QUALIFIED AMBULANCE MAN


1.   I joined the service in January 1981 and have completed the

     Miller qualification at the Leicester training college.



2.   In addition to this I have attended the yearly course Post

     Proficiency at SYMAS H.Q and also at Leicester.



3.   This   is an up date course on the new techniques and

     equipment for ambulance men.



4.   The Leicester training course had major incident training

     and in addition to this I have read the manual        "major

     incidents".   Also on each identification card for SYMAS

     staff there is information relevant to first crews on scene

     for major disasters.



5.   As far as I can recall on the week prior to the major

     incident I was on afternoon shifts of 1400 to 2200.       That

     week I was to have worked on Friday with Saturday and Sunday

     off. My Station Officer   asked me during the week if I would

     work my day off on Saturday 1000 to 1800 to cover the F.A.

     Cup semi-final.   I agreed to do so.



6.   On the morning of Saturday the 15th I arrived at 0945 at the
Middlewood Ambulance Station in Sheffield.     Having booked in

I spoke to my crew member                        We then both

checked the vehicle itself and the equipment which we have

in the emergency vehicles.     The vehicle was sierra 102 (the

fleet number is 422).



Having checked the vehicle we then went to the mess room and

waited for Control to contact us.     At this point the morning

crew 0600 to 1400 were out on calls.       Also with us at the

station was qualified ambulance man               md qualified

ambulance Peter Kean.     They were 1000 to 1800 shift.



Sometime later my colleague               answered a call from

control for another job and asked Control if he wanted the

1000     to 1800   crew   ie Moger and I to do it. Control

requested Durant and Kean to do it.



About 15 to 20 minutes later the morning crew came back in;

one of them was qualified ambulance man Kirk Davis. Five

minutes or so later the phone rang again.       Moger answered

the phone and control asked for the morning crew to go back

out, but Moger and I said that we would do it so that the

morning crew could have their breakfast. As far as I can

recall    it was   an   admission to one of the Sheffield

Hospitals.   Having completed this call I seem to recall we

had another job while we were out.      We returned to station

between 1300 and 1330.
10.   We could see from our ambulance station that there were

      hundreds of Liverpool supporters going to the match. The

      majority of them were drinking with tins and bottles of beer

      and then throwing them away when empty. We finished lunch at

      about 1355 and the afternoon crew came on duty.    They were




11.   Around 1410 the Control rang with another job.    Tony Moger

      answered it and they requested the afternoon crew to go out

      while we remain on station.



12.   Just after 1500 we noticed on the T.V. that the Hillsborough

      semi-final appeared to have been stopped and that there was

      some problem                                       r answered

      a call from Alan Hopkins.     I asked him what it was and he

      said there was a bit or trouble down at Hillsborough and we

      had to go to the Leppings Lane entrance.



13.   Our station is approximately a mile from Hillsborough.

      At the junction of Catch Bar Lane and Leppings Lane Control

      radioed us and instructed us to go to the Penistone Road

      gymnasium entrance.   The time was 15.12.36 (Track 19, Page

      4)


14.   At the gymnasium entrance off Penistone Road (Gate Q) we

      were met by a high ranking police officer.    He asked me to
      reverse my vehicle      tothefirst aid    room and themobile

      police cell which     I did.When we arrived    the scene   was

      quite orderly and there was no indication at that time of

      the seriousness of the incident.



15 . We were met by St John's Ambulance staff.      There were three

      women, together with two or three young lads of about 12/13

      years of age.     They informed us that the casualties were in

      the first aid room.       There were three casualties that

      appeared to be Liverpool supporters from their accent.     The

      injuries were:-

      1 fractured ankle

      1 fractured arm

      I went to the ambulance for my first aid box and equipment

      and returned to the first aid room to treat the injuries. I

      set the fractured arm and went to go to the ambulance to

      collect another splint to set the fractured ankle.     When I

      went outside there were at least two crush injuries laid out

      unconscious (beneath North Stand).



16.   We were unable to use the vehicles radio while we were in

      the North Stand area.      No calls could be made or received

      possibly because of the concrete overhead.



17.              and I tended to the two crush injuries.    By that

      time the police and supporters were running into that area

      carrying dead and injured on boards and advertising boards.
         Although some of the bodies had coats pulled over their

         heads we checked every single body for signs of life.

         A senior police officer asked me to move the vehicle to the

         front of the cell unit.   I did this and then more and more

         casualties were brought into the area. I last saw Tony Moger

         with the mobile resuscitation unit tending to someone who

         had stopped breathing.



18.      I then got my bag and mask and about a dozen airway tubes.

         I went   from casualty to casualty checking pulses         and

         breathing and inserting airways on unconscious patients.



19       Shortly afterwards I saw the first of other ambulance

         personnel coming into this area.   One of them was

                  of Parkway Station Sheffield.   I took him to deal

         with an unconscious patient. Another crew then drove in.     I

         told them to get their stretcher and follow me to the first

         aid area in order to deal with a possible internal injury

         case.



20   .   I then saw                  from Longley Station Sheffield

         coming in the gymnasium entrance to the ground, he was

         driving vehicle Sierra 403. I presumed that because he was

         on his own he had come in off duty.      I was helping

                   to get the stretcher out of his vehicle.       As we

         did so Superintendent Trevor Dale took us to a young lad of

         about 11 years of age near to the gymnasium who was not
       breathing and had no pulse.     We immediately started C.P.R.

       (artificial respiration).     We put him on to the stretcher

       and into                  vehicle.      '            and I were

       in the back and were working on the boy to revive him and we

       called a nearby police officer to drive us to Northern

       General casualty.    We also had a police officer in the back

       with us who had been with the boy as far as I can recall

       with a police escort we left the ground at about 15.50.



21 .   On arrival at Northern General we were met by one of the

       casualty doctors who took us straight round to one of the

       resuscitation units.    We put the lad on the trolley for the

       Doctors to deal with.     We went straight back to the vehicle

       and returned to Penistone entrance.          En route I radioed

       Control at 16.05 (Track 16, Page 19).        We went via Herries

       Road turned right and parked up on the ground side of

       Penistone Road.     There seemed to be more supporters leaving

       the ground than when we left for the hospital.



22 .   Ambulances appeared to be queuing up to take casualties and

       I therefore lef-                     as driver and I returned to

       the first aid area. The Vehicle that                  and I had

       arrived in had gone and was presumably in use at this time.

        An ambulance arrived to collect walking wounded from the

       area.   Vehicles were coming in, backing up to the first aid

       area and being loaded up and departing.
23.                 Alan Hopkins,               were present.     I was

      instructed to help transfer the injured with drips who were

      housed in the far side of the gymnasium to vehicles loading

      in the first aid area.



24.   I spoke to Alan Hopkins,        in the mortuary section, who

      informed me that body bags were required.      I went along the

      line of vehicles waiting on Penistone Road.        I went into

      about a dozen collecting body bags.         I returned to the

      mortuary with them, but there was still not enough.        I went

      back out to the vehicles collecting blankets.          I got a

      couple of ambulance men to help me carry the blankets back

      into the mortuary side of the gymnasium.       On returning to

      the gymnasium an ambulance man from Rotherham known as Ken

      helped me to wrap up bodies in blankets.



25.   Shortly afterwards I spoke to Alan Hopkins      who told me to

      stay with him.     He was busy talking to high ranking police

      officers and I had his portable hand-set radio to listen out

      for any urgent messages.      The hand set seemed to be working

      normally in the gymnasium and outside.      I was with Hopkins

      for about half an hour as far as I can recall             in the

      gymnasium.       By that   time the casualties had all been

      cleared.     I went to Penistone Road and saw

      returning.    I would estimate this was about 1745        I still

      had the hand-set, but there was no activity.
I




    26.   Shortly after 1800                informed us that he wanted to

          speak to all crews in the car park.      He wanted to sort out

          who was on duty, who was due to go on duty and who had come

          in off duty.     The afternoon crews were returned to base for

          normal duties.      These are 1000 to 1800 sfifts    and included

          Tony Moger and I.      The off duty officers were requested to

          stay.



    27.                  ind I returned to our vehicle and went back to

          Middlewood station.      As far as I can recall we contacted

          Control at about 1815 to say we were leaving Hillsborough to

          return to station arriving back at approximately 1825.



    28.   Upon our return to station we re-kitted the vehicle as all

          the equipment had been used.                  contacted Control

          and said that we were re-kitting the vehicle and if required

          we could stand by on station.       Control then rang through

          with an emergency transfer from Northern General ward 3A to

          Hallamshire CAT SCAN.           and I went to Northern General

          ward 3A where the doctor was waiting for us.        The Doctor and

          his     assistant   accompanied   the   patient     to the Royal

          Hallamshire.



    29.   On our return to the vehicle we contacted Control who sent

          us back to the Northern General ward 60 to collect another

          transfer for the Hallamshire for a CAT SCAN.         We collected

          him and again went to the Hallamshire.       Having transferred
      this second patient we contacted Control again and they

      returned us to station.



30.   On our return to the Station we contacted Control.        We

      cleaned and re-fuelled the vehicle ready for the next shift.

      There was nothing further to do so              ind I signed

      off at about 2145.



Dated this   ^     day of            1989 •
