                                                                                LO ND O N OFFICE:      Tel: 01-584 3415
       y& i                       ^ to o .

 Official Reporters to the Crown Courts at:                                     A D M IN ISTR A TIV E GREENCOAT HOUSE,
Bristol, Croydon, Isleworth, Knightsbridge,                                            OFFICE.        183 CLARENCE STREET,
                                                                                                      KINGSTON UPON THAMES,
Maidstone, Oxford, Reading, Southampton                                                               SURREY, KT1 1QT
                                                                                                      Tel: 01-547 2322
Depositions, High Court Litigations, Arbitrations,                                                    Fax-. 01-541 1851
   Public Inquiries and Conference Reporting.
                                                                                Registered in England No. 1706930
            Directors: G. F. Smith
                       M. M. Smith
  Managing Reporter: Helen Carter                                                                    Your Ref:
                                                                                                     Our Ref.
              VAT No. 318 5626 48

        19 April 1989


        Secretary to Lord Justice Lane
        Hillsborough Public Inquiry
        Home Office
        50 Queen Anne's Gate
        London SW1H 9AT.



        Dear Sir,

        I refer to the forthcoming public inquiry which is
        to be held into the Hillsborough football disaster.

        As official court reporters, and as a lifelong Liverpool
        supporter, I should like to offer the services of my company
        to assist in providing the official transcript of the
        proceedings, which we would be willing to do at cost, the
        details of which can be provided at your request.

        Smith Bernal Company Limited is a firm of court reporters
        which is officially appointed to various Crown Court centres
        in England; in addition to which we specialise in providing
        daily transcript services for such matters as public inquiries,
        arbitrations, depositions, etcetera.

         The company is one of the largest court reporting agencies
         in the United Kingdom (employing some 75 full-time reporters)
         and is more than capable of providing a first-class transcript
         service to the inquiry.

         As pioneers of the most sophisticated computer-aided
         transcription systems in the UK and official distributors of
         the most advanced litigation support programme in the world
         today (Discovery ZX), Smith Bernal can provide transcripts of
         each day's proceedings within an hour of the adjournment, both
         in hard copy form and on IBM-formatted floppy disks, to enable
         clients to have instant retrieval of relevant portions of the
         evidence.

         Our reporters have had experience on such matters as the
         Cleveland child abuse inquiry and the Kings Cross disaster
         inquiry.




                                                     Daily Transcript Service
If you wish to find out more about the advantages of using
computer-aided transcription, or about our credentials, please
contact Mr Paul Zimmerman of the Lord Chancellor's Department
or Mr Robert McCunn of the firm of Shaw and Croft, solicitors.

Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any queries on
the services we offer.
Yrmyc:   cinrorplv




G
Managing Director.
