    Ms Julia Preece
    The Secretary of The Aston/
    Witton/Nechells Area
    Police Consultative Committee           POL/89 850/4/30

                                            14 July 1989




*   Thank you for your letter of 3 July to the Home Secretary in your
    capacity as Secretary of the Police Consultative Committee for
    the Aston/Witton/Nechells area about the costs of the inquiries
    by the West Midlands police into the Hillsborough Stadium
    Tragedy.

    The Home Secretary has accepted, in his reply of 28 April to a
    Parliamentary Question from Mr Beaumont-Dark and in his letters
    to other West Midlands MPs, that the additional costs of the
    police inquiries which are being undertaken in relation to the
    disaster by West Midlands police officers should not fall on the
    West Midlands Police Authority.

    "Additional costs" include the cost of overtime worked by the
    West Midlands police officers in their own force area to cover
    duties which would otherwise have been undertaken by officers
    seconded to the Hillsborough inquiry.
    He also mentioned that it will take a while to sort out the
    precise mechanics of how the West Midlands police should be
    reimbursed.

    Lord Ferrers recently met members of the South Yorkshire Police
    Authority to discuss their concerns and to put a proposal to them
    about how the costs should be met. He has also written to them
    about the proposal, which they are considering.

    Lord Ferrers has also previously met a deputation from the West
    Midlands Police Authority to discuss this matter. Ministers are
    anxious to reach agreement on the reimbursement of West Midlands
    police costs. We hope the proposal that we have put to South
    Yorkshire Police Authority will help to achieve this.

    With regard to the efficiency of the West Midlands police and the
    service it can offer, we have been assured by Mr Dear, the Chief
    Constable of the West Midlands police that the duties of the
    officers absent from the force conducting the inquiries have been
    covered by other personnel working overtime.  The Chief Constable
said that there has been no diminution of service to the people
°f the West Midlands and no lowering of police efficiency.

You will be interested to know that when the Enquiry began,
something in excess of 350 staff were involved.  This was reduced
on 5 June to 125 and will be reduced again on 17 July to 65.




                                       MS P RANSFORD
