         DOCUMENTS AND OTHER EVIDENCE CONSIDERED BY SCRUTINY



Documents which are already pubic


1.       Taylor Inquiry: interim and final reports.

2.        Transcripts and other documentation from the Taylor Inquiry (to be returned
          to the Public Record Office).

3.       Transcripts of the inquest proceedings.

4.       Judgement of the Divisional Court on the judicial review application,
          November 1993.

5.       Guide to the safety of sports ground, 1986 edition.

6.       Report of the Disasters and Inquests Working Group, Home Office, 1997.

7.       Various published books about the Hillsborough disaster.

8.       Video tapes of broadcast television programmes about the disaster.

Documents originated by the Family Support Group

1.       Legal Opinion by Alun Jones, QC for the Support Group March 1997, with
          Annexes.

2.       Memorial to the Attorney General on behalf of the families of six of the
         deceased seeking a fresh inquest, April 1992.

3.       Skeleton argument on behalf of those families to the Divisional Court, 1993.

Documents and other evidence not otherwise publicly available which Wft-Mdll
 lacing In.the .Library

1.       Transcripts of interviews with those who gave oral evidence to Lord Justice
          Stuart-Smith.

2.       Other records of the discussions held by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, where
         transcripts were not made.

3.       Written evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by witnesses.

4.       Other written statements consulted at the request of the families (with the
          exception of those provided by Dr Bums and Dr West).


f:\oppu\taou\nusc\ppOS91pddoc
           Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by Counsel
           and others on behalf of the Family Support Group.

6.         South Yorkshire Police operational orders for the 19|8 and 19B9 FA Cup
           Semi-Finals at Hillsborough. ^

r          Nineteen statements by the Police Complaints Authority in relation to
           complaints against officers of the South Yorkshire Police.

3.         A report produced by David Phillips, then Deputy Chief Constable of Devon
           and Cornwall, for South Yorkshire Police in August 1990.

9.         Report prepared by Mr Noel Bume on the state of the ground for South
            Yorkshire Police in 1990.

10.         Police tapes TB1, TB2, TB3 and TB4 which contain the records of all material
            recorded by police CCTV cameras on the day of the disaster.

11.         Transcript of the open meeting involving Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and
            families on 6 October 1997.

 12.         Transcript of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s meeting on 30 September 1997 with
             Counsel for the Support Group.

 Documents and other evidence which will not b9 Placed In thO Library

    1       Advice of Gareth Williams QC and Peter Birts QC to the Director of PiJblic
             Prosecutions, August 1990. (The Home Secretary has agreed with the
             Attorney General that this legal advice should not be made public because it
             attracts legal professional privilege and it is the firm policy of the DPP n0 0
             publish such detailed documentation relating to the merits of individual cases
             which have not been before the courts.)

    2.        Report of a review of the evidence by the CPS, May 1997. (Same reason
              applies).

    3.        West Midlands Police reports to the DPP (23 volumes)        (the same reason
              applies).
    4.        Appendix 9 of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report. (Thiscontains details of
              individual cases, and the relevant sections are being sent to the families
              concerned).

     5.       Written statements made by Dr James Bums and Dr             Ian West. (They
              concern the case of Kevin Williams only).




     f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0591pddoc
