;hs.12.ll/ssg.dm


       HOME OFFICE
                                                                             »*ou Hoi
       Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                     D i r e c t line 01-213
                                  S w i t c h b o a r d 01-213 3000




Mr B Beckett DMA
County Trading Standards Offices
County of Avon
Kenham House                                                   £P>/89 35/48/122
Wilder Street
BRISTOL    B52 8PD                                             11 December 1989




Dear Mr Beckett

SAFETY OP SPORTS GROUNDS:    TWERTON PARK - PERIMETER FENCING

Thank you for your letter of 4 December about perimeter gates in
the pitch perimeter fence at Twerton Park.

As recognised in Mr Bolton’s letter of 6 December to Mr Pearce
(which crossed with yours) decisions relating to the terms and
conditions to be contained in the safety certificate for Twerton
pa r k i are entirely a. matter for your authority. Our position
remains unchanged in that we believe the recommendations of the
Hillsborough Inquiry's Interim Report should be complied with.

  Quite understand that in the wake of an incident of hooliganism
and attempted pitch invasion, your authority should feel that it
is unwise to require the pitch perimeter gates to be kept open.
The arguments for doing so are, of course, set out in paragraph
311 of the Interim Report. No matter how confident one is about
the efficiency of the arrangements at any particular ground the
interim   measures   recommended   by   the  Inquiry   (including
recommendation 8) are intended to provide that additional element
of overall safety which, as perhaps illustrated by the incident
at Ayresome Park at the weekend, is necessary if the public are
to be properly protected.   I hope your Licensing Authority will
bear this in mind when it next reviews the safety certificate for
Twerton Park.

I am arranging for a copy of your letter and my reply to be
passed to the Hillsborough Inquiry for information.           An
additional copy of my reply has been sent to the Chief Executive
direct.
                                         Yours sincerely




                                                        D J MOULD
                                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                                        Planning Department)
          Date     4th December 1989
Your reference
 Our reference     BWB/JC
Enquiries to M r   Beckett
     Extension     276/6078




 Mr. David Mould,
                                                  County Trading   County of Avon
                                                  Standards Officer Bryan Beckett, DMA
 Room 937 - F.E.P.D.                                               Kenham House,
 G2 Division,                                                      W ilder Street,
 The Home Office,                                                  Bristol BS2 8PD
                                                                   Telephone Bristol (0272) 290777
 50, Queen Anne's Gate,
 London,
 SW1H 9AT.




 Dear Mr. Mould,

 SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - PERIMETER FENCING.

 The Public Protection Committee in the County of Avon, who are the Licensing
 Authority under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, resolved at their meeting
 on the 4th October not to require the perimeter fence gates at Bath to be kept
 open. This view was reiterated at their meeting on the 30th November with a request
 that their views and the reason behind these views again be made known to you.

 The earlier decision was reinforced because at the Bristol Rovers v Swansea
 football match held at Twerton Park, Bath on the 25th November there was an
 attempt by the Swansea fans to invade the pitch; Swansea were losing 2 - 0
 at the time and the fans, presumably decided to take advantage of the absence of
 a gate in the perimeter fence in order to disrupt the match.  Prompt action by
 the stewards and police frustrated their intentions, although several charges
 were made at the open gate.

 It is this Authority's view that the opening of perimeter gates is an invitation
 to those so minded to take advantage of the situation and gain access to the
 pitch.

 The incident was recorded by local television and Avon and Somerset Police and
 clearly demonstrated that the insistence of opening perimeter fence gates
 provides a safety risk, not only to the fans involved, but also to the stewards,
 policemen and police horses who have to move in to prevent such an invasion of
 the pitch.

 This Authority's policy of rigorously enforcing the requirements of the safety
 certificates that all gates be closed but attended at all times by a steward with
 a key would have prevented the Swansea fans from taking the action they did, as
 the open gate was seen as an invitation to cause trouble.




                                                                           .contd
It should be pointed out that at Twerton Park the only high perimeter fencing
encloses the 'visitors' terracing as it is felt that the purpose of perimeter
fencing should be to prevent opposing fans from getting at one another.
Enclosing that area occupied by one group of fans is sufficient to prevent
confrontation and largely mitigates the effect of football grounds looking like
prisons.

I hope the views of this Authority will be of use to you in further consideration
of the Hillsborough Report.




Yours sincerely,




B. W. BECKETT
COUNTY TRADING STANDARDS OFFICER.
