From:   M J Moriarty                          cc:   Mr Yates
        27 April 1989                               Mr Hammond
                                                    Mr Whalley ^
                                                    Mr Watts



Mr Walters


INQUIRY INTO HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER: LETTERS OF APPOINTMENT


Mr Whalley has pointed out to me that, although it is not strictly
necessary, it would be desirable to have on the record formal
letters of appointment.   A draft letter to Lord Justice Taylor,
cleared with Mr Whalley and Mr Hammond, is attached together with
covering letters to the two assessors.
DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE    SECRETARY OF STATE


TO:


The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor




Now that a second assessor has been selected it is timely to write
to you and both assessors confirming your appointment to carry out
an Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.


The terms of reference are as follows:


      "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
      football ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
      recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
      safety at sports events."


You will be assisted by two assessors: Mr Brian Johnson QPM, Chief
Constable of Lancashire; and Professor Leonard Maunder, OBE BSc
PhD Sc D FEng FIMechE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the
University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.


This Inquiry has been set up as a Departmental Inquiry.    The
option of establishing the Inquiry under the Tribunals and
Inquiries Act 1921 has been considered but, at least for the
present, set aside.   I remain of the view that this is the
appropriate procedure for this kind of Inquiry but it could be re­
considered were you to form the view that your investigations were
being seriously hampered by lack of the powers which the 1921 Act
would confer.
No terminal date for the Inquiry has been set, but I have asked
that it should proceed with, all possible speed.   The possibility
of your making one or more interim reports exists and, should you
judge that to be feasible and helpful, I should welcome it.


In conclusion, I renew my thanks to you, Mr Johnson and
Professor Maunder, to whom I am sending a copy of this letter, for
agreeing to undertake this urgent and important piece of public
service.
E.R.



   DRAFT LETTERS TO


   Mr Johnson
   Chief Constable
   Lancashire


   Prof. L Maunder
   Professor of Mechanical Engineering
   University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne




   I am most grateful to you for agreeing to act as an assessor to
   the Inquiry into the Hillsborough stadium disaster.   I enclose a
   copy of a letter of appointment of the Inquiry which I have send
   to Lord Justice Taylor.
