               FILE                                               Fora 104
               No.                                   mv 0#S*D*
                                                      19th April, 19&9
Station
            GREENHILL ROAD                                               19   ...
From                   .1 ???..                     Dir.Ref.No.
To          The Chief Inspector^ Mounted.....




     Subject:-          MUTUAL AID COMMITMENT - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                   SATURDAY 15th APRIL 19^9


                               On Saturday 1$th April 19^9 I was amongst a party
     of Merseyside Police Officers giving Mutual Aid to the South
     Yorkshire Police on the occassion of an P.A.Cup Semi-Pinal, being
     played at Hillsborough Football Ground, between Liverpool P.C. and
     Nottingham Forest P.C.
                               At 1130hrs that day I commenced my deployment in
     LEFPINGS LANE in company with Constable 1696 Stanbrid^e of
     M e r s e y s i d e Police.   Other officers in LEPPI'GS LANE were Sgt 17°U
     Thomas of the South Yorkshire Police, Sgt 1952 Smith of the
     Merseyside Police and Woman Constable 3^7 Henwood of the South
     Yorkshire Police. °ur main responsibility was the turnstiles at
     the LEPrlNGS LANE end of the ground, which at this time w e r e quiet.
     Together v ith Constable Stanbridge I went for a patrol around the
      surrounding area of tfe ground to aquaint myself with the geography
     of the location. Outside a public house called the Fa M hCTEL I saw
     a large crowd of Liverpool supporters, drinking.                               ,
                                From approximately 12U5hrs to 13l45^rs I was engage
      in keeping clear the entrance to the turnstile area, encouraging
      people with tickets to go into the ground, and those without
      tickets to go away from the ground.                          'I'        v ^
                                About 13U$hrs I, together with Constable Stanbridge,
      moved my horse to within the confined area of the t e r r a c e turnstiles,
      to encourage people to move into the ground and use all the t u m T
      stiles. At this time the crowd were orderly.                               •
                                About lUlOhrs I noticed that the crowd had begun to
      increase and spread out around the turnstiles. This was due in par
      to the fact that supporters were being searched prior to going in
      the ground, but mainly due to the slowness ofthem going into the
      ground. Constable Stanbridge and myself took our horses into the
       crowd immediately in front of the turnstiles and began to work our
      way through the crowd, towards the turnstiles, a s k i n g supporters
       ease back and relaese the pressure on the people st the turnstiles,
       many of whom were being crushed against the wall. We began to
       succeed, in part due to the fact that some supporters recognized
       us from working on the KOP at Liverpool, but mainly due to the
       steadfastness of the two Police Horses who were withstanding
       increasing pressure and tension. After about $ minutes, there wa
       a massive surge from the back of the crowd, and my horse was Pushed
       even nearer to the wall. He became agitated and I vas able to turn
       him and allow him to face the bulk of the crowd, w h i c h „
       calm him. Despite loud appeals to the crowd from m y s e l f and others,
       the crowd refused to ease back. Many people in the crowd were
       appealing for help but the crush was now so intense that it was
        becoming impossible for the horse to move. I felt the horse be°°“®
        agitated again and realised that the pressure of the crowd was fo
        his feet from the ground. I decided for the sake of safety to
        these supporters to remove my horse from the crush, which I did
        with some difficulty. I took my horse to side of the
        the back to try to ease the pressure. I could see children bei g
        passed out of the crush over tr e heads of the crowd and other^
                                                                            I




                                                               Form 104A



being pulled out of the crowd up onto the top of the metal wall
dividing the Terrace turnstile area/'"from the Stand turnstile area.
1 also saw that people were crawling underneath my horse, which in
his agitated state was a very dangerous thing to do. I could see
a foot Constable trying to close the iron gates ate the entrance to
the Tearrce turnstile area, but without success. A moved my horse over
towards him and was able to move some of the corwd sufficiently for
him to close the gates.    Constable Stanbridge and I then moved
back into the contained turnstile area and attempted to move the
crowd back into the gap which now existed at the back of the crowd
at the turnstiles, between them and the iron gates. Some people
did move: back, but most chose to ignore us and continued to push
forward. At this point there was a sudden large influx of people,
the crushing intensified and I was forced to the side of the crowd.
I again asked my horse to go into the crowd, but he became stubborn
and apprehensive about doing so. I have never known him to behave
like that in the sixteen years he has been a police horse. I did
eventually manage to get him to go back into the crowd. At this
point I noticed people moving away from the back of the crowd and
moving to the right of the Terrace turnstiles, in the direction of
the side passage leading to the club car park. The immediate effect
of thsi was to ease the pressure on the crowd. Afetr a while people
began to make their way back into the crowd and at this point I saw
the exit gate for patrons of. the WEST STAND open and people were
being allowed in. It was open for a short time only, and then
closed. The remaining supporters, of which there were not now many,
passed thriugh the turnstiles in an orderly fashion. Some time later,
 I cannot be sure how long, we were ordered to close the turnstiles,
which we did. I cannot recall hearing the customary n o i s e , from
 inside the ground, which greets the start of the g am e, and it was only
when I heard a loud-speaker appeal to fans to ease the -crushing, that
 I realised that there was a problem inside the ground.
                 We were then instructed to patrol the surrounds of
 the ground, and at about iSlOhrs we were stood down and returned
 to the horse-boxes.
                 I have been a Mounted Officer for 31 years and in
 that time have only once been confronted by a crowd of people so
 un—cooperative and unwilling to listen to reasson, and $hat was on
 the owassion of a football match between Scotland and Wales, played
 at Anfield in 1977. Ify horse is a very stable and brave horse and
 I have neber before known him to show apprehension as he did on
 this occassion.




                                            F.N.GriAjsXll
                                            Constable 1300
