INQUIRY     INTO      THE       HILLSBOROUGH
                                                 2‘
       STADIUM               DISASTER




                     Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                       and

                PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                       At

                 The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                       on

           Tuesday, 20th June, 1989.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Afternoon Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                           INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                           (Afternoon Session)

                                                    Page
     R. CLARKE Called

             Examined by M r . Goldsack              71
             Cross-Examined by     Mr. Robertson     75
             Cross-Examined by     Mr. Glasgow       75
             Cross-Examined by     Mr. Woodward      77
             Cross-Examined by     Mr. Kallipetis    78

     A. HOPKINS Called

             Examined by Mr. Phillips                81
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Glasgow         95
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Woodward        97
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Kallipetis     100
             By Lord Justice Taylor                 102

     A. PAGE Called

             Examined by Mr. Goldsack               103
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Jackson        109
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Gibson-Watt    109
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Glasgow        111
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Woodward       114
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Kallipetis     115
             Re-Examined by Mr. Collins             119

     L. YOXALL Called

             Examined by Mr. Phillips               120
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward         127

     D.J. WALKER Called

             Examined by Mr. Goldsack               128
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Jackson        132
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Woodward       134
             By Lord Justice Taylor                 137

DISCUSSION                                          138
                               71

                     T WE NT Y- FOU RT H DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                          TUESDAY,   20th     JUNE,   1989
(Afternoon session)
                          RAYMOND CLARKE,       called

                        Examined     by MR.    GOLDSACK:

Q.   Mr. Clarke, I think on 15th April you were the Control
     Su per in t e nd en t working the 14.00-22.00 shift. A. Yes,
     sir, that is correct.

Q.   And that means that you were based in the Control              Centre
     at Moorgate in Rotherham?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   Had you in that ca pacity of Control Sup er in te nd en t received
     any specific inf orm ati on about the fact that the Semi-Final
     was on that day?     A.    Yes, sir, we had, via our Operational
     Commander, Mr. Jones, we had received full in fo rma ti on of the
     event to come a week previously and we had read and digested
     the information.

Q.   And that would include, presumably, the effect it was likely
     to have on traffic if your ambulances needed to attend
     urgently?   A.   Yes, sir, it would.

Q.   I think the first indication you had of any trouble at
     Hill sb oro ug h was a few minutes after 3 o'clock; is that
     right?      A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   A call from Station Officer Higgins?               A.   Yes,   sir,   that
     is correct.

Q.   And then within a minute or two of that you also received
     a call from the Police Force Control at Snig Hill?
     A.   I did.

Q.   Initially telling you of an incident where ambula nc es might
     be needed and then very quickly asking for a lot of ambulances
     to attend.   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   You set out the transc ri pt of those calls in your statement
     so I do not need to take you through them in detail but
     I should perhaps give you the opportu ni ty of explai ni ng
     one of your answers.      When you were asked to send all the
     am bul an ces you had got available, your reply was, "We cannot
     do that.      I will send you our initial response and we will
     assess.      We have got Officers on the scene."   A.    Yes.

           LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:    Which page are you on?          Which
     pa ragraph?

          MR. GOLDSACK:   It is Paragraph 6, the bottom of the
     third page and the expilanation is Paragraph 7 over the page,
     sir.

Q.   I would just like to know, Mr. Clarke, your thinking behind
     that answer.      A.     Yes, sir.      One of my res pon si bi li ti es
     is to mai nta in an em ergency cover       at all times for the South
     Yorkshire area.       The in fo rma ti on  to hand at that time did
     not warran t me in st iga tin g the Major Em ergency Plan and
     emp tyi ng the a mb ula nc e station of all resources.        I still
                                                  R.   CLARKE


had to ma in ta in cover for the routine work throughout             the
County which still progressed.

I think, in fact, contact was made via one of your colleagues
to the ground and your Officers on the ground;  is that
right?   A.   Yes, sir.

And also^ Paragraph    8 of your statement, you very quickly
received a further     request from the Police for a fleet of
ambulances.    A.      Yes, that is correct.

And at that stage did the Major Incident Plan in effect
come into operat io n? A.    As soon as it became apparent
from the calls we were rec eiving from the Police and from
our Officers at the ground, I instigated a full Major
Emer ge ncy response.

That had several effects, did it?               So far as the radio
com m un ic a ti on  that your Officers then used - did that
change?        A.    We m a in ta in ed the em ergency radio channel,
the routine eme rgency channel up until the point when it
became ove rw h el mi n g for the Control Officer that was on
that panel.         It was then I decided to take the incident
into our Incident Room which is adjacent to the Control
Room.

Your Incident Room had been set up to deal with just this
sort of matter;  is that right?   A.   Yes, sir, that is
correct.

But this was, in fact,     the   first time it had been used?
A.   Y e s , sir .

I think it had been set up as a   response to other disasters
of a nat ional scale earlier in the year?   A.   That's
right, sir.

So p hys ica ll y that meant - what - that you and someone else
moved into the Incident Room?       A.   Yes, sir.   I took
a Control Ass istant with me and opened up the emer ge nc y reserve
c hannel which is set aside for such incidents.

Did that enable all the radio calls that had to be made in
co nne ct ion with Hi ll sb oro ugh to come through your room?
A.     Yes, the ma jo ri ty of calls came through me although,
through out the afternoon, some calls were received on the
domestic ch annels and the emergency channels but the idea
is to contai n the incident on one channel so we can maintain
normal workin g on domestic channels without interfering
with that.

I think    Mr. Hopkins came into the Control Room at some
stage and on hearing of the di ffi cul tie s he left imm ediately
for Hil lsborough.      A.   Yes, sir.  He went forward to the
scene to get a better idea of what was happening being as
the in fo rma ti on to hand at that time was not very comprehensive.

Did you   also ask one of your Officers,       Kath Lyons,      to
                               73


                                                         R.   CLARKE


     commence making a log?         A.   I did,   sir.

Q.   Is that standard pro cedure when an incident such as this
     begins?    A.  Yes, sir.    If an incident looks like it is
     going to develop into a large incident, that is normal
     procedure.

Q.   And that, if we want to look at it, is at page 510 in our
     core bundle.           Were there also arrangements made to bring
     in from off duty as many Officers as po ssible?          A.   Yes,
     sir.       At the start of this incident two of my colleagues,
     Su pe ri n t e nd en t Hartley and i Control Aisistant, Miss Taff,
     had arrived inan off-duty capacity and I enlisted their
     help straight away.

Q.    I think you also contact other Services?          A. Yes, sir,
     that is to assist us.     We have reciprocal arr angements
     with other Amb ulance Services,    and es pec ial ly with an
     incident of any size     they will come up to our borders and,
     indeed, come to assist if necessary.

Q.   I think you also have an automatic pro cedure whereby the
     Chief Am bulance Officer, if he is not on duty, is contacted.
     A.   That is right, sir.

Q.   And, again, he attended fairly quickly.   A.  Yes, he came
     in very quickly into the Control Room and I briefed him
     when he arrived.

Q. Did you have any proble ms that afte rn oon with the pressure
   on your sw it ch b o a r d ? A. We did, sir, mainly with the
   press.

Q.    Just expand a little on that, will you?    A. Very soon
     into the incident the lines became very,  very busy with
     calls from the press, obviously wanting to know what was
     happening.

Q.   Were they coming through on normal te lephone             lines?
     A.   Yes.   I am aware that one came through              on the 999
     system.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Was that because they were
     not getting any change from the Police or what?
     A.    I d o n 1t know, ny Lord.

Q.   They would po ssibly go to the Police first, would they?
     A.    I would think that would be more prudent for the press
     to do that and let us go about our business, but that would
     be a personal view, sir.

Q.   There might   be two   views   about that.    A.         Yes,   it would.

Q.          MR. GOLDSACK:    0 u t is the effect of what hap pened
     that   someone who came in off duty had to spend all her
     time   really dealing with requests from the press?
     A.     *y©s, sir, that would be our Public Relations Officer,
     Mrs.   Rhodes.    In fact, soon after arriving for duty she
                                          R.   CLARKE


assisted me with various tasks we were involved with at
the time of mobili si ng and so on but then her time was
solely taken up with press enquiries.

Mr. Clarke, so far as you were concerned, were you conscious
of any problems with the radio c o mm un ic at io ns ?
A.     Th roughout the af ternoon we did from time to time
ex pe ri en ce some inte rf ere nc e on the radios.

Was that on all channe ls or on the emergency channels?
A.   It was general, both on the emergency channel and
the emer ge nc y reserve channel 1.




                                /Do you know what caused...
                           75


                                                 R. CLARKE

Q.   Do you know what caused that?      A. I don't,   sir, no.

Q.   Was it something unique to this occasion or is teftat
      something that does happen from time to time without
      apparent explanation?   A. From time to time we do
      experience radio difficulties - only of a very minor
      nature.  It might be a call that is slightly interrupted
      when speaking to a vehicle;  a momentary thing;   nothing
      of a grand s e a l e .

Q.   On this particular day, what was the practical effect of
       those problems?      A.  I don't think it affected the
     smooth running of the incident.      Messages that needed
     tO 'L i get through were received and given and my own view
     was that overall communications were good.

Q.   Your Service, Mr. Clarke, had a system, a plan for the
     sort of emergency that cropped up on   this day. From
     your situation in the control room, did it operate as
     it was intended to?   A. Yes, sir.  I felt that the
     incident ran smoothly.

Q.   And you were able to maintain normal   emergency cover as
     well as dealing with this particular   disaster? A. We
     did, sir.   It was a busy afternoon arid we had many calls
     throughout the County of South Yorkshire for our routine
     work, apart from this incident going on.

                Cross-examined by Mr. ROBERTSON;

Q.   Mr. Clarke, at paragraph 6 of your statement, you set out
     the time when you first spoke to Police Control at Snig
     Hill - 1506.29 - is that right?   A.  Yes, sir.

Q.   You spoke to a Police Constable?     A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And he was immediately able to tell you exactly where the
     incident was, namely at the Leppings Lane end of Sheffield
     Wednesday football ground?  A. Yes, he gave me that
     information.

          Mr. ROBERTSON:   Thank you.

                Cross-examined by Mr. GLASGOW:

Q.   Mr. Clarke, were you familiar with the major incident
     plan which we find at page 324 of our core bundle? I
     think you have got it  in front of you. It would be fairer,
     I think, for you to look at the document before we ask you
     about it.  Page 324.    A. Yes, sir, I was aware of this.

Q.    You were aware of that?   A. Yes,   sir.

Q.   Were you aware of any alterations which had been made to
     that plan with regard to Hillsborough Football Ground, or
     was that the way in which you thought a major incident
     would be handled?    A. Yes, that's the way it would be
     handled.
                           76

                                                    R. CLARKE

Q.   HM’king it in turn, then, the very first step when a major
     incident is delcared is to despatch a crew to the location
     to establish the nature of the incident?    A. That's right,
     sir.

Q.   When did  you first learn that it was unnecessary to do that
      in this case?  A. I don't understand, sir. Could you say
      again?

Q.   When did   you first learn that it was not necessary to
      despatch a crew to the location in order to establish the
      nature of this incident?    A.  We despatched a crew to
      Leppings Lane initially.

Q.   But did you not know that you already had a c r e w on the
     ground?   A. Yes, I knew we had a crew in the ground
     behind the main Stand.

Q.   Well, why was it then necessary to despatch a crew to find
     out what the nature of the incident Was?   A. Because all
     I had got at that time was what the police officer was
     giving me, that we had got an incident at the Leppings
     Lane end or entrance.

Q.   Did you or did you not know that you had liaison officers
     on the ground already?  A. Yes, sir, I knew that.

Q.   You knew that?   A. Yes, sir.

Q.   When did you know that?    A.   When I came   on duty I knew
     they would be there.

Q.   If we go down to No. 5 of    the incident plan, the fifth
     paragraph, "On arrival at ground, Station Officer Higgins,
     after consultation with Police, will establish a patient
     treatment arid “loading point".    Did you know that he was
     already in fact on the ground and there would be no
     question of him doing something whe n he arrived?    A. I
     knew he was in the ground.    I knew where he would be.

Q.    I wonder if you can help us.   One of your colleagues this
     morning was examined by Counsel for your Service on the
     basis that the first five of these steps had already been
     complied with, through the intelligent co-operation of
     your officers in advance?    A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Was it your understanding that the first five steps had
     been complied with, or that you were going through them?
     A. Yes, sir, it was my understanding that those steps had
     been complied with.

Q.   So as soon as the major incident was declared, the first
     five steps, your understanding was, had already been
     talers?  A*  Yes, sir.

Q.   I see.  A nd who did you think you had at the ground at
     that stage?   A. I knew that we had got Mr. Higgins and
     Mr. Eason, and I knew that we had got an ambulance with
     a crew there.
                           77

                                                          R. CLARKE

Q.   And when you came on duty that morning, somebody was in a
     position to tell you how this had been arranged?  A. I knew
     how it had been arranged previously, sir, because of the
     information that Mr. Jones gave us days before.

Q.   Days before?   A. But my colleague who was on the morning
     shift handed the shift over to me and fully briefed m e of
      where these people were.

Q.   So you knew precisely where your officers were ---          A. Yes,
     sir.

Q.   --- responsible for liaison on       the ground?     A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Was this something that had happened before, that the
     incident plan had already been, so to speak, advanced by
     several stages before you came on duty?  A. It can happen,
     sir, yes.  If our presence is required in a particular
     place, albeit a football match or anything else, we are
     updated and briefed by each other so that we know who is
     where.

          Mr. GOLDSACK:    Thank you very much.

                Cross-examined by Mr. W O O D W A R D :

Q.   May I just ask you please, officer, about the radios and
     the control communication system.  You say in your
     statement that you would describe the overall communication
     throughout the incident as "good"?   A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Have you discussed the experience, for example, th&t Mr.
     Garratt, Mr. Flack, Mr. Williams, Mr. Higgins, Mr. Casson
     and Mr. Page had with their radios?  Have you discussed
     it with them?     A. Yes, sir, I have.  I have seen the
     Chief Officer, Mr. Page, and pointed out the difficulties
     that I had on the day.

Q.   There were a number of difficulties being experienced by
     a number of officers throughout the afternoon that they
     were involved?  That is right, is it not?  A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And other means, for example resort to land line, telephone
     land line, had to be resorted to in order to communicate
     with them?    A. That was an option that was taken which in
     m y view is good, effective communication, good controlled
     communication.

Q.   But do you understand that the difficulties that the men
     were experiencing were not only at different locations but
     at different times throughout the afternoon?  A. Yes, I am
     aware of that, sir.

Q.   Is that a situation which could really be described as good?
     It may be that it cannot be avoided, but can you really
     describe it as good?   A.  My honest view, sir, is that
     communications overall throughout the incident were good
     and the messages that got through were dealt with either
     way.  My own view is that communications were good.
                              78

                                                        R. CLARKE

Q.   Obviously if a message got through, then itworked. Are
      you aware of a message that did not get through? A. No,
      sir.

Q.   Are you aware of the frustration that some of the officers
     experienced in trying to get through to you?  A. I can
     understand that frustration.

Q.   Are you aware of it?       A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Has anything been done to alter the system?    A. Yes, sir.
      I saw Mr. Page after this incident and pointed out the
      difficulties that we have had, and it is my understanding
      that he is at this time investigating those problems and
      looking into all the aspects surrounding them.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         He is doing that now,        is he?
     A.   Yes, sir.

Q.        Mr. WOODWARD:  It is being looked at to see if it can
     be improved?   A. Yes, my Lord.

           Mr. WOODWARD:     Thank you.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It is not very satisfactory to
     have to have runners, is it, if you have got a radio
     circuit?    A. No, my Lord, but my understanding is that
     Herries Road bus garage telephone link was set up for
     good communication rather than for communication difficulty.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.

              Cross-examined by Mr. K A L L I P E T I S :

Q.   Mr. Clarke, is it right that the telephone call that you
     had from Snig Hill informing you that they wanted a fleet
     of ambulances finished at 1508.14, and did you then
     immediately inform Mr. Hopkins of the request that had
     been made and he then directed Control to contact liaison
     officers within the ground and asked them what was going
     on?   A. Yes, sir, that's correct.




                                      /Q*    I think Mr.Machin
e>v   -
                                    79


                                               R. CLARKE


          Q. I think Mr. Machin got through to Mr. Higgins at 15.08 and
             14-seconds-and-a-bit, so immediately the request was made?
             - A. Yes sir.

          Q. And in addition to that Mr. Clarke, Mr. Hopkins I think
             despatched the standby crew to the ground in any event?
             - A. Yes sir.

          Q. That was at 15.08 and 41 seconds? - A. That is correct.

          Q. You were asked you see about the Control Plan at page 324.
             That of course is & Control Plan for your Control Room.
             That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes sir.

          Q. And you knew that Mr. Higgins and Mr. Eason were already
             in the ground? - A. Yes sir.

          Q. Therefore the first five stages were not necessary? -
             A. That is correct.

          Q. But the difficulty with this particular incident, Mr. Clarke,
             was that in fact there were two incidents. There was one
             on the pitch to which the Officers in the ground had access
             and there was one outside, as you subsequently learnt at
             Leppings Lane, which you learnedabout when thefirst
             ambulance arrived at 15.17? - A. Yes sir.

          Q. The one with Miss Moffatt on board? - A. That is correct.

          Q. And that you found out as a result of your Officers'
             efforts and not from information   given toyou by the
             Police? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

          Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Sorry, I don't follow that.
               What was outside the Leppings Lane entrance was the subject
               of the message you received, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

          Q. That your ambulance was wanted at Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.
             I knew it would have to pass Leppings Lane anyway to go
             to the rendezvous point.

                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: What I am not following, I
               am sorry Mr. Kallipetis is, you say they discovered that
                   by their own efforts rather by any message from else­
               where?

                     MR. KALLIPETIS¥ Sir, without wishing to make a
               speech at this stage, what happened was this: a message
               comes from Snig Hill "Leppings Lane entrance there is an
               incident". SYMAS operate ofi the basis that ambulances
               go to Penistone Road in accordance with the agreed plan;
               an Officer is sent down to Leppings Lane from inside the
               ground and of course all he sees is what is in front of
               him coming over the feace. It is not until an ambulance
               goes to the back of the ground and as your Lordship will
                                 R. CLARKE


     in a moment the first Police Officer she contacts
knew nothing about it. She persists and then discovers
that in fact injured are being brought out through the
back of the ground, so there are two incidents which
require in fact two separate attendances and that is the
way it was dealt with but more by luck, I readily admit,
than by plan.
      It©RD JUSTICE TAYLOR: There was a message from
Mr. Higgins inside the ground as to what was necessary
from that end, but there was a message which we have just
looked at talkipg about an incident at Leppings Lane end.

      MR. KALLIPETIS: Yes, the Leppings Lane end of the
football ground sir, I am looking at paragraph 6, and
then "Force Control Leppings Lane" and something is blank
"Hillsborough". The "Leppings Lane end" is the important
word sir.
      The notification that SYMAS received I think is
in identical form to the one sent to the Fire Service.
Sir, it is their Exhibit 85. It is the letter with the
routes attached and showing where various vehicles were
going to be parked that afternoon from the opposing
supporters.
Would you also please Mr. Clarke deal with a criticism
published in the Press by a learned doctor. He is
reported to have said by 3.30 there was only one St. John's
Ambulance at the ground. How many ambulances had you
despatched to the ground by 3.30? - A. I would think there
would be something in the region of 20 either there or
en route.
By 3.30 it is right to say that at least a dozen of those
20 had arrived at the ground either at Leppings Lane or
Penistone Road? - A. Yes sir.

Altogether during that afternoon did you cause 42
ambulances to attend the ground of which 31 belonged to
SYMAS? - A. Yes, I did sir.
I think altogether the ambulances conveyed 172 casualties
from the ground to the various hospitals to which they
were sent? - A. Yes sir.

In addition to that, Mr. Clarke, dealing with that
emergency is it right that in the three hour period between
3 o'clock and 6 o'clock in the evening, you dealt with
an additional 49 emergency calls unconnected with this
incident? - A. Yes sir, we did.

      MR. KALLIPETIS:   Thank you.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you very much.
                          81


                                      A. HOPKINS


                       ALAN HOPKINS Called

                    Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

Q. Are you Alan Hopkins? - A. That is correct.

Q. Are you the Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer
   for South Yorkshire? - A. That is correct.

Q. You have been in the City Ambulance Service in Sheffield
   since 1967. Is that right? - A. That is correct sir.

Q.    I want to ask   you first about a meeting you had on the
     9th August 1988. Do you have before you a bundle of
     documents which is the core bundle, the large bundle
     of documents. Would you turn to page 477 please. That
     is a memorandum in fact from Inspector Sewell to the Chief
     Superintendent Mr. Mole and it refers to a meeting chaired
     by Superintendent Murray, attended by Superintendent Marshall,
     Mr. Beale, Mr. Sewell and yourself? - A. That is correct.

Q.    And Mr. Jones    I think also who is anAssistant ChiefAmbulance
     Officer? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. I think with two men, one person also from the Fire Brigade.
   Now what was the purpose of this meeting from your point
   of view? - A. The purpose of the meeting was the departure
   of the Superintendent and the Ground Liaison Officer and
   the introduction of Mr. Murray and Mr. Sewell who were
   taking responsibility for the ground and liaison of the
   ground and it was a meeting of introduction and to assure
   one another that the plan which had been agreed previously
   was still workable and would remain operational.

Q. Mr. Sewell was taking over from Mr. Calvert I think? - A.
   That is correct, yes.

Q. You went through, did you, the system that was in operation
   so far as it affected the Ambulance Service? - A. Yes wei
   did. As I recall on the day the document relating to it
   on the Police side could not be found because in fact
   Mr. Calvert we were told had either misplaced it or took
   it with him but they had seen it and would get it.

Q. Is this document you are referring to the one at page 322
   in the bundle and 323, then 324. Are these the documents
   you mean? - A. I think 324 is the one which is specifically
   to Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground because that was
   the ground we were talking about on this occasion with
   Hammerton Road.

Q. Had you in fact had other meetings in relation to other
   football stadia in South Yorkshire? - A. Yes, we had.

Q. But with a different division, of course? - A. The person
   responsible for the liaison with all the Football Clubs
                                 A. HOPKINS


in South Yorkshire had been delegated by the Chief
Metropolitan Ambulance Officer to a Mr. Wilkinson his
Staff Officer.
Were you able to supply the Police with a further copy of
this plan? - A. I did not think that was necessary because
in fact the Police acknowledged the document but had
merely misplaced the file on that occasion. I think one
was offered but we were reassured that the document was in
existence and they knew it was in existence.




               /Q. Did you go through
                           83


                                                A. HOPKINS


Q. Did you go through it with them, the plan? - A. I don’t recall
   that.   I d o n ’t recall particularly going through it item by
   item, n o .

Q. You mentioned some of the matters, because we see a note on
   page 477 that you were talking about the Senior Ambulance
   Officer to make his way to the gymnasium to direct
   operations, which corresponds with the emergency plan
   that we have? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. What was the system then as far as ambulance personnel was
   concerned at Sheffield Wednesday? - A. The system goes back
   quite some time in that it was felt prudent by the Police to
   have an ambulance attendance around the ground particularly,
   and we felt it prudent in that the streets become quite
   congested, and traffic movement from both sides of the city
   can cause some delays, particularly when responding to
   emergencies, and it was prudent in the sense we were there if
   needed, and vehicles at that side of the city could very
   quickly respond to emergencies at that side of the city.

Q. So the Police really wanted the ambulance to attend, and you
   wanted it as well, and we understand you used to have two
   tickets for all home matches? - A. I think that was the
   arrangement they came to, yes.

Q. There is nothing in fact in this memorandum of August 1988
   that I have seen that refers to Semi-Finals and big events
   like that? What was the system as far as you were aware? - A.
   As I understood it, and it is my personal understanding, it
   was that the Semi-Final was under the jurisdiction of the
   Football Association, and it was definitely implied that
   Sheffield Wednesday had no say in the matter. That was my
   understanding of it.

Q. Who told you this? - A. I have thought about this information,
   and I can't recall where it from, the seat of it, but I am
   absolutely sure that it was raised at one of the meetings.

Q. Semi-Final matches in your view would they be more the sort of
   events that would more require the attendance of an ambulance?
   - A. One could assume that, yes.

Q.   What did you personally do about the situation? - A.
     Operationally it did not concern me greatly in fact because in
     the event of not having access to the ground we could revert
     to our original status and position vehicles very close to
     the ground, namely Herries Road bus garages, and be in a
     position to respond to any emergency.

Q. Did you make any arrangement with the Police for them to see
   to it that two of your men were at the ground? - A.
   Personally, no.

Q. We understand that Mr. Higgins and Mr. Eason were attending in
   their own time. Did you think that was a good idea? - A. Yes.
   If I attended I would be attending in my own time.  I am a
7s x

                                  84

                                                       A. HOPKINS


            member of staff.  I am an Officer and a senior Officer, and
            where I choose to go and investigate what our service is
            doing, I had the authority to do it.

       Q. So you did not ask for the facility to attend with tickets,
          with seats, on a Semi-Final? - A. Me personally, no.

       Q. Did anybody to your knowledge? - A. Having listened to what
          was said this morning I can imagine Mr. Higgins did. I am not
          sure about Mr. Wilkinson, the previous Staff Officer.

       Q. If you had not had this arrangement which he spoke of which
          seems to have been arrived at between Mr. Higgins and
          Inspector Sewell for them to attend, would you have wanted to
          do any more about it, take any further steps? - A. Not really,
          no.

       Q. Did you think it would be appropriate to go to the FA, for
          example, and insist upon tickets? - A. Not really, no.

       Q. Why not? - A. The Ambulance Service has no statutory powers of
          presence anywhere, and if someone chooses to invite us then
          the Chief Officer's policy is we will accommodate. Where they
          are not inviting u s , if we think it is prudent to have an
          input into that, whatever it may be, then we will put that
          input in or around, not necessarily on private property, but
          we will certainly get something near on.

       Q.   So you would have been quite content to have hadambulances
            sitting outside on Penistone Road? - A. I would have been
            perfectly happy, yes.

       Q. How would you know what was going on in the ground? - A. There
          are various means of communication.  Long before this
          arrangement was arrived at communication was
          maintained between South Yorkshire Police and the
          Ambulance Service even when we were at the Herries
          Road bus garages, because we used to interchange
          radios.

       Q.   They could speak to you directly by radio.   Is that what you
            are saying? - A. Radio or telephone or whatever.

       Q. There was some discussion about whether the Ambulance Officers
          should be placed when they were there, was there not? The
          note says it was considered he would be better based in the
          North Stand so he could get to the gymnasium without problem.
          This is the bottom paragraph, page 477, but that the club only
          wanted to give them tickets for the South Stand? - A. I am not
          aware of that, quite honestly.   I read it and I agree with
          what you are saying, but it is not a copy of a minute I
          personally had sent.  It has only come to light since this
          investigation has been going on.

       Q. But you were at the meeting? - A. Yes, i was at the meeting,
          but I am not conscious of the fact that that conversation took
          place.  It may well have, but I can't recall it.
I
                               85

                                                       A. HOPKINS



    Q. One final matter on that. Can you recall this, that there was
       reference made to Police Tango units being specifically
       detailed to assist you in the event of a major disaster? - A.
       Yes, I do recall that.

    Q. And that these orders would be specifically written into the
       serial orders? That is the very last item on page 478? - A.
       I do recall the question of serials being deployed to assist
       in the event of.  I definitely recall that.

    Q. Did you think it would help if you had received a copy of the
       relevant part of the Force Order if such arrangements were
       made? - A. Yes, I would have thought so.

    Q.   Did you in fact receive any such copy? - A.    Not to my
         knowledge.

    Q. Because you would be concerned with the routes you would take
       both to and from the ground, would not you?  - A. I would be
       extremely concerned about the exit routes from the ground with
       casualties, ye s .

    Q. And you would have to go to particular hospitals if you had
       casualties, would you not? - A . We go to the nearest hospital
       offering the facility initially.

    Q. Would you have wanted to be consulted over the assistance that
       the Tango or mobile units would provide to you? - A. I could
       imagine what assistance they would provide, and that would
       be to ensure clear access en route to the hospitals which
       were designated.

    Q. What I am asking you is whether you would be assisted to have
       been consulted over that before such instructions were drawn
       up? - A. I think the fact we were at the meeting and it was
       discussed, I would assume that would be consultation.  The
       fact that we never received a copy of the letter to my
       knowledge is probably disadvantageous to us as an
       organisation.

    Q. So far as you were aware were the Police Officers who attended
       that meeting aware of first the use of the gymnasium as the
       casualty station? - A. I certainly was.  There was no doubt in
       anybody's mind in the room where the clearing station was
       going to be.

    Q. And the need to keep the access to that station clear? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. So that ambulances could go in and come out? - A. That is
       correct.

    Q. I want to take you now to the day of the event itself. You, I
       think, after various journeys were in control just after 3
       o ’clock. Is that right? - A. Yes.
                          86

                                              A. HOPKINS


Q. You had previously heard at half-past-2 from Eason and
   Higgins that they were all right and they were at the ground?
   - A . Yes.

Q. This is paragraph 13. You saw the Police line light up in the
   dontrol just after 6-minutes-past-3? - A. That is correct.

Q. And you overheard a conversation between Mr. Clarke and the
   Police operations room? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. And you then took it on yourself straight away to get in touch
   with the ambulance at Middlewood? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. And this was at 15.08-41 as has just been put? - A. Correct,
   sir.

Q. Did you then see Mr. Morley? He is an Assistant Divisional
   Officer, is he? - A. Yes, he is.

Q. And he came in the Range Rover.  I think you went off down to
   the ground with him straight away? - A. I did, sir, yes.

Q. At that stage had you had from Mr. Higgins or Mr. Eason at the
   ground? - A. I had been in the control room when they both
   indicated they were leaving base for the ground, and I think I
   had been in the control room when they both radioed saying
   they had arrived at the ground.

Q. You overheard radio traffic on the way down to the ground, so
   you would know thatambulances were going to Leppings Lane as
   well as to Penistone Road, would you? - A. My may objective in
   leaving the control room was the message, "A fleet of
   ambulances to the Leppings Lane end of the ground” . It was
   well within my knowledge that ambulances cannot gain access to
   the Leppings Lane end of the ground and I was somewhat
   confused as to why that request had been made, when in fact I
   was also well aware that the Leppings Lane entrance was no
   good to i». In fact the only entrance which was suitable for
   ambulance transport was the Penis^one Road entrance, the
   agreed entrance against the gymnasium.

Q. That is true if you want to get an ambulance into the yard
   behind the turnstiles, is not it, but an ambulance can go
   through the outer perimeter gates and round the back of the
   riverside road, can’t it, and indeed many of them did? - A.
   You are talking about the service road, sir, yes.

Q . Yes. - A . That is correct.

Q. In fact, we know ambulances picked up people just outside Gate
   C and went off down the service road to take them away? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. What is the problem then with that? - A. The problem was for
   me that I was sat in a control room at Rotherham, and I was
   not aware what was going off at the ground, but knew something
   was going off, and it was in our interest to find out what was
r\
                                  87

                                                       A. HOPKINS


          going off and get resources in there toaccommodate it.

     Q . So you wanted to go down there, but you said you were
         concerned about the ambulances going to Leppings Lane? - A.
         That did give me some concern, yes, sir.

     Q.   So you were, I think,   on yourtrip down to the ground     kept in
          contact with control,   did you not? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. And asked for other ambulances to be sent? - A. I asked for
        all vehicles to be made available.

     Q . You got there     we know at3.23 and parked theRange Rover at
         the Penistone Road end.    Is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q.   And then did you go on to the   pitch? - A. I did, sir, yes.

     Q. Did you meet up withStation Officer      Higgins when yougot to
        the ground? - A. Yes, I did, sir.




                                  /Q. Did you go and get in touch.
                                   88


                                                             A.   HOPKINS


Q.    Did    you go and get in touch with the senior                     Police Officer?
     A.       No, I didn't, sir.

Q.   Did you know where the Control Box was?                        A.      The Police
     Control Box, sir?

Q.   Yesi.     A.   Yes,    I know where it was,             yes,    sir.

Q. Did you go to that box,              or try to go to that box?
   A.   No, sir.

Q.   Qr send anybody?         A.        No,   sir.

Q. Why is that?      A.     Well, the agreed point for a major
   evacua ti on of H il lsb oro ugh is between the Stand and the
   gymnasium.

Q.   So you would have expected to see a senior Police                           Officer
     there?   A.   I would have, yes, sir.

Q. And there was not         one?        A.     Well,    I did not see one,
   sir.

Q. Did you then go on to the pitch?                     A.        Yes,    sir.

Q.   What was your object in going on to the pitch?
     A.   I wanted to establish just exactly what was happening.

Q. What did you see when you got on to the pitch?       A.   Very
   little, actually, other than a line of Police Officers
   across the pitch which ne ces sit ate d me going across to go
   through them to see what was going on at the other side
   of them.

Q. Did you manage that?       A.   Yes, I did, and when I got
   through it the scenes were quite horrendous;      it was a
   ba tt lef iel d and I stayed for seconds and in my mind
   was that the a m bu lan ces were at the wrong end of the
   ground, the Peni sto ne Road end.     fhat was going through
   my mind, so I ran back.

Q.   You, of course, were there to direct operations on the
     part of the A mb ula nce Service, not to give individual
     assist anc e to people;   is that right?   A.   Well, I was
     the senior officer there and th erefore it was my job to
     organise the Service response in the best possib le manner.

Q.   But you did not        get as far as the rear of the West                    Stand,
     did you?   A.         The --- ?

Q.   The rear of the   Wesfe Stand, the Leppings Lane end of the
     ground?    A.   No, I never went near there, sir.

Q.   So you do not know what was going on in the yard?
     A.   That is perfectly true, sir.

Q.   Did you get any i n f o rma ti on from Ambul anc e Officers                   at
     the Lepping s Lane turnstiles, what they were doing?
                                               A.HOPKINS


A.   I got info rma tio n a little later about ca sualties
at Leppings Lane end and deceased at Leppings Lane end
of the ground.

What was your means of co mm un ica tio n at the ground       itself
with other Offic ers ? A.     Verbal.

Speaking to them directly?        A.    Yes.

Could you not use any other form of radio or anything like
that?    A.   You could use radios on talk- th ro ug h but, I
mean, it is not an ideal situation.      I think when you take
c harge of an incident, we were virtually operating in a
given area - an agreed area - so c o mm un ica tio n did not
become a problem.

So now I think you went back to the gym nasium end and you
spoke to Control and asked for the major accident vehicle.
A.   Yes, I did.
                                                          V
You very kindly supplied this morning a list of the equipment
which is carrie d -- an inventory of equipment carried by
this vehicle.    I do not want to go into it all but I do
notice one of the things that it carries are bolt- cr op s
and saws.   A.    That is correct.

Is this in fact con fined to the major accident vehicle or
do other a mbu lan ce s carry them?     A.     No, not at all.
Eme rg enc y vehicles have what we call a br ea kin g-i n kit which
includes small bol t - c ro pp er s and  saws and rope and gloves.

Do dEdinary ambul anc es have these?      A.   What do   you mean
by or dinary am bul an ce s?

An ambul anc e from the County Am bulance Service, does it
have            A.    An emer gen cy County ambulance carriers a
bre ak in g- i n kit.

So the ambu lan ce that Mr. Higgins had brought to the ground,
would that have this br ea ki ng- in kit?  A. It would have
had a kit, yes, sir.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not know - you have seen
the   fencing, have you, at the Leppings Lane end?
A.     Yes, my Lord.   Yes.

I do not know what your bo lt -c rop per s and saws were able to
deal with.   Would they have been able to deal with that?
Cut the wire or --- ?   A.    I think the big ones may have
done.   The ones that were carried on the ambu lan ce would
probably have had problems.      The major incident - the large
gauge - one  would pro bably have cut it but ---

Can I get it clear?     The am bulance which was standing by
at the ground which M r. Higgins had had some equi pm ent of
this kind but are you saying that would not have worked on
this wiring, or what?     A.    I think the equi pm en t carried
                                                 A.    HQPOKINS


on an em ergency ambulance, my Lord, is equipment for
gaining access to proper ti es rather than breaking down
security fences, and that is ba sically what it is on
the ambu la nc e for, for gaining access to property, really,
when someone has co llapsed inside.

It comes to this - it might have worked but it was not
designed for that, does it?        A.   My im pression would be
I would be da ob t f u l on whether it would have, in fact,
fulfilled that role.

     MR. PHILLIPS:   Perhaps we can get round that, sir,
if I ask for a set of these bolt-c ro ps to be provided
and we can have them looked at to see whether they would.

       LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:     Yes.

     MR. PHILLIPS:   You then ask for the major accident
vehicle to be brought to the ground.   A.   To be despatched
yes, sir.

By the time you got back to the Pe nistone Road end you
clearly had the idea that this was a very serious matter.
A.   There was no doubt in my mind it was a serious matter,
sir.

And you did then everything you could to get ev erybody
there that you wanted.      You saw,   I think, some St. John's
people, did you at the gy mnasium?       A.    I saw a group of
St. John's Cadets, sir.      My initial reaction was to
utilise them but they were quite distre sse d children, really
and not in a po si ti on to be utilised on what I wanted doing.

Now,   you went    into the gymnasium,          I think.     A.     Yes, sir.

Did you see anybody in charge there   from the Police?
When you first went in?    I am looking at Pa ragraph 22 of
your statement.   A.    I didn't see anybody at that time,
sir.

You de sc ri be   the situ at ion   as chaos.         A.   That's   right,
sir.

Did you try to do anything to bring order to the chaos?
A.      Not really, sir.      The main concern I had was getting
resources to the ground to remove what I had seen on the
pitch.          At the time I came off the pitch I was co nscious
of two things - (1) that at that moment in time I hadn't
the reso urc es to remove the c as ua lt ie s from the pitch,
and I was c on sci ou s of the fact that the people on the
Penis to ne Road end of the ground seemed to have a total
unawaren es s of what was going on at the other end of the
ground and there was still quite a lot of clapping and
ch anting as I came off.         My imme di ate reaction was to
get an ambu lan ce on to the pitch.          T h a t was the forefront
of m y m i n d , mainly, yes, to deal with casual ti es but so the
rest of the people -- to bring home to them that something
                                            A.   HOPKINS


serious   had ha ppened at the other end of the ground.

A St. John's ambul anc e had gone on to the pitch, had it
not?   A.   With hindsight, yes, sir, but I wasn't aware
of that at the time.

You did not see it when you were there?   A.  I know it
was there, looking at the video, but I was not conscious
of the fact that it was there.

When you were outside the gymnasium, did you have any
p roblems with vehicles?  A.   There *|as quite a lot of
vehicles there, sir, yes.

Did it make any di ffe ren ce to the use to which you could put
your ambulances, because by that time you would have had
some attend at that end of the ground, would you not?
A.    Yes, we did.   It caused us to reverse in, which is
n egligible, really.

You also mentio n horses.     A.   There were some horses
there, yes, sir.

You see, Inspector Hand-Davies said that they had gone
b efore the fixsSt ambul anc e arrived. Is it your recol lec tio n
that they were still there when the ambulances arrived?
A.    I know they were there when I arrived, sir.

You were not in an ambulance, you were in a Range-Rover.
A.  Well, they were there when the ambula nce s arrived
as well, sir.

I see.   I think Mr. Beevers and Mr. Edwards came in an
ambulance and you wanted to get them on to the pitch;
that is right, is it not?   A.   Yes, sir.

And you also got Mr. Morley    lining up ambula nce s outside?
A.   That is correct, sir.

Did you.isend an ambul anc e on to the pitch driven by Mr.
W ads wor th? A.    Yes, I did, sir.

I think that went on to the pitch.     Did you see   the St.
John's ambulance coming off the pitch?     A.    Yes, I did,
sir.    We were, in fact, trying to get one on at    the top
of the slope and there was a pr obl em there which, frankly,
su rprised me becaus e I had not seen it before and there
was a ramp running down the side of the Stand on a large
block of con crete at the bottom of it.

That leads to the dis abled area, the We stfield enclosure,
I think, in the North Stand, does it not?      A.   Yes, but
I had never seen it before, sir, and my ambulance came in
on a left -ha nd lock and the moment he hit the concrete
his body on the other side went over on to the gate-post.
You could not negot iat e the ga te-post unless youEEame at it
straight and we were at tem pti ng to push the vehicle off
the top gat e-post when the St. John's came out, trying to
                                                       A.     HOPKINS


come off the pitch at the bottom and his bumper was
fast on the stanc hio n holding the pe rimeter railing up
and    I recall he had a couple of runs at it and bounced
off it again and then had a real run at it        and came off
it minus his n u m be r- pl at e and I think some damage to
his bumper.

        LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:      Can we see this?

       MR. KALLIPETIS:        Sir, if I may, I think these
ph ot og rap hs are easier    to dem on str at e what Mr. Hopkins
is talking about.

        LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:      Are   these some new        ones?

        MR .KALLIPETIS:      Sir,   yes.     (H a n d e d )

        MR. PHILLIPS:       I have not got them but do they
help,    sir?

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I think they may do, yes, because
they look at it from the top of the ramp whereas the
p h ot og rap hs we have got I think look at it from the bottom.

     MR. PHILLIPS:        Yes.  Can you just perhaps point to
the pa rt i cu l ar post that you say the ambulance was getting
caught on?        We can see the ramp there.   A.   It was the
gate and the post, sir.

On the left-hand side of the large p h o t og ra ph ? A. Yes.
We were having to come in and turn sharp left and the moment
the front wheel hit the co ncrete nodule, it threw the
amb ulance across on to the pillar - both ambulances that
went on to the   pitch - sort of identical damage.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     The bit of lighter coloured
con cr et e on the right is a rise, is it?     A.   My Lord,
I think the co ncr et e is to accommo da te the ramp.

     MR.    PHILLIPS:   So it is the thin end of the ramp,
is it?      A.   I don't.know what one calls it, b u t ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You are talking about coming
in past where you are standing there.   A.   Yes, sir.

Turning    left.    A.      Turning   left in.

And the right -h an d front wheel goes up, does it?
A.   Up on to the concrete, sir, and throws the offside
on to the gate-post.

     MR. PHILLIPS:      Was that the same gate-post that the
St. John's amb ula nc e got stuck on?   A.   Yes, but ---
No, no, he was at the bottom of the ramp trying to come
off.   There are some angles holding the pe rimeter fence.
He had come down and tried to         right up the ramp and
got fast.
                                                   A.    HOPKINS


You had not seen that before,         you say?          A. No,   I hadn't.

When had you last been to the ground?      A. I went to the
ground the year before merely on a courtesy visit because
Officers were on duty there and I wasn't consc iou s of it
then, and I was quite surprised.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Had anybody actually tried
drivi ng an am bulance in there before, do you know?
A.    No, sir.    I am sorry, before the ramp, my Lord?

     MR. PHILLIPS:    Yes, before the ramp was put on.
Do you know if an amb ulance had been sent through on any
earlier occa sio n? A.   No, I don't, sir.

Well now, these two or three of your ambulances                  went on
to the pitch, did they not?   A.   Yes, sir.

I think you then came into contact with Mr. Hornsby, the
Assis ta nt Chief Fire Officer. A.   That is correct, sir.

Can you say what time that was?     Paragraph 30 of your
statement, you just sent a couple of ambulances down to the
pitch.    How long had you been there before you spoke -
perhaps you can    remember it that way - how long had you
been there when    you spoke to Mr. Hornsby?   A. I think
po ssibly around   15.44 I spoke to Hornsby.

By then you still had not spoken to a senior Police
Officer?      A.     Bearing in mind, sir, I hadn't been back
to the g y m na si um and I hadn't seen one in the area where              I
was working.

But you had been in the vicinity of the gymnasium, had
you not?   A.   Yes, sir, I was there all the time.

In the yard, sending ambula nc es to the pitch and getting
people sorted out into ambu lan ces ?  A.   Yes, sir.

And I think you gave various other i n str uc tio ns and the
major incident vehicle arrived.   That was about 15.45, was
it?   A.   Yes, sir.

And then you'started to use the body-bags which had been
pro vided with that ambulance, is that right?         A.                    Yes

You tell   us then that ---

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I am sorry, did youswant to
sey so met h in g? A.   I thought around that time, sir, I
went into the g y m na si um and met Chief S u p e ri nt en den t Addis.

                                                 /MR.    PHILLIPS:         I am
                                      A. HOPKINS

I am coming to that. That is paragraph 36 of your statement.
You say that you met Chief Superintendent Addis. Again can
you give us a clue as to what time that would be? A. About
1550, sir.

So you had been there 25 minutes anyway before you saw a
senior police officer? A. Well, he was the only one
I recognised.  I hadn't seen anybody else I recognised.

Did you get any further information from Mr. Addis over
and above what you already knew from your o*m observations?
A. Chief Superintendent Addis seemed to have taken charge
of the deceased side of the gymnasium, and that's what one
would expect. He seemed to be sorting things out in there.

Yes.   A. With a view to --

I think he had been in touch with the Coroner, had he not?
A. I think he gave me the impression that they had been
in touch either with the Coroner or the Coroner's Office.

Yes.  A.  And that he would let me know as soon as he got
some detail.

I think you finally managed to get all the injured away from
the ground by half-past-4?   A. Yes.

During this time when you had been engaged at the gymnasium
end of the ground, until seeing Mr, Addis and shortly
afterwards, did you become aware at that stage of what
had been going on at the Leppings Lane end, the turnstile
end?   A. I think the first time I became aware of what
had gone on at Leppings Lane end in its entirety was much
later that night. Mr. ilones, the Assistant Chief Officer
(Operations) came to me at the ground and informed me that
he had gone to that end of the ground, been directed to
that end of the ground, and that there were casualties
there and that there were in fact a number of bodies round
there, which frankly — —

But you had not known about this at the time and you were
at the ground, at the gymnasium? A. I hadn't known about
it.

Had you expected, first of all, anyone to tell you about
what was going on at Leppings Lane end? A. To be
perfectly honest, sir, I had enough on my plate in the
ground and at the Penistone Road end.  I was not really
concerned about Leppings Lane end, and that is exactly
as it was.  I probably never gave it a thought.

But, of course, you had been told right from the beginning
that ambulances were to be sent there?   A. That's right,
sir.

And you are saying that that really went out of your mind,
did it?   A. When I saw what I saw on the ground, my
100 per cent attention was given to the evacuation of what
                                95

                                                       A. HOPKINS

     I saw on the ground. To be perfectly honest, until Mr. Jones
     came to me, I don't think Leppings Lane entered my head
     whatever until he told me what was round there, and then
     it did.

            Mr. PHILLIPS:      Thank you very much, Mr. Hopkins.

                   Cross-examined by Mr. GLASGOW:

Q.   Mr. Hopkins, did it ever occur to you that the arrangements
     which you had for dealing with an incident at Hillsborough
     were unsatisfactory in any way?   A. A major incident, no.

Q.   No. Were you aware of the fact that it had become the
     Ambulance Service's policy to have two of its ambulance
     officers at the ground for all games?   A. Was I aware
     of that?

Q.   Yes.     A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   You knew that?      A.     Yes, sir.

Q.   And the only difference between League games and semi-finals,
     so far as you were aware, was that at League games they
     would have their complimentary tickets in the Stand and
     at semi-finals they would not? A. That was my understanding.

Q.   That was your understanding.   Did that, to your mind,
     produce anything that was unsatisfactory from the Ambulance
     point of view?   A. Only that if we haven't got officers
     in the ground then, we are reliant on somebody else telling
     us what to do or what is happening, and on this occasion
     I personally felt from a Service point of view that the
     analysis of a situation is best done by your own officers
     who are aware of what is going on and what resources are
     required to overcome what is going on.

Q.   The^ important thing from your point of view was to have
     at least two of your officers at the ground? A. To me,
     yes, because my experience tells me that if one relies on
     other organisations, they tend to look at their point of
     view and not other people's.

Q.   But once it had become a matter of established policy that
     there were two ambulance officers at the ground for every
     game, wherever they were, how did the emergency plan that
     we see at 324 operate?    What was the relevance of it?
     If you take 324, can we go through it line by line? We
     are now talking about, in rough terms, the last three years
     during which it has been established practice to have
     officers at the ground for all games, wherever they may
     be. Now, first of all, (1) does not apply, does it? You
     do not have to despatches a crew to the location to
     establish the nature of the incident, because they are
     already there?   A. That's correct.

Q.   (2) does not apply, does it, because you do not have to
     contact Station Officer Higgins because he is already
     there?   A. That's correct, sir.
                                           A. HOPKINS

(3) does not apply? You do not have to despatch a number
of available crews to the bus depot?  A. That's correct.

And (4) does not apply because the duty officer will already
have been notified, will he?    A,. Possibly, yes.

And (5) does not apply because on arrival at the ground
Station Officer Higgins does not have to do anything
because he is already there - correct?   A. That's correct,
sir.

Does (6) affect anything that the officers at the ground
have got to do?   A. Well, as it says, "Station Officer
to update control."

Does that mean that the officer at the ground has then
got to update Control when he knows what is going on?
A. Yes, sir.

And he is already there, as we know?   A. Yes, sir.

(7) is dealing with extra crews available for stand-by.
Is that something that is done by Control in any event
once the incident has been declared?   A. Based on the
update, Control may decide to move additional resources
into the area.

Once this set of rules, or whatever they are, is no longer
material because the first five have been complied with,
what instructions are given to the liaison officers on the
ground as to the steps that they should take to deal with
the incident once they are there?   A. Well, if they are
on the ground, sir, the liaison officer is the eyes and
ears o£ the Ambulance Service. These rules would come
into effect in the event of the liaison officer not being
in. the ground.

Did nobody think, during the three years preceding this
incident, to agree with either the Club or the Police or
anybody else that "Now that we have established the policy
that there will be officers at the ground for all games,
it might be a good idea to re-write the Rule Book when the
first five principles out of eight do not apply any more"?
A. I'm notisure what difference re-writing the Rule Book
would make, quite honestly.

You just do not think it would have mattered?   A. In this
event, n o .

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Were the Club aware of the
arrangement that had been made by the Police for the two
officers to stand at the corner by the Kop? A. I have no
idea, sir. The co-ordinating body for that is the Police.

     Mr. GLASGOW: Your Service would have preferred to
have them in the North Stand, I think? You told the
Police that at your meeting with them. We can see it on
page 477. You would have preferred your officers to have
been in the North Stand?   A. I recall that.
                               97

                                                      A. HOPKINS

Q.   Did anybody tell the Club that?   A. The co-ordination
     point between the Club and the emergency services is the
     Police.

Q.   But did anybody in the Ambulance Service at all get in
     touch formally with the Club officials to tell them what
     was going on and what was expected of them, or was this
     left    the arrangement that we heard about this morning
     with the physiotherapi&fe for taking a team player away?
     A. I don't know.

Q.   The whole purpose of the meeting which you attended, the
     note of which is at page 477, was to update the incoming
     police liaison officers as to the arrangements with the
     Ambulance Service, and we see from the last few lines of
     477 that the only arrangement there was with complimentary
     tickets was, in the words of the writer of this memo,
     "Service for use in the South Stand so that the Club
     physio., Alan Smith, can signal straight away to the
     Ambulance Officer if an ambulance is required for a
     Wednesday player". Now, I ask again, was anything said
     by the Ambulance Service to the Club officials, as
     distinct from the man responsible for physiotherapy for
     the players, as to the arrangements that they were expected
     to co-operate with?   A. I am of the belief that the Chief
     Metropolitan Ambulance Officer wrote to the Club. The
     content of the letter I am not privy to.

             Mr. GLASGOW:   Then we will ask him.        Thank you very
     much.

                    Cross-examined by Mr. W O O D W A R D :

Q.   Mr. Hopkins, I think you said that the eyes and ears of
      the Ambulance Service would be their liaison officers?
      A. Yes.

Q.   Their liaison officers at the ground?            A. Yes, that's
      right.

Q.   So is it the position that when anything occurred which
      necessitated the attendance of the Ambulance Service at
      the ground, you would; have expected contact to be made
      with the liaison officers?   A. Not necessarily, sir.

Q.   But that would be one of the first points of call, perhaps,
      for you? A. It is a possibility but it's not necessarily
      the way it would happen.

Q.   You do not recall, do you, on this day having any
      particular contact with either of your liaison officers,
      do you?   A. Do I recall it?

Q.   Yes.    A. I know I did have contact         with the liaison
      officers.

Q.   But your recollection of it is very hazy?                A. Yes, I will
      admit to that, sir.
                          98

                                                A. HOPKINS

Q.   Are you able to say when it was, roughly?   A. I had
     contact with one of the liaison officers the moment I
     arrived at the ground and while I was running across the
     ground.

Q.   Was that with Mr. Higgins or with Mr. Eason?      A. That was
     Mr. Eason.

Q.   You knew where the Police Control was?      A. That's correct,
     sir.

Q.   At any stage did you receive from SYMAS a request to go
     to the Police Control? A. I think there was a request
     for a senior officer to go to the ?blice Control.

Q.   Do you remember when that happened?      A. No, I don't.

Q.   Did you respond to that?   A.   No.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Request from whom?   A. I think
     the request, sir, was from the Police, for a Senior
     Ambulance Officer to go to Police Control.

Q.   Was this whilst you were at the ground?      A. I learnt of
     it after, sir, not whilst I was there.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:    A request obviously, you say, coming
     from the Police in origin, but do you know how it was
     communicated to anybody?     A. No, I don't.

Q.   Of course, you say that you did not observe any senior
     Police Officers?   A. No, I didn't.

Q.   There came a point when your attention arid your sole
     endeavour was a preoccupation with making your own
     arrangements?   A. To remove the injured.

Q.   Yes.   A. Yes, sir, that's right.

Q.   If you had wanted to make communicationwith senior police
      officers, was there anything to have prevented yourself
      or sending one of your men as a runner to the Control Room?
      A. There was nothing to prevent me doing it, sir, no.

Q.   May I ask you if you made any endeavour? A. Well, no, I
     didn't, sir, because I was at the recognised area for
     removal of casualties.

Q.   And were you abi«b to do what you wanted to do and fulfil
     your function there?     A. Certainly, yes.  I wasnever
     conscious of a great deal of problem.

Q.   There were no problems*and you were not in any way inhibited
     from getting on with what you needed to do?   A. I wasn't
     conscious of any problems inhibiting me from doing what
     I wanted to do, no.

Q    I: think it would follow that if you had been, you would
     have dealt with it? A. I would, yes.
                            99

                                               A. HOPKINS

Q.   May I ask you just about the problems of access that you
     have mentioned.  I think you said that ambulances were in
     fact able to get in and out?   A. We were able to reverse
     two or three ambulances in at any one time.

Q.   You were?   A. There were a number of vehicles in the yard
     which were Police vehicles, but one understood why they
     were there.

Q.   Are you saying, in fact, that their presence was an
      inconvenience but it did not really prevent you getting
      on with the job?   A. No, it didn't.

Q.   And if you had wanted them to be removed, you would have
     taken some steps?   A. Well, we did eventually get them
     moved, sir.

Q.   And they were moved   as you requested?   A. Yes, sir.

Q.   The horses that you have spoken aboutwere no problem     for
      you, were they?   A. I acknowledged their presence.     They
      did not give me a problem as such.

Q.   I imagine you are talking about horses with men upon them*
      are you?    A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And if you wanted a horse moved, it would have     been a simple
      job to get it done?  A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And although you have mentioned horses, you are not
      suggesting that the vehicles there or the horses were
      really an impediment to getting your job done? A. They
      didn't stop us doing the job, sir.

Q.   Thank you.  Is it   right that you   did not in fact haveany
     conversation with   any of the men   on the     horses?   A. Ihave
     a recollection -- I don't think      I did, no. One spoke to
     me as I got to the ground, but I     didn't     have any
     conversations with them regarding    the incident.

Q.   May I ask you about one further matter. Bolt croppers or
      equipment on the ambulances have been referred to.  I think
      three of your ambulances actually went out on to the pitch?
     A. There were three ultimately, yes, sir.

Q.   What equipment is it that you have in mind on    the ambulance

          Mr. KALLIPETIS:    Sir, if it helps, I am having them
     brought here.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you.

Q.        Mr. WOODWARD:    Are you aware of any of the equipment
     having been used?      A. No, I'm not aware of it, sir.

Q.   It would follow, would it, that your experienced ambulance­
      men, if they thought they had got any tackle on board that
      could have helped, would have soon had it out? A. I think
           would have used it, sir, yes.
                            100

                                                    A. HOPKINS


          Mr. WOODWARD:     Thank you.

               Cross-examined by Mr. KALLIPETIS:

Q.   Mr. Hopkins, you were asked about your recollection of the
     events of that day. What time did you come on duty?
     A. About half£past-ll, sir.

Q.   Is it right that you stayed at the ground and eventually
     came off duty at half-past-5 the following morning?
     A. There was a break in between, sir, but I actually
     finished at 5.30 on Sunday morning.

Q.   You were asked about the meeting in August, 1988 - page
     477 of the bundle which I think is in front of you?
     A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Just so that we understand the purpose of that meeting and
     who was there, Mr. Hopkins, will you just turn to it?

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Where are you now?

          Mr. KALLIPETIS:     Page 477, sir.

Q. Present were Ambulance, Police and Fire Service?         A. Yes,
    sir.

Q.   It was an update between those three Services of the plans
     that had been made in 1986?   A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And also as a result of a change of liaison officers and
      senior officers on the Police side? A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Present was Superintendent Murray , Superintendent Marshall,
     Chief Inspector Beale and Inspector Sewell from the Police?
     A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Yourself and Mr. Jones?      A. Yes.

Q.   And a Fire Officer?     A. Yes, sir.

Q.   At that meeting, Mr. Hopkins, is it right that all three
      Services were made aware of the arrangement about home
     matches?    A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And also that the contingency plan would be as set out in
      that memo, namely that the Herries Road bus depot would
      be used for the rendezvous of ambulances - is that right?
      A. Yes, sir.

Q.   The Senior Ambulance Officeer already at the ground would
      control the ambulance vehicles in and out of the football
      stadiufta? A. Yes, sir.



                                         /Q. That the senior officer
                                A. HOPKIKS


"That the senior Officer who would attend the ground on
those matches would meet Inspector Sewell at 2.15 each
time there was an afternoon kick-off"? - A. Yes sir.

And that happened on this day as we have heard? - A. I
understand it did, yes sir.
And "in the event of a major disaster the Senior Ambulance
Officer would where possible make his way to the gymnasium
to direct his operations"? - A. That is correct sir.

So all three Services were absolutely clear in August 1988
where your position should be once you arrived at the
ground? - A. Yes sir.
And prior to your arrival either Mr. Higgins or Mr. Eason?
- A. Yes sir.
You were asked about the last paragraph on that page. Was
that discussed at that meeting, Mr. Hopkins? - A. I cannot
honestly say sir.
You can't remember? - A. I can't remember whether it was
said or not sir.
You see I have to put it to you because Mr. Jones, who I
also represent who was present at that meeting is satisfied
it was not discussed at that meeting? ~ A. I thitok I said
earlier sir that I cannot recall it being discussed, but
to be perfectly honest I cannot remember.

Over the page at 478, Mr. Hopkins, there are two paragraphs
which deal with the Fire Service and in the last paragraphs

      "To assist the fire and ambulance services
      in any major disaster, two Police Tango units
      will be specifically detailed to assist ...."

They are the ones you have referred to? — A. Yes sir.

As far as you are concerned, Mr. Hopkins, you told the
Inquiry that when you arrived at the scene you expected
a Senior Officer to be there to meet you? - A. Yes, I
would have expected a Senior Officer to be there sir.

What would you have expected him to have done or to have
said? - A. I would have expected him to brief me on what
was going off and what was required and  what role he
wanted us to play in it.
In your experience was this the normal procedure when
Ambulance Services are called to a major disaster? - A.
Well the co-ordinating body for major disasters or major
accidents or serious accidents is thePolice Force, they
insist on that and we agree to it.
                                        A. HOPKINS


Q. Do you see it as your function to chase round the ground
   trying to find a senior Police Officer who knew what he
   was doing? - A.No, I didn't and I did not chase round the
   ground.
Q. It was   your function once you saw what was going on to
   get on   with it as quickly as possible? - A. My function
   was to   move casualties out of Sheffield Wednesday Football
   Ground   to the nearest medical aid in the shortest possible
   time.
Q. As far as the access routes to the hospitals are concerned,
   would it be of any concern to you which particular Tango
   Unit was designated to carry out that function? - A. Not
   really because it would not be necessary for me to come
   into contact with that Tango Unit.  I would have thought
   that their role would have been explained to them at the
   briefing should a major accident happen.

Q. Is it fair to say after the Police had called in the
   Ambulance Services to a major incident, you would have
   expected them to have known which routes are the quickest
   route to the hospital and have them cleared? - A. Well
   the quickest routes are obvious sir.

            MR. KALLIPETIS:   Quite.   Thank you.


                       Bv LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

Q. Mr. Hopkins, can you clear one thing up for me. Earlier
   in your evidence you said that it did not strike you as
   being inappropriate that there were no Officers of yours
   in the ground. You put it: "We could revert to the former
   practice of having an ambulance nearby in Penistone Road".
   Is that right? - A. Herries Road Bus Garage.

Q. Later on you said:  "If we had not got Officers in the
   ground we are reliant on others telling us and the important
   thing is to have Officers at the ground".  I am not quite
   sure how that reconciles? - A. The point I was making, my
   Lord, is that we have no statutory powers and we can go
   into premises if invited in, but we have no right to demand
   to be there.
Q.    I suppose you can say, particularly if as I understood the
     Police thought this was appropriate too,   you could say to
     the Club:  "Well you have got a big match, particularly a
     semi-final, that is the time you ought to have Ambulance
     Officers in the grounds, never mind the league games when
     there is not likely to be so many" statute or otherwise,
     wouldn't you? - A. Yes sir.

Q.    What was your own    view, that there oughtto be? - A.My own
     view is air, that it should be mandatory for Ambulance
                     103

                                 A. HOPKINS


Officers to be present at large gatherings irrespective
of whether it is a football match or not.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you.


                   ALBERT PAGE Called

                Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

Mr. Page, you are the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer
for South Yorkshire and have been for some years now?
- A. Yes sir, seven years.

Mr. Page, do you have a copy of your statement with you?
- A. Yes sir.

You have made a long statement and a lot of it gives very
helpful background information, but we have all got that
and so I can take you through some parts of it fairly
briefly if I may.
      So far as the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
Service is concerned, and I am going to paragraph 22 sir,
I think you were one of the first in the country to intro­
duce paramedics? - A. Yes sir, we went against the National
Guidelines from the point of view there was a freeze on and
I continued the training sir.

So the position onthe 15th of April was that you had para­
medics available to assist at this incident? - A. Yes sir.

And they of course amongst other things would be trained in
the use of defibrillators? - A. Yes sir.

But you shared Dr. Purcell's view this morning that in fact
they would not have been of assistanoecon the pitch in
the event? - A.   Itwould have been professionally irresponsible
to take them on   tothe pitch sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: If I may say so, I don't think
that point seeds to be taken further.

      MR. GOLDSACK: Now so far as the incident room that
we heard about this morning, again that is something that
you arranged should be set up earlier this year? - A. Yes
sir.

I think as a direct repponse to the problems associated with
the Kegworth and Lockerbie disasters? - A. Well we never
believe we have major incidents in this country sir, but
they have been proved very quickly wrong and I thought we
had not really seen one, I hoped we never would, but just
in case.

From your position did that Incident Room operate in the
way that you had hoped it would on the day? - A. Yes sir,
                        104

                                    A. PAGE


  we have made one modification since and have had to put
  more telephones in for the Press problems.

Q. You of course had particular responsibility after the
   Bradford Fire and I think you personally liaised with your
   opposite number in West Yorkshire? - A. Yes sir, that was
   a personal choice.

Q. As to the lessons that your own Service might learn fr€>m
   it? - A. Yes sir.
Q. And I think you made a number of changes particularly so
   that there would always be not only Senior Officers on call
   but also so that other ranks could also be called up very
   quickly in the event of this sort of disaster unfolding?
   - A. Yes sir, we organised an on-call rota system for all
   ranks from Station Officer level to my level.

Q. Again did that operate on this particular day? - A. Yes sir,
   that has been in operation for four years.

Q. And did it operate as you would have hoped? - A. It operated
   better than I hoped.  I had the Deputy and all the Assistant
   Chiefs with the exception of one present.

Q. Now so far as the major incident planning is concerned we
   have of course got the document in our bundle. Going to
   paragraph 41 of your statement I think it was again your
   own involvement in 1985/86 that led to the Plan being drawn
   up in connection with Hillsborough? - A. I asked Mr. Wilkinson
   who was my Staff Officer at the time to involve himself with
   each of the Football Clubs in South Yorkshire and to draw
   up an evacuation plan if necessary.

Q. We have in our core bundle at pages 305 and 306 a letter
   that you wrote to Sheffield Wednesday inviting their co­
   operation and their reply of the 29th January 1986 suggesting
   that you contact Mr. Chester? - A. Yes.

Q. Can I move to the physical presence of Ambulance Officers
   within Hillsborough.

         From the time of the Bradford Fire onwards, has it
   been your view that there ought to be a presence at certainly
   the larger football matches? - A. Not just football matches
   sir, pop concerts, anything where there is a large gathering.

Q. You set out in paragraph 4 what is your official guidance
   from the Department of Health and Social Security so far
   as that is concerned? - A. Yes sir, must have their
   permission, must agree a fee, etc.

Q. Does it come to this: officially if you are going to have
   an ambulance present at what is really a private function,
   be it a large number of the public will attend, you are
   supposed to charge for it? - A. Yes sir.
                                 A. PAGE


When you had your approaches to Sheffield Wednesday in
1985/86, were they made aware that it would be with a charge
if ambulances were to be present? - A. The initial approach
made by Mr. Wilkinson was one to suggest that fees would
be charged. When it was obvious from the reply from the Club
that that was not very favourable, my attitude to Mr. Wilkinson
was:  "I want in" and "I want in to the ground, I want our
men available for call".

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: What are we talking about in
terms of charges? What sort of charges would you have in
mind? - A. If I put two ambulances and two Officers in
the ground sir, we are talking at the present stage of about
£249.
      MR. GOLDSACK: When was the last time that there was
any discussion between your Service and the Club about there
being ambulances present and being charged for? - A. I am
not sure. I cannot give you a specific date. I do remember
Mr. Wilkinson informing me that he had met the physiotherapist
and that topic had been broached.  I made the point with
regard to contacting the Club again and he said he felt it
was better if we did not do that from the point of view
that we were getting a favourable response through Mr. Smith
in assisting with the Club and we had eyes and ears in.
If it went on a formal basis he did not feel the response we
were getting would be maintained.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: So your aim with the Club really
was so that the ambulance would be on hand #©r the players?
- A. No sir, it was the opposite.  I was not bothered about
the players.

I know you weren't but the Club was? - A. Oh yes sir.

      MR. GOLDSACK: That is what they wanted you there
for but you saw yourself being there for the other however
many thousand people? - A. Yes sir.

So over the last two years you have accepted the situation,
have you, that they would be there at your expense? - A.
Yes sir.

And similarly as we have heard, the Officers who attend
it is not part of their official rota but they go on
Saturday afternoons? - A. They go sir. They are in uniform
and they are on lieu time. They don't receive payment but
they can gather the hours and be released from duties at
other dates.

Do we take it, Mr. Page, that you were aware of the arrange­
ments for the 1988 and 1989 semi-finals? - A. I would have
been informed.

That is to say that the normal South Stand tickets were not
being made available and arrangements had been made by
                                 A. PAGE


the Police for your presence? - A. Yes sir, that is correct.

I ask only because others have queried it. Was there any
consideration given by you at any stage to contacting the
F.A. about the semi-finals? - A. No sir, until very
recently I was not aware that the Football Association
were the people to contact.

So coming if I may to the 15th of April, I think in fact
you had alternated with Mr. Hopkins and so you were not
initially on duty that day? - A. That is correct.

But as you would have hoped and as in fact happened, you
were contacted at your home as soon as the major incident
was declared? - A. It was a little after the major incident
had been declared sir. My presence was less important than
mobiles, Ambulancemen and Senior Officers.

And you then made your way straight to Headquarters? - A.
Yes sir.

Once you got to Headquarters did you assume overall responsi­
bility there? - A. I did not take the command of the incident
away from Mr. Clarke. Mr. Clarke had a very good insight
in conjunction with the domestic emergency channel of what
was happening, but if it had been necessary to make a
senior decision I was available sir.

Do we take it from your answer that you did not see any
insuperable problems developing on the communication side?
- A. No sir, I knew that we had enough mobiles and ambulance
personnel either going to the ground or in situ at the ground
and everything seemed to be going in accordance with our
procedures.

Towards the end of your statement at paragraph 70 you deal
with one or two difficulties that were encountered on the
day. One was the access point which others have dealt
with so I don't trouble you with that, but I would like
your help Mr. Page on the question of radios.

      From the reports you received, what appeared to you
to be the problems on the day with the radios? - A. I was
approached by Mr. Clarke with regard to the interference
on the radios.  I was also aware from the two ground Officers
initially, Eason and Higgins, that they had had communication
problems with Control.  I went a little bit further than
that because the communications and the major accident
unit that went in reported that we had lost all transmission
on approaching the ground.

      We have been looking at that now for the past five
or six weeks since the incident and we have various reasons
as to why that happened.
                                A. PAGE


      The difficulty with communication within the ground
we put down to three basic problems. One was the [fM>4se
factor; one was the mass of concrete around the Stand area
and the third one was there was so much communication
between our own radio channels and the Police Officers'
that there were wavelengths bouncing from one another and
I would suspect that was one of the reasons why the Police
had difficulties as well.

      We also recognise now that on the emergency reserve
channel which we turned to for management of the incident,
we asked for the assistance of Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire
and West Yorkshire Ambulance Services.

      The interference that we experienced at some stage
during the Hillsborough evacuation of the injured continued
for quite some time after Hillsborough and we were concerned
it might be associated to the BBC transmission from the
Crucible. We contacted the BBC and they were good enough
to actually turn off one of their three transmitters each
time so that we could test against that and we cleared the
BBC, that was not the problem. We eventually had to
call in the specialists who supplied the radio equipment
and we found that two transmitters had been left switched
off from the West Yorkshire Ambulance Control which should
not have happened. As far as I am concerned the emergency
reserve channel once those vehicles have transferred to
my management, remain with my management and there is no
need for the Home Service to monitor.

That might explain some of the difficulties after about
10-minutes, 12-minutes-past-3? - A. Yes sir.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: It may do to Mr. Goldsack, it
has not to me I am afraid. You say that two transmitters
at West Yorkshire were off.  Is thet right? - A. No.
To go on to the emergency reserve channel which is a
national channel reserved for ambulance services, you
press a button within your Control Room on a base station.
That opens the reserve channel and allows you access.
That happened on the day but it was not necessary for the
West Yorkshire vehicles to keep that retained. Once they
transferred to me my base channel will cover that. I suggest
sir it was a good way of listening to the situation as it
arose.

      MR. GOLDSACKi The problem or possible problems
caused by concrete.  Is that something you were aware of
before this particular day? - A. No sir.

Do you see any way round it given tlBt presumably as the
Fire Service you prefer Stands to be of concrete? — A.
Well I have spoken to my Communications Officer and we
will certainly be looking in the near future to consult
with the grounds to get aerials placed on the Stands with
a base station unit to be supplied on the day.
                                A. PAGE


So far as the noise of the crowd, that simply requires
a better radio, doesn't it? - A. No sir, it requires ear­
pieces which are on order now.

We have heard quite a few witnesses say that when they have
used those in the past they have not actually assisted them?
- A. We have never used them sir. I am purchasing to
eliminate that one.




                    /Q. Mr. Page, one other matter .
                         109


                                               A.   PAGE


Q. Mr. Page, one other matter I should have dealt with
   chronologically.  You attach to your statement a further
   letter you sent in April 1988 to the Director of
   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.  I think that is a
   letter you also sent to other football clubs and also to
   a racecourse within the County? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you receive any response from Sheffield Wednesday to that
   letter? - A. I think I did, but I can't, to be truthful,
   recall it.

Q. If you did receive any response do you know whether that
   matter was taken any further? - A. None of the clubs responded
   from the point of view of a positive sense to have our
   involvement increased.

Q. You may have had an acknowledgment of the letter? - A. Yes,
   sir, but the offer was never taken up.

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. JACKSON:

Q. Mr. Page, can I ask you to summarise the position.   Is this
   the overall position, that if Sheffield Wednesday d o n ’t get
   into the Semi-Final they sell the tickets to someone else?
   Presumably if Sheffield Wednesday got into the Final they
   would keep the tickets and the ambulancemen would be there? -
   A. I d o n ’t know, sir.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry?   The Semi-Final?

        MR. JACKSON:   Yes, into the Semi-Final.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It might not be held there.     I
   don't know.

        MR. JACKSON:   I would not be held there:

Q. Mr. Page, were you in the Inquiry this morning when we heard
   if you had a cardiac arrest you are better off a director than
   a fan? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is it fair to say that throughout your entire discussions with
   the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club all their attention was
   first to the protection of their players and then thereafter
   of the supporters? - A. I have never personally talked to
   anyone at the club. My Officer did that, and I think that is
   a fair assessment, sir.

               Cross-Examined bv MR. GIBSON-WATT:

Q. One matter, Mr. Page.  Paragraph 46 of your statement, please,
   the second sentence.  Take a moment to read it. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What you are saying there, ideally you would have liked to
   have at all matches at Hillsborough two ambulances at the
   ground and a foot squad of between 6 and 12 Ambulance
   Officers? - A. I think I refer there to a Semi-Final or
     •   »

0/

                                       110

                                                              A.   PAGE


                  matches where we assume there may be problems. Certainly I
                  would provide for every match two ambulances and two Officers.
                  The foot squads I would put in for large situations.

             Q.   That is right.  The Semi-Final is obviously a very large
                  occasion, full attendance, over 50,000 people there? - A. Yes.

             Q.   And the cost I am not particularly interested in, but what you
                  are saying is even with a 12 man foot squad it is going to be
                  around £500? - A. Yes, sir.

             Q. Is there any particular basis on which you make your
                assessment of needing two ambulances rather than one, 12 men
                rather than 6? Is it the number of people there or any other
                point in particular? - A. It is a bit of a mixture, sir.   It
                is the size of the crowd, the history of the clubs from the
                point of view that the Police may inform us or may not
                inform us that there is a tendency to have crowd problems.
                Certainly from the point of view, and we saw it with Eason
                and Higgins, if they were going to send one vehicle out they
                would like to retain one vehicle in, so they have a constant
                supply of equipment and manpower.  The foot squads, we have
                learned a lot from the Orgreave situation which we were
                involved with several years ago, and we find that it is
                easier without an ambulance to rescue than it is with an
                ambulance.

             Q. When you said in that answer the history of the clubs, you
                meant the history of the two competing clubs? - A. yes, sir.

             Q. That really means whether there is any particular reason for
                thinking there might be crowd trouble because of the
                reputation of particular supporters or things like that? - A.
                That is correct, sir. That is purely inside the ground, and
                maintaining a standard cover or additional cover outside.

             Q. Can you help me on this. The cost you have given of
                approximately £500, that would probably be a standard charge
                throughout the country, would it? - A. Yes, sir, because the
                only factors associated to that are the cost of the vehicles,
                the cost of the manpower and a slight on-cost for
                administration.

             Q. So no pinning other authorities down within pounds, it gives
                us an idea of what that sort of facility might cost? - A.
                Yes, sir.

             Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   When I asked you about the cost of
                  two ambulances before I wrote down £249? Was that correct? -
                  A. We are talking about two different things, sir.  The first
                  cost of £249 is two Officers, four Ambulancemen and two
                  vehicles.  This one includes a foot squad of 8 to 12 men on
                  top of the two Ambulances and two Officers.
                        111

                                               A. PAGE


                 Cross-Examined bv MR. GLASGOW:

Q. Mr. Page, paragraph 47 of your statement you refer to Mr.
   Wilkinson's meeting with club officials.  I do appreciate
   before I ask you these questions that to you this is second­
   hand, but I think we are not hearing from Mr. Wilkinson, so I
   must ask you the questions. You say:

        "I recall that after Mr. Wilkinson attended one meeting
        in July 1986 with club officials he came back and
        reported to me” .

   Did you know that his meeting with club officials was with the
   groundsman and the physiotherapist? - A. No, sir, my report
   from Mr. Wilkinson was just "club officials” .

Q. Would it be fair to say that you would expect the club team
   physiotherapist to be more concerned with the questions of
   injuries to his players than he would be with general matters
   of club policy concerning spectators? - A. I would suggest
   that is common sense, sir.

Q. It does not seem to have been common sense to some people, so
   I wanted your help on it. When you were dealing with this
   matter with Mr. Wilkinson were you unaware of the fact that no
   club official in the proper sense of that term knew anything
   about his visit on this matter? - A. I was under the
   impression, sir, that following the letter I had sent and the
   response that the club had sent to me with regarding to
   contacting Mr. Chester at some stage Mr. Wilkinson had met Mr.
   Chester.

Q. But we now know - I think you were here this morning, to give
   it in sequence - there had been a meeting of the officer party
   with Mr. Chester, and that then your Officers had done a tour
   of the ground with the groundsman, Mr. Ward, and finished up
   simply with themselves and nobody else with the club
   physiotherapist? - A. That is what was said this morning, sir.

Q. But was that the first time you knew the meeting had gone that
   way? - A . Yes.

Q. So today is really the first time you have known that when Mr.
   Wilkinson was talking of club officials and their response,
   the only occasion upon which attendance of Officers at the
   ground that was mentioned had been with the physiotherapist? -
   A. From Mr. Wilkinson’s point of view, from Mr. Higgins and
   Mr. Eason slightly differently, again we have heard that in
   the Inquiry.

Q. Yes, but today was the first time you knew that those were the
   officials concerned, the groundsman and the physiotherapist? -
   A. And I believe Mr. Chester initially.

Q. But Nhen you wrote your letter - I say "your letter” ; forgive
   me, we are told Mr. Hopkins was writing on your behalf when toe
   wrote following the meeting? - A. I wrote one letter which was
                          112

                                                    A.   PAGE


     the initial request for ambulance involvement, and I arranged
     for the second letter which was offering facilities, I think
     April this year, and Mr. Hopkins in my absence put the formal
     request through to the club for the tickets because they would
     not respond without a formal request.

Q.   It was not a memory test, Mr.  Page, at all. Let me help. If
     you go to the black bundle on your right, go to page 340.
     Again it is not your letter.  Is that the letter which Mr.
     Hopkins wrote in your absence following the meeting on 16th
     July? - A. Yes, I believe so.

Q.   Can we go through it, because it may be important.         It is
     written on 6th August, is not it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And itfollows a telephone conversation Mr. Wilkinson had had
     about a week earlier on 28th? Do you see that, the first
     paragraph? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Just to help you with the time.Were you away        at this time? -
     A. Yes, I was on leave.

Q. Go to the second paragraph, and if there is anything you can't
   help with just tell us, but I would like to go through it with
   you:

            "On 16th July Mr. Wilkinson visited your club along
          with two other Officers from the South Yorkshire
          Metropolitan Ambulance Service, and Sergeant Goddard of
          the South Yorkshire Police.  The meeting was held with
          Mr. Ward, the senior groundsman. After touring your
          complex and discussing evacuation plans with South
          Yorkshire Police it was felt that the Ambulance Service
          would normally only become involved in any events after
          they had already occurred and therefore slight delays
          could be experienced on occasions in responding to the
          incident.  To avoid this I would ask if two passes could
          be supplied to the Ambulance Service which would enable
          us to ensure that an Ambulance Officer was in your ground
          at all home fixtures".

     Correct? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You now know that that sentence which I have just read refers
   to the meeting which there had been with Mr. Smith, although
   he is not named in that letter, the physiotherapist? - A. I
   assume that, yes, sir.

Q. Did it occur to you whenever you saw that letter that the club
   official, Mr. Chester, was being told by your service that
   from your point of view there was anything at all
   unsatisfactory about the arrangement that had been come to? -
   A. No, sir. We knew or we assumed from a financial point of
   view that the club did not really wish to get involved, and I
   saw that as an inroad into getting ambulance services involved
   with the club.
                         113

                                                A.   PAGE


Q. Mr. Page, that is quite a serious allegation to make in
   public. - A. I understand that, sir.

Q. What did you know of the club's attitude to the financing of
   ambulance service other than what you had been told about what
   the physiotherapist had said to your visiting   Officer? -    A.I
   thought we had just cleared that I was informed by Mr.
   Wilkinson that as far as the club were concerned, which had
   been repeated to him by your physiotherapist, that if money
   was involved the club didn't wish to know.  I   have not said
   who said that.  I am merely reporting back to   you what I    have
   been told.

Q. You have said who said it. You said it was the
   physiotherapist, with respect, and you regarded that as a
   matter of very serious concern which merited you taking the
   matter up further, did it not? - A. In what way further?

Q. You are extremely critical of that attitude in the tone you
   take in your statement for a start.  Understandably. - A. I
   am, sir, yes.

Q. Because you thought that represented the view of, in your own
   words, the club officials? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. You now know the only conversation which your Officer had had
   about the question of people being on the ground at all was
   with the physiotherapist? - A. No, I was informed, and I think
   it has been said this morning as well, that they initially met
   Mr. Chester and they went for a walk around the ground with
   Mr. Ward, and later had another meeting with Mr. Smith.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   No doubt, Mr. Glasgow, you will be
   able later to indicate to us why the club could allocate two
   of its fairly large allocation of Semi-Final tickets to the
   Ambulance Service?

        MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, of course we will, and you in turn
   will appreciate why there is concerned at the suggestion that
   the groundsman and the physiotherapist, talking about a matter
   of club finance, does take us by surprise. May I say straight
   away there will be of course acceptance that the question of
   allocation of tickets is regrettable, and it is our
   responsibility.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That was peanuts compared with the
   cost of a couple of ambulances.


        MR. GLASGOW:   Of course, sir.  That is accepted, but you
   will appreciate why I am concerned to get to the question of
   the club officials' attitude towards financing of the
   ambulance service:

Q. Mr. Page, when this letter was written did you still believe
   that the club officials had taken the view that if money was
   involved they didn’t want ambulances? - A. I believed that
c
                             114

                                                    A.   PAGE


       until very recently, sir.

    Q. And it is only today that you know that the physiotherapist is
       supposed to be the only person who expressed that view? - A.
       Yes, s i r .

    Q. I won't take you further.   Thank you.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

    Q. You appear to have given a lot of thought before this incident
       happened to the chances of a disaster occurring? - A. Yes,
       sir.

    Q. May I ask you just one matter.  In view of the problem of
       communications that occurred it would seem, for example, in
       communication terms a message would have to be passed by a
       Policeman to the control, from control then to Snig Hill, from
       Snig Hill then to the ambulance room, to the ambulance people
       and then to somebody on the ground. Do you follow - a long
       chain before a message would get to an individual
       Ambulanceman? - A. I lost you, sir.

    Q. Exactly.  That is what happened to the messages or could have
       happened in a chain of control? - A. If I understand you
       correctly, sir, that is not necessarily correct. Any Police
       Officer could have contacted the ambulance, which they did.
       The Sergeant did contact M r . Higgins. M r . Higgins responded
       by speaking to our control.

    Q. It is about the future I am asking. Perhaps it is a little
       premature. - A. I am sorry. You did not make that point, sir.

    Q. Have you given some thought as to how that potential problem,
       the message ultimately getting from the source to the person
       who had to do something, might be dealt with? For example, an
       emergency channel upon which all the services could
       communicate, or is that far too complicated? - A. The
       Ambulance Service have been talking about that for three years
       to my knowledge. As recently as several months ago the Deputy
       Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) was made aware by one
       of my Station Officers of the same sort of request.

    Q. What is the notion you have? What is that which is considered
       might be helpful? - A. Let me give an example of last Sunday.
       There was a marathon through Sheffield.  I supply an Officer
       with radio communications to the Police incident room at Snig
       Hill, and we jointly co-operate in ensuring that ambulances,
       Police vehicles and public transport can circulate through the
       city without problems.

    Q. For example, at Hillsborough at you suggesting that some
       thought might be given to having an Ambulanceman in the
       control room? - A. Not an Ambulanceman.  You need those men.
       They are important.  You need them on the ground.  You can put
       an Officer in the control room.
    I


7
                                 115

                                                         A. PAGE


        Q. So there is an extra point for contact and an immediacy of
           contact? - A. My understanding is when that was looked at by
           my Officers with the South Yorkshire Police it was far too
           small to accommodate one other person in the hut.

        Q. There is size there, but if one is trying to plan for the
           future that is what you would like to see done, is it? - A. I
           think you have to gauge it with the situation.  It is a very
           expensive commodity to set up boxes everything for incidents,
           but certainly from a mobile sense we are capable of moving
           mobile radio communications equipment into any use.

        Q. What you say is some thought ought to be given for the future
           to easing the communications path by, for example, having not
           an Ambulanceman - I did not intend that - an Officer with the
           equipment. - A. I am sorry, sir.  I was being flippant.   I
           think it is a very serious situation, but can I say and it is
           important to say, that we have always enjoyed a very good
           working relationship with the South Yorkshire Police.
           Unfortunately, on 15th April we had this terrible disaster,
           and certainly there are things everybody can learn from this.

        Q. In fact, in your relationship in the past you found them
           efficient and co-operative? - A. Yes, sir.  I have dealt
           obviously mainly with senior Officers, and I have no reason
           for concern.

                        Cross-Examined bv MR. KALLIPETIS:

        Q. Mr. Page, you were asked about your letter sent by Mr. Hopkins
           at page 340. Just to clear this point, can we look at the
           earlier letter, page 305 of the core bundle. - A. Yes.




                                 /Q. That was a letter
                                                A.   PAGE


That was the letter        that you sent per so na ll y?     A.    Yes.

Can you remember to whom that was addressed?    A.   That
was ad dressed to all the football clubs in South Yorkshire,
sir.

And the next page is the reply that you received              from Mr.
McGee, who was the Chairman.   A.   Yes, sir.

And in the last pa ragraph of that letter he told you that
a copy of your letter and the reply had been sent to Mr.
Chester.   A.   Yes, sir.

Club Secretary.       A.      Yes,   sir.

And he asks one of your Officers to contact Mr.              Chester so
that the matter can be di scussed further.  A.                Yes, sir.

As far as you were concerned and are aware, Mr. Page, is
that what happened, namely Mr. Wilki nso n contacted Mr.
Chester?   A.   Yes, sir.

Met Mr. Chester,     together with      Mr.   Higgins   and Mr.   Keyworth?
A.   Yes, sir.

And whose de cision was it to give them to Mr. Ward and to
the p h y s i o - t h e r a p i s t to see round the ground? Was it your
choice?         A.        No, sir.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:            What you are saying is Mr.
Chester would be well aware there               was a meeting taking
place betwee n someone from your Service              and their
ph y s i o- th e r a p i s t and grounds ma n?  A.    What I am saying
is my u n d e rs t a nd in g until just recently, and I have still
not been proven to be wrong, is that my officer met with
Mr. Chester and then continued in a separate meeting around
the ground with Mr. Ward and then a further meeting with
Mr. Smith.             Ihat is my understanding, sir.

     MR. KALLIPETIS:   As far as deciding which members
of the Club were to discuss which matters with your Officers,
would that be a matter for your Service to dictate or for
the Club to decide?   A.   That is totally the Club, sir.

A qu estion- about radios, please, Mr. Page.              We have heard
that the Police used talk- th ro ug h on this af ternoon and
I think you   have very strong views about t a l k - t h r o u g h ,
do you not?    A.   Yes, sir, I insist ---              It is not just
my opinion, sir, nationally the Ambulance Service is
against the use of t a l k - t h r o u g h . It co mp licates the
issue ---

Just take this slowly because it may be important.      A.  I
am sorry.   It com pl ica tes the issue from the point of view
that many peop'l&tcen hear a message, so metimes meani ng that
people jump on to the bandw ago n when they should not be
and may be give a pos ition or a messa ge becomes unclear.
I insist on direct co mm u n ic at io n one to one.
                                                  A.   PAGE


Another matter, please, Mr. Page.    You have heard my
telling Lord Justice Taylor that,   in fact, two incidents -
one outside the Leppings Lane end   of the ground, that is
by the turnstiles, and one inside   on the pitch.    Is it
right that Contr ol instructed one  of the senior Ambulance
Officers, Mr. Litster to assume the position of Duty
Officer outside the Leppings Lane end turnstiles?
A.   Yes, sir, he is one of the first vehicles to arrive
on the scene.

      MR. KALLIPETIS:     Sir, that is Paragraph 19 of Mr.
Litst er 's st atement which is one of the statements
tendered.

     LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:     Thank you.

     MR. KALLIPETIS:    Also, would you please show the
Inquiry a Brooks Airway, which I think you now have
available.    While that is being done, I think you have
also had in quiries made for the costings of various bits
of equipment;   is that right?   A.   That is correct,
sir, over lunch.

I think we all have this.          A Brook Airway costs £13.15.
Just demonstrate, please,        there for us a face shield which
costs £1.30.        A.   A face shield, sir, is issued to every
ambulance pe rsonnel in South Yorkshire, pr imarily for
their own safety when doing mo u t h - t o - m o u t h resuscitation.
It is b a s ic all y a piece of polythene with a small plastic
insert in order to gain a po sition within the mouth to
do mo uth -to-mouth.      More commonly used now because of
the various pr oblems with      hepat iti s and AIDS.

Can that be used in c on nec ti on with an airway? A.          Yes,
sir, it can.   An airway can be inserted in this.

That is the airway we saw this morning with Mr.           Higgins?
A.   Yes, sir.

What about the Brook Airway, can you just dem ons tra te that,
please.     A.    That is a Brook Airway.   This curved part
goes in the pati en t' s mouth.   That forms a shield between
the pati en t' s mouth and the tube.   You blow down that end
of the tube and in order to avoide fumes, in fe cti on or vomit
re turning into your mouth, as has been suggested, from mouth-
to-mouth, there is a safety valve centred half way up.
That allows excess fluids from the body to exit and keeps
the user totally safe.

And that costs £13.15.      A.    That costs £13.15.

As far as the Brook Airway, the other airways we have seen
and the face shield are concerned, do they require any
s pecial training other than element ary First Aid? A.  No,
sir.

tyhat about the bag and mask that we saw also earlier?
Does that require special tra in in g? A.   It doesn't require
                                                        A.   PAGE


anything out of the ordinary;         just commonsense,       sir.

Just deal with one point thet Mr. Wells of the St. John's
Am bulance Brigade was asserting, that the bag and mask was
di fficult to use because you had to use two hands to
inflate and deflate the bag.    What do you say about that,
Mr. Page?    A.   I think  Mr. Wells was making mention to
the fact that he pre ferred to do mou th- to -m ou th in a manual
sense than use the bag.    My recol lec tio n of mou th- to-mouth,
sir, is that you still need to use two hands, you become
ex hausted and your hands get cramped.

You need two hands, one to hold the nostril closed?
A.    That's right, sir, one to hold the jaw open and
retain the position of the tongue.

So for the purposes of mo ut h-t o-m out h coupled with cardiac
massage, you need two people in any event?        A.   Yes, sir.
Well, no, sir.   You can actually change the system slightly
for one operator to use it.      It is obviously better if
you have two operators because of the amount of physical
exertion taking place.

So a bag and mask     can be used by one person without
diff icu lt y? A.      Yes, sir.

Lastly this:  I think you also have there the break-in kit
that is standard on emergency ambulances.  A.  Yes, sir.

All we are interes te d in, I think, are the b o l t - c u t t e r s ,
please, Mr. Page.          A.         I feel like Father Christmas!
That is the b o l t - c u t t e r s .

You hae seen the     fences   at Leppings Lane end,      have   you not?
A.   Yes , s i r .

Are they sufficient ly powerful to cut through that?
A.    I would have thought at a push you might get through
eventu all y but they are primarily purc ha se d for the
Ambu lan ce Service from the point of view of freeing drivers
from trapped cars, if some bodywork comes in on them.

I hesitate to ask but what do you use that for on a motor
car?     A.   If the door comes in, sir, it is quite often
defl ect ed - the metal material - and you just move or cut
through the shell area.     It is quite often used for padlocks
and fences, etc., garden fences.

And that is standard eq uipment on what sort of am bulance?
A.   On front-line em ergency ambulances.

What was the ambulance that was in the ground on that day?
A.   The one on st and-by would be a front-line equipped
ambulance.
                                                A. PAGE
                   Re- ex amined by MR.   COLLINS:

      MR. COLLINS:        Sir, it has been men tioned thet Mr.
Wi lkinson is not going to be called.          In fact, we have
had d i f fi cul ti es in co ntacting him, as I un derstand it; he
has moved out of the area, but I have a statement from him
w hich I have shown, or a copy of which I have shown, to
Mr. Glasgow.         I do not know whether you have ever seen a
copy of this, Mr. Page?          A.   No, sir.

       MR. COLLINS:      Sir, it will of course be circulated
but it seems, in fairness to everyone, that what Mr.
Wil ki nso n says ought to be brought out and can be brought
out c on ve nie nt ly at this stage.   The relevant part, he
having said that you de legated him to act on behalf of the
Amb ul anc e Service in co ntacting the football grounds - it
was not only Sh effield Wednesday, was it?       A.   No, sir,
it was all five.

Can   I take   you to Par agraph   10 of his statement     ---

       LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:      I do not have a copy.

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir,        you do not yet,   but of course
it will be circulated.

What he says is that he made a telephone appointm ent through
Mr. Ch ester's Secretary and desired Police and Fire Service
atten da nce as well and eventually the meeting was arranged
on 16th July.            He de scribes in his Paragraph 12 circums tan ces
thus:       He says, "The meeting of 16th July was attended by
myself, Station Office rs Higgins and Keyworth, a Police
Inspector and Police Sergeant and two people from the Fire
Brigade.       When we arrived we were introduced to Mr. Chester,
the Club Secretary who then left us with Mr. Ward, the
Groundsman, who showed us round.                 It was during the tour
of the ground that we di scussed with the Police and Fire
Service where the casualty clearing p o st /m ort ua ry would
be in the event of a major incident.                   This was agreed to be
the gymnasium.             Foll ow in g the tour, we were taken to see
the p hy si o -t h e r a p i s t Mr. Smith in his room.      At that point
I believe the Police and Fire Service re pr e s e n t a t i v e s left.
Mr. Higgins, Mr. Keyworth and I spoke to Mr. Smith about
Am b ul an ce Service cover.            I told Mr. Smith that we could
provide Ambu la nc e Service re sources for the ground but
this would involve a charge.                He told me that the Club would
not wish to pay such a charge and that they were happy with
their current ar ra ng em en ts with the St. John's which attended
their matches and gave First Aid training to the Club's
per son ne l at the begi nn ing of each season.            He said that
wh en ev er the Club had needed the Am bulance Service they had
relied upon making a 999 call."               Sir, he then goes on to
descri be the ar ra ng e me nt s that might be satisfactory.            He
said, "I told Mr. Smith that if we could not actually provide
an am bulance to the ground, we would like to have two Officers
inside, in the in terests of crowd safety" and then there
were di sc us sio ns about where they should be and this led to
the letter about c o mp li men tar y seats and the co mp li me nt ar y
seats were provided.               I am not reading it out because it
will be pro vided but the gist of it is, as would appear, and
                                                                      A.   PAGE


I ap pre cia te that you perhaps were not aware of this,
that he did not speak to Mr. Chester about anything that
mattered;            he left that to the conve rs at io n with the
p h y s i o - t h e r a p i s t , Mr. Smith, and that would appear to be
the position, would it not, Mr. Page?                   A.   Yes, sir.

You were telling us about the Brook Airway.   I think
Dr. Purcell told us this morning that it clogged up with vomit
within a few seconds of his starting to use it.  A.   That
is possible, sir.

That   can happen,       can it?             A.      Yes,    sir.

That is something that is unfortun ate and unavoidable, is
it?   A.   That can happen with any type of resuscitation.

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, there is one other matter that
I would like to ask Mr. Page about.   It does not strictly
arise out of what has been put.

       LORD JUSTICE        TAYLOR:            Yes.

      MR. COLLINS:   It is just this.    Mr. Page, as I
underst and it, the Am bulance Service is co ncerned and has
been for some time con cerned that it does not have an in-put
into the Working Party and the Safety Certificate;     is that
cor rect?   A.   That is correct, sir.

Have you ever thought to approach the City Council, who
are the ce rt if i ca ti n g authority, to request them to include
some sort of re qu ir eme nt for ambulance pres en ce?    A.  No,
sir.    Our concern was basically that we wanted an in-put
in itially into the ground.         We were working on a basis of
stepping up the ladder from there.          That was hard enough
initially.

I follow that, but it never occurred to you to go to the
City Council and say, "Look, we know you are res pon sib le
for the Safety Certificate, can you include so mething in
the Safety Ce rt if ic at e? "? A. No, sir. We conce ntr ate d
at the Club.

It now occurs to you to do thkt,                      I imagine?           A.     Yes,   sir.

       LORD JUSTICE        TAYLOR:           Thank you very much.               You have
been   veiy helpful.

                          LAWRENCE          Y O X A L L , called

                        Examined           by MR.    PHILLIPS:

You are Lawrenc e        Yoxall,           are you?         A.      Yes,   sir.

A quali fie d   a m b u l a n c e m an ?     A.       That is correct.

You were off duty/on 15th April but you decided                             to go to the
                                   121


                                                          L.   YOXALL


     match.      A.      Yes,   sir.

Q.   You didn't have a ticket.   What did you do about that?
     A.   I didn't have a ticket S a t u r d ^ m o r n i n g . About l u n c h ­
     time I ob tained one in Barnsley.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:               You hadn't a ticket and on
     Saturday morning - what?               A.   I obtained one about
     lunch-t im e in Barnsley.

Q.        MR.    PHILLIPS:        Did you       find it easy to get a
     ticket?      A.    Yes,     sir.

Q.   You ob viously      knew where      to go?     A.    That        is correct,      sir.

Q.    Had you been to this place where you got                   itfrom      previously
     and ob tai ne d tickets? A.    No, sir.

Q.    How did you know to get one               from there?      A.     I learnt
     about it on Friday evening.

Q.   I am sorry?   A.   I learnt on Friday evening in Barnsley
     that the Liverpool suppo rt er s were going to be at this
     public house in Barnsley.

Q.   Were there       lots of people      buying     tickets     there?       A.     No,
     sir.

Q.   Just you,     as far as you know?               A.   Probably        a couple of
     the local    lads who were normally             in the house.

Q.   I think you went with anothff man,              did you not,       to the ground?
     A.  Yes.

Q. And you got there at about 20 to 3,                   is that right?
   A.  That is correct.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:   You bought         the tickets at face
     value, did you?         A.   Yes, sir.

Q.       MR. PHILLIPS:            You were outside the turns ti les             A-G,
     is that right?    A.           That is correct.

Q.   Where was your ticket for - for the terrace?                       A.     For the
     Lepping Lane end in B section, B turnstile.

Q.   Were you .able to find where            you had to go alright?
     A.   Yes, sir.

Q. Did you have any difficu lty seeing the en trances that you
   were requir ed to go through?          A.   Once I got through the
   w r o ug ht - i ro n gates I could see the turnstiles but there was
   just one mass of people in front of them.

Q.    You managed to get through            that mass of people, though?
     A.   No, sir, I went round.

Q.   You went    round    to where?        A.      Towards the river.              There
                                                         L.   YOXALL


was no crowd at all there.                  I could see that there was
n o b o d y c o n g r e g a ti ng at all but I didn't realise why.   It
is because, if you look at the map ---

There    is a barrier there.   A.   there is a small barrier
which    you couldn't see from where I was at first off.

You    went   round   the side?         A. Yes.

Trying to get ahead of the rest of the queue.   A.                      I
could see that the end turnstile was more available.

Was it?   Were there not people waiting to go in there?
A.   Well, the st anchion goes right up to that end turnstile
sir.

How did you get into the ground?      A.   As I approached
that end turn st il e the gate - Gate C - opened up in front
of me and I just carried on walking straight in.

Did    it open   very wide?       A.     I should say    fully.

Did many people        go in with you?      A.    Quite anumber.
Quite a number.

I think       the friend you were with was left behind,           is    that
right?         A.   That is correct.

When you got into the ground, did you go to the south-west
corner?   Look, please, will you at the board.   A.  Not
immediately, no.

You waited,    Ithink, in the co ncourse for your friend to
arrive.     A.   (That is correct.  I went to the toilet first.

Yes,    but he did not arrive,         did he?    A.      No.

Eventually did you go to the south -w est              corner?     A.       That
is correct.

Near to the      Police Box.   Would  you look. Is that where
you went?        A.   I didn't go that far, sir.      Just to the
corner.

The corner near to the stand, you mean?     A.   Further back.
I was up on the stand.    There is a stand at the side of that
Undern ea th the scoreboard.  Just level with the stand.

Could you see across to terraces 3 and 4 from where you
were?    A.   Not to the rear.        I could just see the front
fencing.    I was just p o si ti on ed - I could see the corner
flag on the far side.

You did not go down the tunnel,  why was that? A.    I
didn't consider it at the time but I have been to that
ground before.
                                                 L.   YOXALL


You have been to that ground before so you knew your
way about, did you?   A.   In the Lepping Lane end, yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     There was something you had
learned by gging there before which persuaded you not go
go down the tunnel?   A.     As I say, it didn't cross my
mind at the time.   I jtist did it by instinct.    I stood,
when I came out of the toilets which are next to the tunnel,
for a while and then I went back down to the gate where
they were selling program me s and then I went to the right-
hand side.

         MR. PHILLIPS:              Is that where you prefer to stand
when you go?               A.      Well, the last time I went to that
L i ve r po ol / S h e f f i e l d Wednesday game, 2 years ago, that
tunnel was policed actually.

     LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:    I am sorry, 2 years ago - what
did you say then?        A.    The police directed me away from
the tunnel.

       MR. PHILLIPS:    But on this occasion          there was nothing
like   that, was there?    A.     No,sir.

What did you see from yar corner           there, as you looked
across to the Pens 3 and 4?   A.            Immediately?

When you got there.    A.    Immediately, I just climbed
up on to where I was going to stand until      my friend came
round, which he never did. As minutes       progre ss ed people
a lways seemed to be climbing    the fence.

Was that before or after ki ck-off you are talking about?
A.   I would say before kick-off.                    -*■




                                         /Before the kick-off.
                               124

                                                    L. YOXALL

Q.   Before   the kick-off?       A.   As I recall.

Q.   People were climbing the fence?           A.    Yes.

Q.   Could you see what was inducing t hem          to do this? A.        Only
      that they wer e too crushed, maybe.

Q.   Could you see any distress, for example,            from where you
     were?   A.  No, sir.

Q.   So the   game started and continued for a while.   Did you
      notice any difference in what was happening in pens 3 and
      4?   A.   It gradually got worse, the scaling of the  fence.

Q.   Were you paying much attention to what was             going on   on
      the pitch?   A. No, not a great deal.

Q.   What were you paying attention to?             A.   The area behind
     the g o a l .

Q.   Why was that?      A.    There were people spilling on to the
      playing area.

Q.   Was this sufficient to take your attention away from the
     pitch?   A. Yes.

Q.    Now, did   you hear any PA announcements?          A. Yes,   sir.

Q.   What did  you hear during this period after the kick-off?
     A.  I heard two messages.   One was requesting the Liverpool
     supporters to stop pushing in the Leppings Lane area, which
     I understood at that time they were announcing outside the
     turnstile, because when I left it, it was quite crowded.

Q.   You thought that was referring to outside the ground.   Did
      the announcement appear to come from behind you, then,
      from the back of the West Stand?   A. It just came over
      the tannoy, sir.  I just heard it over the tannoy.

Q.    Did you have any difficulty hearing it?            A. No, sir.

Q.   What was  the other announcement? A. For people to clear
     the playing area, as people were already spilling on to
      the playing area.

Q.   Was the game still progressing whe n you heard that?              A. Yes,
      sir.

Q.   Again did you have any difficulty hearing that?               A. No, sir.

Q.   We know that a. Superintendent ran on to the pitch and stopped
      the game by talking to the referee.   A. Pardon.

Q.   We know that a Superintendent stopped the game by talking
      to the referee, and that was at s i x - m in u t e s - p a s t- 3 . Were
      you still keeping an eye on what was happening down at the
      terrace?   A.  Yes, I was just observing the amount of
      people that were spilling on to the pitch.            It was getting
                           125

                                              L. YOXALL

     more and more all the time.

Q.   What did you decide to do about it?    A. I didn't do
     anything, sir.

Q.   Sorry?

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Will you keep your voice up,
     please?    A.  I didn't do anything at that time, sir.
     It didn't cross my mind to do anything at the moment.
     The game was stopped.

Q.        Mr. PHILLIPS:   But then you did decide to try and go
     down to the pitch, did you not?   A. Yes, sir.

Q.   But you did not   get quite as far as that, did you?
      A.  About 10 or 15 minutes past, I observed a youngster
      being resuscitated in the bottom corner in front of me.

Q.   The bottom corner of which pen is that?   A. Just in front
     of me, under the scoreboard, on the pitch.

Q.   On the pitch?      A. Well into the pitch, sir; somewhere
      in that vicinity.   I passed a comment to peoplec around
      me.  We were all just standing in silence and observing,
      and I passed a comment that somebody was actually being
      resuscitated.

Q.   And this, you say,   is ten or twelve minutes after the
     game was stopped?     A.  I would say so, sir, as I recall
     it.

Q.   And you had not cottoned on until that time that there
     was an emergency?    A. No.  People w h o were already on
     the pitch just appeared to be distressed, and they were
     just sitting down and gathering their breath at that time.
     I could then see people trying to resuscitate someone and
     I couldn't stand there any longer, so I had to make up
     m y mind to get on to the pitch somehow.

Q.   Which way did you go?  A. It were obvious I couldn't go
     forward, so I climbed back down.

Q.   Why could you not go forward on to the pitch?    A. As far
     as I knew, the fencing would prevent me.

Q.   So you waat back to the concourse behind the turnstiles
     at Leppings Lane?   A. I w ent back round the stands and
     as soon as I turned the corner any thoughts of returning
     to the pitch just went out of my mind, you know, because
     for the next hour or so I was busy in that area behind the
     stfe&d&.

Q.   Now, I think you then saw an ambulance with a crew on it
     who you knew, did you not?   A. Not immediately, sir.

Q.   Well, shortly after going behind the stand?     A. After I had
     attended to several casualties.
                         126
                                               L. YOXALL

Q.   And the ambulance was in fact with Mr. Early and Mr.
     Smith, was it not?   A. Correct.

Q.   You then, if I can take this briefly, did a good deal of
     work trying to help people at the scene? A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Putting them into ambulances?   A. Yes.

Q.   One of the ambulances left, I think, and at that stage you
     spoke to a Police Inspector, did you not?  A. That's
     correct.

Q.   What did you tell him?   A.  As the ambulance left, I
     immediately turned round and there was a police officer
     in front of me, so I just stated the need for casualties
     to be brought down to the gate area and the rest of the
     supporters keeping away, as the ambulances would be coming
     up.

Q.   Did you in fact see other ambulances arriving there?
     A.  Yes.

Q.   When the first ambulance went, was there another one
     ready to take its place?   A.  Not at that stage, no.
     When that ambulance went, I went back into the ground
     momentarily.

Q.   So how did you know that other ambulances would come to
     Leppings Lane?   A.  I spoke to one of the attendants in the
     first ambulance and I wanted to impose on him the seriousness
     at the ground, the seriousness of the situation.  That was
     one of the main points to do at that stage.  I spoke to him
     once and obviously a lot of other people tried to take
     part in the conversation, but we didn't get replies, so
     I pressed the point  about the seriousness of the situation
     at the ground and I asked him how many ambulances he
     thought were coming and in the end he replied "Twenty",
     which at that stage immediately put my mind at rest.

Q.   Yes.  So you were really organising it with the Police so
     that they could have casualties there at Leppings Lane
     for the ambulances when they came?   A. I just stressed
     to the ambulanceman --- I really didn't get into any
     conversation with the policeman apart from stressing the
     need to get casualties down and keep the area clear.

Q.   Can you just tell me one thing about that?   Were you aware
      of a plan in force with the Ambulance Service to use the
      Gymnasium in the event of casualties?   A. No, sir.

Q.   All right.   I think,  in fact, what you did, after again
      putting a lot more effort into helping people who had been
      injured, was you went off with one ambulance to take a
      patient to hospital - is that right?    A. I spoke to
      a leading ambulanceman who had two bad cases which I helped
      load on to his ambulance, and he asked me to leave the
      rear doors open as I was just about to close them, to
      observe another ambulance coming up the alleyway, which
 V



WjiAf
                                    127

                                                               L. YOXALL

             I did immediately, and then as I was closing the doors
             he asked me to get on w ith him to attend to the patients,
             which reluctantly I did at first, but there was a need
             for me to go because they were two bad cases.

        Q.   I understand.  A n d I think that is effectively how you
             continued the afternoon, is it not?    A. Yes.

                  Mr. PHILLIPS:     Thank you very much.

                         Cross-Examined by Mr. W O O D W A R D :

        Q.   Mr. Yoxall, the tannoy that you heard was clearly after
              the game had started, was it?   A. My impression when
             I wrote about the incident a week later was how I recall
             it.

        Q.   The game had been going for a few minutes, had it?
             A. Yes.

        Q.   And the message was for people to stop pushing at the
             Leppings Lane end?   A.  Yes, sir.

        Q.   May I ask you about w hat happened, Mr. Yoxall, when you
              came out from your viewing point and ran to the enclosure
              at the back towards the t u n n e l . Already there weaee
              casualties  laid out in that area?        A. Yes, sir.

        Q.   And alredy there were policemen and other people giving
              attention to those casualties?   A. Yes.

        Q.   So what had been going on there had obviously been going
              on for some minutes by the time you arrived?  A. I would
              assume so.

        Q.   One further matter.  When you spoke of going to the ground
             in 1988 and being diverted ---  A. 1987.

        Q.   1987, was it?     A. I think it were January, 1987, sir;
              a League game.

        Q.   When you made your statement about the reason for going
              to where you did go in 1989, the reason you gave in
              paragraph 10 of your statement was "I didn't go down the
              tunnel in the middle of the stand because I had been there
              on previous occasions and I knew it would be very crowded"?
             A. Yes, sir.

        Q.   That was yours reason, was it, for going to where you         went
              in 1989?   A. I didn't assess it at the time, sir.           It's
              just an instinct.

        Q.   It was just an instinct?       A. Yes, sir.

        Q.   You thought there would be more space where you went?
             A.   I thought my friend would have been able to find me
              better if I had gone to the c o r n e c : of the stand. That's
              why I stood on that corner.
                           128

                                                L. YOXALL

Q.   Because the reason that you give    there has got nothing to
     do with being directed away from    the tunnel in 1987®
     A.   It may have played a part.

Q.   In 1987, was it simply being shown where there were accesses
     to the terrace?  Do you remember   it clearly or not?
     A.   There was a line of policemen across the tunnel.

Q.   A line of policemen across the tunnel?     A. Yes.

Q.   What time was that?   A. £n 1987, sir?

Q.   Yes. A. I've no idea, sir.    I can't remember what      time
      I went to the game.

Q.   Do you remember if there were any gates closed?        A. Gates
     closed?

Q.   Yes, do you recall any gates being closed, barring your
     access?   A. No, sir.

Q.   Are you able to say how many policemen were there then?
     A.   Enough to cross that entry.

Q.   A clear impression of a cordon, not an officer simply
     saying "If you want space, you had better go down the
     end"?   A. That's correct, sir.

Q.   It was more that, was it - "If you want space, there is
     space at the end"?   A. Yes, sir.

g.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Well, I do not think that is
     what you were saying, is it?  It was more than that -
     is that right?    A. There was a number of policemen in
     that area.  They weren't linked in any way;  just a
     number of policemen.

          Mr. WOODWARD:    Thank you.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much.

          Mr. GOLDSACK:    Mr. Walker please.

                   DAVID JOHN WALKER, Called
                   Examined by Mr. GOLDSACK:

Q.   Is your name David John Walker?    A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Are you a sports writer with the Daily Mail?      A. That's
      right.

Q.   Mr. Walker, have you in the past few years been to a       lot
     of the big matches held at Hillsborough?   A.  Yes.  I have
     covered four semi-finals there and over a period of four
     seasons I have covered at least ten to twelve games per
     season at Sheffield Wednesday home matches.
                           12 9


                                              D. J. WALKER

Q.   And have you   attended the semi-finals for the last three
     years?   A.   I missed the previous year's Nottingham Forest
     Liverpool game but the year before that I was at the Leeds
     Coventry match.
Q.   Can I begin by asking   you some questions about the 1987
      semi-final? Was that a match where you as a journalist
      anticipated any difficulties with the crowds?    A. Yes.
      In that season the F.A. had introduced an all-ticket ruling
      on all Leeds away games because there had been a series
      of crowd disturbances involving Leeds supporters.   In the
      end, Leeds were only allowed to sell tickets to their
      season ticket holders, shareholders or officialsmembers
      of their Supporters' Club.   Now, for the F.A. Cup semi-final
      against Coventry, that ruling was lifted, in effect meaning
      that Ledds tickets were on open sale, which put it back
      in the situation to the times when there had been a lot of
      trouble,,so we had a mid-day kick-off on the Sunday in an
      attempt to help the policing of the match.

Q.   So far as the policing of that match is concerned, did you
     observe how they treated the Leeds fans in Leppings Lane?
     A.  Yes.  Until this last season, I had always parked my
     car behind the Leppings Lane end.  That changed this y f a r .
     On the day of the semi-final when they played Coventry in
     1987, I gained entry from that end of the ground.  The
     Leeds fans were given the exact same allocation as the
     Liverpool supporters were this year;   the Leeds fans were
     in greater number, by tradition, than the Coventry fans
     but were given the same part of the ground.




                                  /Q. What was the actual
                         130

                                    D.J. WALKER


Q. What was the actual policing arrangement that you saw in
   Leppings Lane in 198?? - A. I saw what I would call snake
   queues from the Leppings Lane terrace, two or three abreast,
   they were no more than that, and so there was no surge on
   particular turnstile entrances.
Q. How far back from the perimeter gates did those "snake queues"
   as you call them, go? - A. I got to the game fairly      y*
   I would think when I was there the queues were probably
   30 or 40 yards, but beyond that further away from the
   ground there were barriers, Police checkpoint barriers to
   check that you had a ticket before you actually got around
   the perimeter of the ground.
Q. What time was that roughly when you arrived? - A. I would
   think that was about 11 o'clock.  It was a midday kick-off
   or it should have been a midday kick-off because there were
   still supporters outside.  I now understand it was a 15
   minute delay, a 15 minute postponement of kick-off time.

Q. So as a journalist who had anticipated that there might
   be difficulties, what was your own assessment of the policing
   of that 1987 match? - A. I had attended a game that season
   at Odsal, Bradford, where there was a riot of Leeds fans
   and there was an arson attack on a mobile chip van and I
   was very very fearful of trouble especially with the opening
   up of Leeds tickets.
         My overall impression was in the light of that in a
   game which ended with Leeds losing in extra time, I thought
   it could be a very emotive day for Leeds supporters and
   might have provoked an incident.  I thought the South Yorkshire
   Police were absolutely superb,
Q. Did you know the Senior Officer who was responsible? - A. I
   had met Brian Mole when I think he was No. 2 when the
   close circuit television system was put in at Hillsborough.
   They had an open day and I went over to see the new tech­
   nology, how Sheffield Wednesday with the Police liaison
   were attempting to curb the hooligan problem.       I had been
   given a view of the Police Control Room; how they could
   use the cameras; the close-up views they could get. This
   sort of thing.  I had met Brian Mole when we were working
   on the coverage of the L e e d s /Coventry game, yes.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I am sorry, may I just get
    this clear before you go on.
Q. You referred to "barriers”. What do you mean by "barriers"?
   What sort of barriers were they? - A. What I would term
   the things you see sometimes used on the streets by the
   Police when there is a marathon or Royal event. Just the
   removable things that can be spread across the road.

 Q. The things you see on the phonographs? - A. That is it, yes.
                            131
                                      D.J. WALKER


O           MR. GOLDSACKs Now coming to 1989, you refer in your
      statement to having worked on the ticket allocation contro­
      versy? - A. Yes.
Q. What exactly do you mean by that? - A. I am employed as a
   Chief Northern Sportswriter. I have a col1eague^who works
   specifically covering Merseyside and I had a call from him
   telling me that the Liverpool Football Club we5®
   Sheffield Wednesday And the F.A. about the number of tic
   they would receive because of the segregation of the ground.

            I made an enquiry to Graham Mackrell to ascertain
      whether the segregation was as it had been !n Previous
      years and how many tickets per Club would be allocated
      that system.
Q. That information and those 'phone calls, were they before
   or after it was announced that the semi-final was to be
   at Hillsborough? - A. That was at about the day or the
   day after. It was at the time that the semi-final was
   announced for Hillsborough.
O     Are you as a journalist aware of any representation by
      anyone before Hillsborough was decided upon as the venue
      about ticket allocation? - A. No.
Q. On the 15th of April itself you were going to be sitting,
   were you, somewhere in the South Stand? - A. Yes, I was
   towards the Leppings Lane end from the Press Box.
   main Press Box is right on the h a l f w a y line next to the
   Pirectors' Box.  I was towards the Leppings Lane end from
   there.
    Q. What time did you take up your seat? - A. 2.30.

    Q. I think you had gone in by the Penistone Road end? - A. That
       is right.  I entered from behind the Kop end. I parked
       my car; came in through the Penistone Road gates.

    Q. And at or shortly after you had taken up y0^r      "hat
       was your assessment of the crowd situation behind the
       Liverpool goal? - A. Well I remember noting that it was
       20-to-3 and the two centre sections behind the Liverpool
       goal were then looking very full but there were easily six
       steps empty at the front of both wing sections which suggested
       to me, knowing it was a 54,000 sell-out game, that there
       must have been a lot of supporters still outside.

    Q. How full did it appear to you that the centre pens eventually
       came? - A. Well eventually they were p a c k e d to overful1
       but at that stage they looked full. With 20 minutes
       kick-off I considered as a regular to that ground and having
       seen it full before, I thought the centre sections looked
       as it they were capacity.
                       132
                                     D.J. WALKER


Were you expecting anything to happen so far as the kick-off
was concerned? - A. I turned to the friend who had gone with
me and I predicted the game would not kick-off on time.
They had got to put it back because it was so obvious there
were a number of fans outside and it was just a matter of
time before the announcement was made.

As we know kick-off was not delayed. At what stage did you
personally become aware that the pens behind the goal
were overcrowded as opposed to full to capacity? - A. At
around 3 o'clock I think the teams were out kicking in,
certainly by kick-off time there were people climbing up
in the centre sections both up the perimeter fence to the
pitch and also sideways into the wing sections of the Leppings
Lane terrace.
We have heard from many other witnesses so I need not take
you through the details of what happened in the few minutes
after that. I think the position is, Mr. Walker, that when
you realised something fairly major was happening you made
your way down through the player's tunnel out on to the
pitch.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

What were you hoping to achieve there? - A. I was there
really as the number 2 man for the Daily Mail. Our Chief
Football Writer Dave Powell was in the Stand so once an
event like thi^-%>ccurring it is established journalistic
policy that the second man will go and find out what has
happened. There was quite clearly a major problem.    I had
witnessed a young man having chest massage, heart massage
on the pitch. There were cases of mouth-to-mouth resuscitation,
so the obvious act for me to do in a professional capacity
was to find out and go down and see what had happened.

I don't know, do you give any consideration in a situation
like that as to whether your presence may actually add to
the problems that are already that? ^ A. I thought about
this. I must admit it was afterwards when I ended up in
the gymnasium and helped a young teenager who we carried
through on one of the make shift stretchers. At that point
we were asked to clear the gymnasium and I can remember
then thinking I have no first aid knowledge so I left
and realised that I could actually be cluttering up the
place when the medical people were trying to sort things
out.
But when the incident happened your journalistic instinct ..
- A. The instinct for the story was to go and find out what
was happening.

      MR. GOLDSACKs    Yes, thank you.


              C ross-Examined by MR. J A C K S O N :

Just one matter.   At 20-to-3 would you look please at
                         133
                                   D.J. WALKER


  Composite Album 2, Photograph DB16/29* 14.46.   I have used
  that because it is the first I see.

         Mr. Walker, would you believe that some people have
   actually said it looks as though you can get more people
   in there satisfactorily? - A. I would believe somebody might
   have said that but I would not agree with that.

Q. This is the view that you are talking about. You could
   parafahute in I suppose behind the flag, but is it really
   that view that you saw? - A. This is taken from a different
   angle.

Q. I appreciate that. That is why I asked you in particular?
   - A. That is a sort of packed congestion that I witnessed
   from the Stand.

Q. And do I take it that it was about that time that you came
   to the view that (a) the centre pens were full; (b) you
   could clearly see the outside pens weren't full and (c)
   you expected an announcement to be made? - A. Yes.

Q. May I just briefly take you back to 1987. Do you recall
   the timing of the announcement that the game would be delayed?
   - A. No.

Q. Can I help you by reminding you of the contents of your
   statement which rather indicate that it was about 15 minutes,
   the penultimate page sir, page 5, your statement about that
   reads:

         "An announcement was made 15 minutes before the
         schedule kick-off time and relayed to the people
         outside."

   A. That is correct.

Q. That accords with your memory? - A. Yes and specifically
   the major thing that was in my mind about that was that
   the people outside knew that there had been a delayed
   kick-off so that they were not trying to gain entry by
   midday, as it was two years ago, or 3 o'clock as it was
   this year.

Q. You acknowledged my Lord's photograph by saying those were
   the type of cordon, barriers that you saw? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you position any one of those barriers? We are trying
   to identify where it was away from the turnstiles that
   people were being monitored? - A. If you continue the
   Leppings Lane Road which goes alongside here, it is off
   the map now, it was on the corner around there away from
   the ground. You could not actually approach anything
   near the ground without a ticket.
/
\
b                                    134
                                                  D.J. WALKER


    q   . we have heard of some people saying t h e y w e r e a s k e d by
          individual Officers.  Is your recollection that it was^not
          just an isolated request by an Officer but a Planned P°lice
          annroach? - A. I considered it to be a blue print of the
          Police at that time of the way the stadium was to be policed.

    n       Pinallv Mr. Walker, perhaps on a more distressing note,
            nfdiibi           totheconfusion, but was it a p p a r e n t t c y o u
            that at the same time as people were Ibeing                   *rom
            the Dens because of the pressure, others were b e i n g returned
            tS the pen. because those returning then did not understand
            the true nature of the situation? - A. In that period
            a r o u n d 2-minutes-to-3 to around kick-off time therewere
            definite cases of people trying to climb over the fence
            who were being put back in, but once the nature was under­
            stood they were allowed out.
                  MR. JACKSON: Mr. Walker, I hope I prefaced my < J ^ t i o n
            by emphasising there is no suggestion anyone was     back
            in after anyone realised the true nature of the situation.
            Thank you.

                            Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD?

        o Mr Walker in 1987 the delay of the kick-off. Were you
        Q * aware whether that was for t L b e n e f i t o f t h e C o v e n t r y
            supporters or the other supporters? - A. I understand
            was for the benefit of the Coventry supporters who had been
            delayed in transit. I think it was a problem on the motor­
            way.
        Q. Of course they were at the Kop end? - A. That is            right.

        Q. Not the Leppings Lane end? - A. No.
        Q. May I ask you about your approach to the ground in ^ 8 7 .
           You walked along the Leppings Lane did you? - A. That is
           right.  I parked on a dairy car park which is about 300
           yards along Leppings Lane.
        Q. As you walked along Leppings Lane you must have passed
           numbers of Policemen? — A. Yes.
        Q. And there were Policemen at the ends of each of the little
           roads? - A. That is right.
        Q    And of course there were not only Policemen at the ends
             of those roads there were barriers across. Did you see
             them? - A. Yes.
        Q. You say there came a point when there were barriers affecting
           your progress? - A. That is right.
         Q. were those barriers across the line of your « a v e l ? - A.
            As I walked along the pavement towards Leppings Lane
                                   D.J. WALKER


I was stopped by a P o l i c e Officer. There was a barrier
there and he asked me for my ticket to gain entry.

The barrier was on the pavement, was it? - A. That is
right, yes.
Was there any barrier across the road? - A. The road was
blocked anyway. There were barriers ftir-tlier a
Leppings Lane end after I gained entry at the car park.
There was no traffic travelling along there anyway.

Yes, but the barrier which you negotiated and as it were
filtered out? - A. Yes, there were filter barriers that
I went through with a Police Officer there.

Are you able to say whether there was just one filter line
you had to pass or more? - A. I cannot recall that. I
went through one filter.
That was something that was stood on the pavement, was it?
- A. That is right.
A barrier stood at right angles to your line of progress?
- A. As I recall, yes.




                         /Q. That must have narrowed
y ’i   ■   ‘




                                         136
                                                                D.J. WALKER


               Q. That must have narrowed the pavement very much, did not it? -
                  A. It was a filter for fans to walk   through, yes.

               Q. If there was a barrier across the pavement with a gap
                  between the end of the barrier and the building - is that
                  what you mean? - A. There were gardens and walls at the
                  end of the garden, yes.

               Q. The barrier of some property, a wall or whatever? - A. That is
                  right.

               Q. So the barrier was across the line of your progress across the
                  pavement and to the kerb edge? - A . Yes, and there was also as
                  you approached,the ground a line of   barriers on the corner
                  stretching across the Leppings Lane end. Again, it is just
                  off that map. You are looking to the side of the river and
                  again this way.

               Q. When you say "this way", which is it? - A. The North side,
                  down towards the North Stand, the way the Leppings Lane goes.
                  The way I walked in.

               Q. Could you get the pointer to go where you say you went? - A.
                  You see where it says, "Leppings Lane", if you go northwards,
                  which is down that way, not as far as that, but that is where
                  the Police barriers were.

               Q. It is the filter I am asking you about. This was close to the
                  entrance to the ground, was it? - A. It would about 50 yards
                  or 100 yards at the most away.

               Q. And a number of Policemen there or just one? - A. There were a
                  number of Policemen there.

               Q. There c a n ’t have been a lot of room for you to get along the
                  pavement then? - A. I recall you had your tickets checked.
                  There were Police filter points, and you had to go through
                  that to gain access to Hillsborough.

               Q. It is not suggested you may not have been asked whether or not
                  you had got a ticket.  It might have happened from a number of
                  Officers along the road. - A. I showed my ticket.   It was not
                  a case of being asked, "Do you have a ticket?".   I had to show
                  the ticket.

               Q. Did you see anybody being turned away? - A. Not in the group I
                  was with, no.

               Q. You have had a lot of dealings with Mr. Mole, have you? - A.
                  No.

               Q. You met him on a number of occasions? - A. No.

               Q. Just the once? - A. No, I have met him on two occasions and
                  spoken to him on two others about the way that specific
                  matches were going to be policed.
                             137
                                                   D.J. WALKER


    Q. In relation to which matches did you discuss things with Mr.
       Mole? - A. The Leeds-Coventry Semi-Final was the specific, and
       the other thing was that the season before that Sheffield
       Wednesday introduced a policy of banning any supporters who
       were arrested for crowd related disturbances, and I ran a
       story with Mr. Mole and Mr. Howard Wilkinson, who was then the
       manager, about the close Police liaison with the club over
       getting better behaviour from supporters.

    Q. Did I understand you to say you have had discussions with Mr.
       Mole over the arrangements for a number of games? - A. The
       specific one was that Semi-Final.

    Q. When you say a number of games.... - A . I have spoken to him
       about policing of Hillsborough, specifically on how they would
       do it over that one game. The other was the general co­
#      operation between the club, attitude to offenders and how
       Sheffield Wednesday have made a stand to alleviate the
       problem.

    Q. Apart from general attitudes, are you saying you have had
       discussions with Mr. Mole over his arrangements in relation to
       one game only, not a number? - A. Semi-Finals, yes.

    Q. One game only? - A. Yes.

    Q. And that was which one? - A. Leeds-Coventry Semi-Final.

    Q. Did you find Mr. Mole to be efficient and have all the
       material information at his fingertips? - A. There were people
       I spoke to in the course of my duties, the director at Leeds,
       Maxwell Holmes, who was in charge of crowd related affairs
       there, there were people at Sheffield Wednesday who described
       Brian Mole in their view to be the best Police Officer in
       regard to crowd control they had worked with. That was their
       opinion passed on to me.

                         Bv LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

    Q. Can you just help about this barrier about 50 to 100 yards
       away. Have a look at this photograph, one marked West
       Midlands 1. The first photograph.   You see where we are, the
       beginning of the gates there on the right. That is looking at
       Leppings Lane? - A. That is right.

    Q. Whereabouts do you say this barrier was? - A. I think the
       barrier - you see the lorry on the left.

    Q. The yellow one on the pavement? - A. No, there is a lorry
       slightly further away, just beyond the first street that is
       showing there.  I think the barrier was around there.

    Q. What do you say, that it was across the whole width of the
       street? - A. To gain access there were gaps within the barrier
       to the sides and through the middle, and to gain access
       through there you had to show your ticket.
I)*




                                 13 8

                                                         D.J. WALKER


      Q.   Is this the picture you are giving, that the whole of that
           street was in effect closed to traffic? - A. Yes, there was    no
           traffic heading along it anyway.

      Q. There were barriers across there with gaps between them? - A.
         Yes.

      Q.   And Police Officers requiring not just an      answer but
           production of a ticket? - A. Specifically asking for a ticket.

      Q. Before you could cone through? - A. That is right.

      Q. I would like you to appreciate that this matter has been
         raised a number of times here.  There is a strong issue about
         whether that has happened or it has not. Are you in any
         doubt about that? - A. I am in no doubt.  I was asked
         specifically about the Semi-Final.  I have been to
         Hillsborough away from Semi-Finals with 48,000 people
         and to Sheffield Wednesday Cup Ties and a Liverpool game
         there.  I can remember similar things, similar policing
         on other occasions.

      Q. On other big games? - A. On other big games, and that is why,
         I have a young son who wanted to go to a safe football
         ground, and I understood the South Yorkshire policing of
         Hillsborough in the past was superb.

      Q. Thank you very much.

                MR. COLLINS:      Sir, you will see there are three
           Ambulancemen and one Ambulancewoman left on the list.     I have
           had a word with Mr. Kallipetis.     So far as he is concerned he
           would be content that the statements were simply put in and
           taken as read.     I am quite content, having regard to the time,
           that should be done. Of course, they have all been waiting
           all day, and we have all read their statements, and all have
           seen the sterling work that each of them has done, and I hope
           they w o n ’t feel they have wasted their time by being here all
           day notwithstanding that they have not given evidence. Sir,
           unless anyone does wish them or any of them to be called it
           would seem having regard to the hour sensible that their
           statements, all of which have been circulated, be effectively
           taken as read.

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is there any counsel who, having
           read the statements, wishes to cross-examine any one of those
           witnesses on any matter?

                MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, it is to be understood that the
           statements will go in to be read by the Inquiry. Sir, there
           are differences of detail which are probably unimportant, and
           at the end of the day if what one is trying to get is an
           overall impression then the utility of the pursuit of the
           detail is probably lost.

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   If I may say so that is a
           realistic view, Mr. Woodward.  If there is any major matter I
                                            D.J. WALKER


would not want to shut anyone out from having a chance to
challenge it, but if it is smaller matters or questions of
emphasis or things we have already heard are in issue and
heard evidence both ways about then I think the course
suggested would be one I accept.

     MR. WOODWARD:   You will notice, sir, on the list there
are a number of other statements in respect of which it was
said they were to be tendered. We have not seen them, sir,
save for Mr. Garrett, which was one of the originals. What is
it intended to do with those?

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, I did not think, knowing my learned
friend as I do, that he would welcome being served with those
this morning, so I stopped that happening, and again I have
had a word with my learned friend, Mr. Kallipetis. He agrees
with me that in the light of the questions that have been put
to his other witnesses it is not, as I understand it,
necessary for any of those statements to be circulated or put
in, and therefore I don't propose they should. They simply
repeat the matters that have already been put in evidenced and
have been deaLt with by the other witnesses.  So I will spare
my learned friend, Mr. Woodward, the service of those
statements.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I have not had them and I shall
not have them. The last four in the list for today I have got
and read and I will take those into account.

     We will break now until 10 tomorrow morning.

         (The Inquiry was adjourned until 10 a.m.
                  the following morning)
