                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY


                            FINAL OBSERVATIONS




I. INTRODUCTION
1.     A large number of witnesses and a great deal of evidence has
been heard in the course of the 31 days during which the inquiry has
been sitting.     We do not propose in these observations to go into
detail or seek to resolve issues of minor importance.     We will give
our views on the major issues and seek to indicate what in our opinion
are the important findings of fact which the Tribunal ought to make.
We do not conceive it to be our task to invite the Tribunal to
apportion blame, but we recognise that is inevitable that criticisms
will be made in the course of deciding what happened and why.       We
shall not shrink from making such criticisms as we consider
appropriate.


2.     In deciding what happened, we have been greatly assisted by
the video and photographic records, all of which have been freely made
available by their owners.     We should like also to place on record our
gratitude to the interested parties for their co-operation in
producing relevant documents and witnesses and to the West Midlands
Police for their immense effort in interviewing witnesses and
collecting the necessary evidence and in producing for us, often at
very short notice, exceedingly helpful reports and summaries of their
enquiries.     Without that assistance and co-operation our task would
have been impossible.     As it is, we are conscious that we have
completed this stage of the Inquiry within 3 months of the occurrence
of the disaster and that many witnesses who were at the ground and who
                                    2



could have given relevant evidence have not been called.     We have
taken the greatest possible care to try to call a representative cross
section of witnesses and to ensure that no serious issue has been left
uninvestigated or uncovered by evidence.     We are satisfied that we
have succeeded in this objective and that sufficient evidence has been
called before the Tribunal to enable it to reach proper and accurate
findings.     All parties represented have had the opportunity to
nominate witnesses whom they considered were able to give useful
evidence and we have, so far as possible, tried to accommodate them.
We confidently believe that there are and can be no complaints that
any relevant witness, who could add to the account given by others,
has been overlooked or that any evidence has been omitted which
affects any material finding of fact.


3.      In opening this inquiry on 18th May, there were set out what
the indications were at that stage of the sequence of events.       After
31 days of evidence, it is not necessary to change anything of
importance.    The picture, broadly speaking, remains the same.     By
about 2.30 pm, there was a serious crush outside the turnstiles at
Leppings Lane.    As the minutes went by, the situation deteriorated and
by 2.47 had reached such a state that the experienced police officer
in charge, Superintendent Marshall, decided that the only way to avoid
injuries or death was to open the exit gates to relieve pressure.        He
radioed a message to the controller, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,
who authorised the opening of the gates.    At 2.52 pm Gate C was opened
and about 2000 went through it.    By this time, the two central pens on
the terraces, 3 and 4, were full, although there was space on the
wings.    When the gate was opened, no measures were taken to prevent
those entering going down the tunnel ahead of them into the already
crowded central pens.     Most did so, causing severe congestion in the
pens.    As a result, 95 in the pens were crushed to such an extent that
they died and many more were injured.     Unfortunately, the police
officers in the control room and on the perimeter of the pitch failed
to appreciate that the pens were overcrowded and that fans were in
distress.    The perimeter gates, inadequate as they were, were not
opened in time and measures to relieve the situation were
insufficiently expeditious or adequate.    This does not mean that
individual police officers did not do all they could.     The fault lay
in a lack of planning and of leadership and, above all, in a failure
to appreciate the need to control the numbers in the central pens.


II. STATE OF THE GROUND
1.        Following representations by the South Yorkshire County
Council in April 1978, on 7th August 1978 Hillsborough was designated
as a stadium requiring a safety certificate under the Safety of sports
Grounds Act 1975 with effect from 1st January 1979.     The club
appointed Dr. Eastwood’s firm, Eastwood and Partners, Consulting
Engineers, to act on its behalf in its dealings with SYCC and/or
Sheffield Metropolitan District Council "in relation to the ground
being designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act" (Doc: 30).
There were meetings and correspondence about various improvements
which were needed to the ground in order to achieve the capacity
desired by the Club.    The Leppings Lane terraces were awarded a
capacity of 10,100, after the existing crush barriers had been tested
and, as necessary, replaced and new ones positioned.     This capacity
                                    4



was based on the figure in the Green Guide, stated to be the maximum,
of 5.4 per m2 reduced by about 10% to take account of the lack of
gangways.   This lack was not considered by Dr. Eastwood to be of
significance because of the ease of movement throughout the terrace:
at that time, there were no radial fences.


2.      In 1981 at a cup semi-final there was some crushing. This       was
caused by a combination of uneven distribution on the terrace, an over
capacity of about 500 and the late arrival, due to traffic problems,
of a number of supporters.     An early goal exacerbated the situation,
because there was a surge, and a number of fans were injured.
Perimeter gates were eventually opened and fortunately sufficient fans
were able to escape to alleviate the problem.     There had been some
crushing at the turnstiles and the police were, according to Mr Vaux,
slow to react to events.     There are obvious similarities to the events
of 15th April 1989, but fortunately the injuries were few.


3.      It is significant that the police at the time appear tohave
believed that the figure of 10,1000 in the Safety Certificate was too
high: see Doc: 136. Their letter to the FA does not reflect this
belief - see Doc: 138 - and it does not seem to have been put to the
Working Party of SYCC concerned with the Safety Certificate.      The
answer to the problem was considered to be the division of the terrace
by radial fences with 3 pens of roughly equal areas.     Eastwood and
Partners were asked by the Club at the same time to consider an
alteration to the turnstiles, but that did not in the end come to
anything.
4.        The erection of the pens was not of itself a bad idea.      The
fences were to have gates at the top, to enable egress to be made to
the adjoining pens.    Much has been asked about these gates and the
arrangements, if any, to man them, whether by stewards or by the
police.    It seems they were to have a dual use: first, to enable fans
to go from one pen to another to help in an even distribution on the
terrace as a whole and secondly, as emergency exits in case of the
need to evacuate the pen.    Dr. Eastwood said that he believed there
would be police control over these gates because he recognised the
importance of maintaining the numbers of people in the pens.
Unfortunately, although he was aware of the importance of this
control, he does not seem to have impressed the club or the working
party with it. The police interpreted control as meaning that the
gates should be left open, only needing an attendant if they were to
be closed and might need to be opened in an emergency.


5.        The reality was, as Dr. Eastwood accepted, that without any
mechanical means of counting, there was no possibility of adhering to
the capacity in the pens.      Accordingly, no capacity was formally
adopted and the safety certificate remained as it was.     Reliance was
placed on visual assessment.     The problem with that was that all
responsible, both police and stewards, accepted and tolerated density
in excess of that which was proper.     Evidence was given by police
officers to the effect that full meant chest to back and shoulder to
shoulder and that it was only when people were in obvious discomfort
that action would be taken to shut off a pen.     This is not
intentionally callous; it is a reflection of what football crowds have
been conditioned to put up with.     It is significant that in both 1987
and 1988 the conditions on the terrace in the central pens were
thoroughly unpleasant, but no-one complained and each match received a
clean bill of health.   The failure to seek the views of supporters or
to take any steps to inquire into their comfort is a notable feature
of the story unfolded in the evidence.   It has led to assumptions
being made which were dangerously inaccurate.


6.      In 1985 there were plans to improve the turnstiles at Leppings
Lane.   In addition, the police asked for more radial fences.   The main
purpose of those changes was segregation, so that home and away
supporters could both be accommodated at the west end of the ground.
In the result, the scheme to increase the turnstile numbers, and to
achieve not only segregation but a means of counting numbers into each
part of the terrace, was not pursued due to the reluctance of the club
to incur the expense.   In fairness to the club, it does not appear
that Dr. Eastwood impressed upon them with sufficient emphasis the
absolute need to keep the numbers in the pens to a safe level and the
desirability of the increase of turnstiles to achieve that.     He said
that he saw it as his duty to advise the club on the safety
implication of any proposal and to raise any objections he may have
had on that score.   But he seems, perhaps understandably, to have
adopted the attitude that the working party was there to approve or to
disapprove and, if it was satisfied, all well and good.   The working
party for its part did not appreciate the absolute need for regulation
of the numbers in the pens and so no steps were taken to review the
safety certificate appropriately.   In the result, the centre pen was
divided by a radial fence down its centre and part of it was taken out
of commission by a second fence to form the sterile area now known as
                                         7



     pen 5. The barriers in pen 3 had to be modified because one stretched
     right across it. This was done by removing two sections of railing.
     This had an effect on capacity and also resulted in the gaps being too
     wide.   In 1986, as a result of a police request, barrier 144 in pen 3
     was removed because it was said to be causing an obstruction at the
     mouth of the tunnel.    This, too, had an effect on capacity.


     7.            It is clear from the history that the pens were developed in a
0^   piecemeal fashion.     It is difficult to accept Dr. Eastwood’s evidence
     that he made a positive decision not to follow the Green Guide advice
     on the width of gaps and that there was a full discussion at the
     working party.    There is no record of such a discussion, which is
     surprising.    One suspects that the significance of the changes and the
     need to ensure that there was no overcrowding was not fully
     appreciated at the time and there is an element of hindsight creeping
     into the evidence that has been given.     Furthermore, the record of the
     telephone calls at docs. 379 and 380 do not suggest that Dr. Eastwood
     was as concerned as he now suggests about the need to monitor and
     control numbers in the pens.     His evidence that he was misquoted by
     his colleague Mr Strange is not very convincing.      Be that as it may,
     the result of the changes        was that the capacities of     the pens
     according to the formulae set out in the Green Guide were 822 in 3 and
     871 in 4. A conservative         estimate of the numbersin      pen 3 at    1503pm
     on 15th April 1989 is 1576.    It is likely that that pen contained at
     least double its safe numbers.
                                    8



8.        In April 1986 the Sheffield City Council became the licensing
authority.   Mr Bownes was the individual responsible.     He himself had
no direct knowledge of sports’ grounds and their safety and was
responsible for a large number of disparate licensing systems.           In May
1986 he reported that the conditions attached to the safety
certificate gave "some cause for concern, as they appear to be
inadequate or inappropriate in some areas".      In evidence, he said that
those were ill-chosen words and he meant nothing more than that the
certificate should be updated to reflect the substitution of the City
for the County Council.     We find that evidence unsatisfactory,        but we
are left in the dark      as to the precise ways in which Mr Bownes
believed the conditions were inadequate or inappropriate.      They
clearly were in that they failed to reflect the existence of the pens.
Mr Bownes very properly embarked upon a review of the conditions and
decided that the working party system inherited from the County
Council needed to be changed.     Sadly, his review was not concluded,
nor indeed nearly concluded by 15th April 1989.      He was undoubtedly
overburdened and he did not appreciate that there was any real problem
at Hillsborough.    Nevertheless, there can be no excuse for the failure
to sort the certificate out and more particularly to ensure that
something was done to prevent overcrowding on the terraces.         In
fairness to him, the other members of the advisory committee (as the
working party became) did not apparently appreciate the need for
action.    The absence   of any certificate at allat Sheffield United and
the glaring omission     to change the capacity for the Kop are
symptomatic of failure to do what ought to have been done.
                                    9



9.      The police and fire authority both had an input, being
statutory consultees.     But on the key issue of capacity neither had a
direct concern.     The police were, of course, concerned with problems
of order and generally safety.     They were not experts in capacity nor
is it altogether surprising that they thought in terms of visual
monitoring.   The fire service was concerned with the sufficiency of
emergency evacuation measures.     They say they were given to understand
at a meeting on 10th April 1985 that the police would man the gates at
the back of the radial fences and thereby be able to monitor numbers.
The police deny this.     It is difficult to believe that there was such
a positive undertaking by the police: if there had been, one would
expect it to be recorded in writing and it is not.     The only record is
back in 1981 (Doc: 153) where it is noted that the new gates would be
under police control.     The probability is that the need to control
numbers was not properly appreciated so that having men at the gates
was not considered to be as important as it now appears.     The fire
service may well have believed that the police would be in charge of
the gates.    In league games they were, and the system involved the
filling of the pens one after the other.     In 1985 and 1986 there were
no semi-finals and the problem of a capacity crowd into all the
terrace did not arise.     This may have given rise to any
misunderstanding.


10.     It will be clear that it is our view that the avoidance of
overcrowding in the pens is the key to safety.     The perimeter fences
are needed to prevent pitch invasions and they, or some similar
barrier, are a requirement of UEFA and of the FA: see Doc: 296.     They
are not in themselves the problem, although the gates or means of
                                    10



egress through them must be adequate to cater for an emergency.        Those
at Hillsborough were not, being narrower than the 1.1 metres required
by the Green Guide.     Provided that the fans are properly distributed
in proper numbers, no problem of crushing should arise.     Indeed,
smaller areas ought in theory to be safer, since they contribute to
ease of distribution.     However, the smaller the area, the greater the
significance of an increase in numbers over the safety limits.


11.       There are other defects in the ground which contributed to the
disaster.    There were an insufficient number of turnstiles to
accommodate the 24,000 or so fans who were to come through them.       The
Leppings Land entrance to the ground formed a natural bottleneck.
Crushes at the turnstiles were, it seems, not uncommon, but normally
they were shortlived and contained well within the perimeter gates.
Unless fans came to the ground over a reasonably long period,
ie. about 90 minutes, and at a reasonably steady rate, problems were
likely.     Furthermore, there was a complete absence of adequate signing
inside the turnstiles.    All fans were encouraged to go down the
central tunnel and would be forgiven for not being aware of any
alternative route.     Suggestions that anyone who had been before,
indeed any fan who knew football grounds generally, would have
realised that they could go round the side of the west stand we found
unacceptable.    The lay out at Leppings Lane was the result of a need
to segregate.    That need had not existed since the 1987 season, but no
changes had been made and no signs put up.     It was accepted by Mr
Mackrell that the club could not at semi-finals comply with the
requirements of condition 28(1) of the Safety Certificate that a
record be kept of the numbers of spectators admitted to the west and
                                    11



north west terraces respectively.        There were no means of controlling
the numbers on any part of the terrace within the limits of total
capacity.


III. OTHER PRELIMINARY MATTERS
A. Who was to control the fans on the terrace?
1.      The Green Guide clearly places the responsibility of ensuring
the safety of spectators upon the management of the ground, in this
case, the club: see paragraph 23. The South Yorkshire Police Standing
Instructions for the Policing of Football Matches (Police Doc: 11)
include as one of the specific duties of stewards that they should
prevent overcrowding and ensure that crowd limits in various parts of
the ground are complied with: see Appendix L paragraph 7(a).           The
evidence of all senior police officers from Chief Superintendent Mole
at the outset has been consistent.        The police did not expect there to
be any stewards on the terraces and no active steps were to be taken
by anyone to control or direct spectators on the terrace so as to
avoid overcrowding.    The fans were expected to find their own              levels.
If the central pens became overcrowded, the fans would either                turn
round and go back up the tunnel or disperse by the gates at the rear
of the radial fences to the adjoining pens.        The police in the control
room would keep an eye on the pens and, if overcrowding was detected,
should take steps to stop more coming in. Alternatively, although it
was not part of the match operational order, police officers on the
perimeter of the pitch and in the west stand would report any problems
to Control to enable   them to take necessary action.       The club         was
clear that it had no   responsibility for the management of the              fanson
the terrace and said there was an agreement, not in writing or
specifically recorded (pace Mr Lock whose evidence in this regard we
consider unsatisfactory: such an agreement would in our view
necessarily have been recorded somewhere), that the police should take
on that responsibility.    At league matches, it seems that the police
did manage the pens.   At semi-finals, the arrangement was as described
above.


2.       In the light of the evidence, which is all one way, it is in
our view futile for the police to attempt to suggest that the club and
not they were responsible for the safety of the fans on the terrace.
It is interesting to note that in Harris v. Sheffield United Football
Club, South Yorkshire Police asserted that their responsibility went
beyond maintaining law and order and extended to the safety and
comfort of the fans.   This is not at all surprising, since it was
accepted in evidence that the police were concerned with the safety of
everyone in the ground.    There certainly ought to have been a clear
and explicit written agreement between the Club and the police to
ensure that there was an effective means of maintaining and
controlling the numbers going into the pens to prevent overcrowding
and its attendant dangers.     It was a grave defect that not only did
no such agreement exist but no arrangement at all was made which
produced any effective means of avoiding overcrowding.    The policy of
allowing the fans to find their own level was dangerously useless:
Dr Eastwood’s description of it as ridiculous is clearly right.
Furthermore, the monitoring of the state of affairs in the pens by
Control was ineffective.     It is quite extraordinary to find that Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield could look at a photograph of pen 3 at 2.45
(Composite II DB16/29) and say that there was still plenty of space in
                                    13



it. There manifestly was not, particularly when one bears in mind
Dr. Eastwood’s evidence that people tend to avoid the very front
because it is below the level of the pitch and so the view is poor.
That evidence of Mr Duckenfield is a good example of the conditioning
referred to in II/5 above and the dangers of reliance on visual
monitoring.   It seems, too, that the view from the control box tended
to give a false impression.    No field glasses were available and the
camera, which could have been used for close-up shots, was defective
and in any event not used at the material time because those in the
control box were concentrating on the problems outside the turnstiles.
The police failed to make it clear to the officers who could have seen
the numbers building up that they should report to control; there was
nothing to that effect in the Operational Order or any briefings and
Mr Duckenfield’s evidence that he expected the officers to report
those matters is not credible.    There was no system to deal with
overcrowding and the problem does not appear to have been foreseen.
This is surprising since in 1988 the tunnel was blocked off to prevent
more going into the central pens, which was overcrowded although not
dangerously so.   That was not reported in the course of any debrief
and was unknown to Chief Superintendent Mole or any senior officer
involved in the planning.     It ought to have affected the 1989
operational order.


B. The decision to give Liverpool the Leppinas Lane end
1.      Chief Superintendent Mole made it clear that he would only
agree to police the semi-final at Hillsborough if each team’s
supporters had the same end as they had had in 1988.     That decision
was in our view justified and it was left to the FA to decide whether,
                                    14



in the light of it, to choose Hillsborough.      The 1988 fixture had,
according to Mr Evans’ report, gone well.       In fact, Liverpool had then
complained that, although they had more support, they had the smaller
ticket allocation.     In addition their supporters had further to
travel.    Mr Kelly accepted that, in retrospect, the choice of
Hillsborough for the second year running was somewhat unfair to
Liverpool.     It was also unfortunate that Liverpool’s complaints about
the choice of Hillsborough for 1989 were not put before the Committee
which had to decide on allocation.       Liverpool and its supporters had
reason to feel unfairly treated.     There were no factors which
militated in favour of Hillsborough rather than Manchester United.
Those set out by Mr Kelly in his evidence are unconvincing.        The truth
seems to have been that it was thought convenient to use Hillsborough
because things seemed to have gone well in 1988.


2.        Although the wrong decision was in our view made, it is
difficult to see how it had any direct connection with the tragedy.
There were no doubt a number of fans who were unable to get tickets,
perhaps more than there might have been had the match been played
elsewhere.     This may have resulted in more ticketless fans coming to
Sheffield in the hope of getting into the ground.       Certainly, there is
evidence of considerable numbers of fans asking for tickets.        It is
clear that after the tragedy, some Liverpool fans were blaming the
allocation of ends.     We do not think that an inference can be drawn
from that that large numbers of ticketless fans gained admission.           In
the shock and confusion things were said which were not properly
thought out.     There is no reason to change the opinion stated in
opening this inquiry that a disaster such as this could have occurred
                                   15



at any semi-final and that, if Nottingham Forest supporters had been
allocated to the Leppings Lane end, an Inquiry might well have been
considering why some of them were crushed to death.


C. The testing and collapse of barrier 124A and the removal of 144
1.      Two sections of barrier 124A in pen 3 collapsed as a result of
the overcrowding.   There can be no doubt that that collapse caused a
number of deaths.   The barrier had been tested by Dr. Eastwood’s firm
in July 1988 and had passed.


2.      The test had been carried out     in accordance with
Dr. Eastwood’s interpretation of Annex C to the Green Guide.      The
force of 6.0 KN/metre width has to be applied for three 5 minute
periods, a record being kept of the amount of deformation during each
loading and of the percentage of recovery.     If the recovery is less
than 50% after the third application of force, there is a failure: if
it is 50%-75%, there must be a retest.    As may be apparent, the
question is 50% or 75% of what?    Is the recovery by reference to the
position of the barrier before the first application of force or
before the third?   If the former, a span of 124A recorded 53% and
should have been retested; if the latter, it recorded 100% and passed.
 Dr. Eastwood adopted the latter and so passed it.      He justified his
interpretation in evidence.    We think   he was wrong and thatsafety
ought to have dictated that the recovery must be by reference to the
position of the barrier before the first application of force.      But we
do not think we can be criticised for adopting his interpretation,
because it is fairly open on the language of Annex C and has some
support from the tests in the British Standards.
                                    16



3.        Although the collapse of the barrier caused deaths, there were
many who died elsewhere in pens 3 and 4 and, if          ithad not collapsed,
fans would in all probability have       been crushed     todeath against it.
In his statement, Dr Eastwood said       that it was in his view "reasonable
to believe it failed on 15th April       1989 because     itwas subjected to a
significantly greater crowd pressure than is envisaged in the 1986
Guide".     That evidence was not challenged, since it is manifest that
the gross overcrowding in pen 3 would have created an excessive
pressure.    The vertical run behind it to barrier             and the
diagonal run to the tunnel side of the pen at the top would have
increased that pressure.     There is no certainty that the different
interpretation and a retest would have led to renewal of the barrier
or that, even if it had been renewed, it would have survived the
pressures exerted upon it.     Furthermore, even if it had survived, it
is difficult to say that lives would have necessarily been saved.        It
is incidentally unfortunate that Dr Eastwood’s test records were
incomplete, since the test of one out of three of the spans was not
recorded.     It happens that in the case of 124A the one omitted was the
one which survived.


4.        We should also refer to the removal of barrier 144 in 1986.
This did materially affect the capacity and we think that insufficient
consideration was given to the adverse effects of the removal. It
made it all the more important to regulate the numbers going into the
pens; this no-one seems to have appreciated.       Its removal made it the
more easy for fans coming down the tunnel to spread out into the pen
and we believe that its absence did result in a greater flow down the
pen. The evidence of Inspector Bullas, who was looking down from the
                                  17



west stand, of a sea of people flowing down the pen is graphic and
consistent with the sort of movement one would expect.      A number of
fans spoke of being carried down the pen from the tunnel as they
entered after Gate C was opened and we know that at least 20 of those
who died came in through Gate C after 2.52 (a fact which gives the lie
to the opinion expressed in some quarters that drunken late-comers
killed those who had arrived in good time) and some of those ended up
at the front of pen 3.


D. The Police Planning
1.      The police operational order for 1989 was essentially a
reproduction of that which had apparently worked well in 1988.      So
much was this so that it omitted to include the instructions to the
police Tango units to assist the ambulance and fire services to make a
rendezvous point at Herries Road Bus garage as had been agreed in
August 1988: see Doc:477.   This omission might have been important: in
the event, despite the emergency that arose, it seems to have made
little difference.   Since there had been a minor pitch invasion at the
end of the 1988 match the Order underlined the instruction to serial
1, the offices on the perimeter track, to forbid anyone "access to the
track from the terraces without consent of a senior officer (except to
receive medical attention)".   In this context, senior officer meant an
inspector of higher ranking officer.   Thus it was drummed into all
officers that access to the pitch must not be permitted except in the
most exceptional circumstances.   This led to the failure to react
quickly enough to the emergency that in fact arose.   Police were
conditioned to believe that any attempt to come out of the terraces
must be a pitch invasion and therefore must be prevented.     In
addition, there was insufficient planning to deal with the arrival of
fans at the turnstiles.     It was assumed that they would arrive in a
steady flow and that there would be no build up. It is interesting
that there was a considerable body of evidence from fans to the effect
that in 1988 there had been a much higher profile policing en route to
the ground.     Fans coming down Leppings Lane had been stopped and asked
if they had tickets and steps had been taken to weed out those who had
not and to control those going to the turnstiles.     Some witnesses even
talked of a recollection of barriers across Leppings Lane.     The police
denied that there was any difference and there is nothing in the
Operational Order which suggests any change, save for a reduction in
numbers of officers posted to public order duties away from the
ground.     It may be that the relatively smooth running of things in
1988 has led people to think there was more control than in the chaos
of 1989, whereas in fact there was no material difference.     In any
event, it is clear that in 1989 insufficient consideration was given
to the possibility of the arrival of large numbers at once or to the
problem of a substantial number of latecomers.     The need to control at
a distance from a ground was identified in 1926; that lesson was not
learnt at Hillsborough.


2.         The plan had been operated in 1988 by Chief Superintendent
Mole.     He had considerable experience of overseeing the policing of
Hillsborough.     He was moved to a new post at the end of March 1989 and
was succeeded by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.     Mr Duckenfield had
little recent experience of policing football grounds and had not been
to Hillsborough for some 10 years.     That was, of course, not his
fault.     He inherited a plan which had appeared to work well and was
content that it would work well again.     He did not have the experience
                                     19



    to recognise all the potential problems.   This was not his fault, but
    we feel that he should have taken more time and greater care to
    familiarise himself with the ground and all its problems.
    Alternatively, Mr Mole could have been asked to deal with the match,
    notwithstanding his new posting, since to require that Mr DuckenfieTd
    should be in control if such an important match with a capacity crowd
    so soon after his appointment was to ask a great deal of him.


^   III SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989
    A. The crush at the turnstiles
    1.      Because of the need to segregate Liverpool from Nottingham
    Forest fans, 12 turnstiles which normally were used to gain access to
    the North Stand from Penistone Road were not used.   This meant that
    all 24,000 Liverpool fans had to enter by the Leppings Lane
    turnstiles.   1-10 were allocated to the 9880 in the North Stand, 11-16
    to the 4465 in the West Stand and A-G to the 10,100 on the terrace.
    This meant that there was considerable pressure on the turnstiles and,
    assuming a hoped-for rate of 800 an hour was achieved, it would have
    taken well over an hour to get everyone in. Any hold ups would have
    increased that time.   The design of the ground made this imbalance of
    turnstiles inevitable and it is a defect which undoubtedly contributed
    to the disaster.


    2.      It was essential that there should be no impediment to the
    smooth operation of the turnstiles.   However, there are a number of
    things which did cause fans to congregate outside the turnstiles and
    to obstruct and delay the entry to the ground.   In particular, we
    would identify the following matters:-
                          20



(i) The confusing nature of the tickets coupled with the
signing outside the turnstiles.    1-10 were marked A, 11-16 C
and A-G B, so that they ran ACB.   B was the other side of a
wall to A and C, so that anyone getting himself on the wrong
side had to extricate himself and go to the other side.
Furthermore some of the signs placed to show the appropriate
colour coding of the relevant turnstiles were too low and
invisible once a substantial queue built up.    Police officers
said that there were numerous queries from fans as to where
they should go and that the signing was not at all good.    The
Club ought to have made sure that the tickets and signs were
clear.


(ii) The activities of ticket touts.   There were touts
operating, albeit not in large numbers, in the vicinity of the
Leppings Lane turnstiles: one at least was arrested for
obstruction.   Touts are a menace because (a) they encourage
fans to come without tickets in the hope of being able to buy
one, (b) they sell supporters tickets for the wrong end of the
ground, thus imperilling the segregation of the fans and (c)
they cause obstruction.    Ideally, they should be barred from
the vicinity of any ground, but there are difficulties in
devising a means of curtailing their activities without
preventing the perfectly lawful and unobjectionable swapping
or selling of tickets other than as a business.
                        21



(iii) The presence of ticketless fans.     The evidence makes it
clear that there were many fans asking for tickets.      Police
officers on duty at and near the turnstiles give various
estimates of the numbers, ranging from 200 to 2000.      Fans have
told the inquiry that much more was done in 1988 to try to
weed out the ticketless than in 1989. Whether or not that is
right, very little was done in 1989.     The police told the
inquiry that there was little they could do, since no offence
was committed in being near a ground without a ticket,
provided there was no obstruction or breach of the peace.         We
do not think the police are so powerless.     Ticketless fans do
cause problems and, in sufficient numbers, are almost bound to
cause an obstruction.   It is in our opinion perfectly
reasonable for a police officer to ask a fan if he has a
ticket and, if he has not, it is lawful to refuse him access
to the immediate vicinity of the ground.     Such refusal can be
justified on the basis of an apprehended obstruction.      In any
event, we suspect that in many cases an indication by an
officer to a ticketless fan to go away would suffice.


(iv) Some ticketless fans tried to get in by bribing turnstile
operators or by rushing or climbing over turnstiles.      Others
with tickets for the Kop tried to get in the Liverpool end.
Both of those categories of people delayed the turnstiles and
affected the smooth running of entry to the ground.
                                 22



3.       By 2.30pm all pretence at orderly queueing had ceased and
there was a crush of fans at the turnstiles.    Although, according to
the operational order, officers outside the turnstiles had inter alia
to form orderly queues, the Inspector in charge (Inspector Sykes) told
the inquiry that that was an impossible task when a large crowd
attended.   By 2.40pm or thereabouts the police had lost control.    The
crush got worse and worse and the gates had to be opened.     Attempts to
save the situation by the use of mounted officers failed.     Despite the
views of Inspector Hand-Davies, which must be given considerable
weight, it seems to us that the area was too confined to permit of
effective action by horses,   they did not have sufficient room to
manoeuvre and were enveloped by the crowd since individuals were
unable to move away, there being nowhere to move to.     Superintendent
Marshall himself was overwhelmed by the crowd and his efforts to
alleviate the crush were ineffective.    At some stage, an attempt was
made to shut the perimeter gates and to form a barrier of horses to
prevent new arrivals coming down Leppings Lane joining the back of the
crush and so making things worse.     This tactic seems to have
succeeded, at least for a time, but it was too late, for, very soon
afterwards, Gate C was opened.   Evidence was given that, despite the
barrier, fans were forcing themselves through, even going under the
horses’ bellies.   The perimeter gates, or some of them, were pushed
open.   The evidence of what precisely happened is confusing.     There is
no doubt that there were fans, particularly among those arriving at a
relatively late stage (i.e. 2.45 onwards) who, perhaps because they
had had too much to drink or because of selfishness or to create
difficulties in the hope of getting an advantage (e.g. admission to
                                  23



the ground without a ticket) or for some other reason, did push and
shove and exacerbate the position.     But those were a minority.


4.      The manual log kept by Superintendent Murray shows that at
14.17 there was a request to close Leppings Lane.     Mr Marshall and Mr
Duckenfield think the request came later and certainly Leppings Lane
was not closed to traffic until after 2.30.     If Mr Murray’s timing is
correct, the police outside were aware of problems building up at a
comparatively early stage.    We find it surprising that no measures
were taken by those inside the ground in the control box to try to
seek information to ascertain whether many fans were still coming
towards the ground.   It is also surprising that nothing was done by
the Commander outside to deploy officers to try to control the fans
arriving further away from the ground to create a breathing space.        At
about 2.30, Mr Duckenfield, seeing the crowd at the turnstiles, asked
Mr Murray if they would get everyone in by 3pm.     Mr Murray said he
thought they would.   It does not seem to have occurred to them to
check the turnstile count or to find out how many were to come.      It
should by 2.40 at the latest have been apparent that all would not be
in by 3pm and the kick-off should have been postponed.     It had been
decided that kick-off would only be postponed if there were some
reason other than their own volition which caused late arrival of a
substantial number of fans.    This was to adopt too inflexible an
approach.   Postponement might not have eased the crush, but, since it
was accepted by many witnesses that things got worse nearer to 3pm
because fans did not want to miss any of the game, it might well have
done.   If a dangerous situation was created, it should not have
                                  24



mattered what caused it.     If postponement of the kick-off might
reasonably have overcome the danger, it should have been done.


5.        All the police witnesses concerned in the policing asserted
that they did not foresee that there would be so many arriving late,
and at once.    They go on to suggest it was unforeseeable.   We
disagree.    It is, we would have thought, not in the least surprising
that fans should be reluctant to spend many minutes standing on a
terrace or, for that matter, sitting in a seat with very little in the
way of entertainment provided.    There was some evidence of knowledge
by the police that fans were developing a pattern of arriving 15
minutes or so before kick-off because, it was thought, they were
seeking alcoholic refreshment elsewhere since they could not get in
the ground: see Doc: 434A.     This was not particularly referable to
Liverpool fans, but, on the day, the police were at a fairly early
stage aware of a considerable amount of drinking by supporters.        It
was a fine and fairly warm day, such as would encourage people to sit
around in the sunshine.    It was an all-ticket match, so that fans
would be forgiven for believing that it would not take very long to
get in.


6.        In any event, we do not think that those who arrived Ihour
before kick-off can properly be branded latecomers, particularly since
the tickets said spectators should be in their places by 2.45.       It was
taking up to 20 minutes to get through the crush and into the ground.
Once the crush developed, there was more difficulty in getting through
the turnstiles which worsened the crush.
                                      25



7.         It has been said that, had the fans not pushed, the problem of
crushing would not have arisen.        This is a superficially plausible
view.   But it ignores the reality of crowd behaviour.          It has not been
seriously suggested by any police officer that the mood of the crowd
up to about 2.30 was other than good natured.           It is precisely because
people who are aiming to go to a particular place through a limited
means of access do tend to crowd together that there is a need for
control.    And, as one witness said, once you are in that sort of a
crowd, you only move forwards or sideways, never backwards.           Sideways
was constricted, so all were tending to move forwards.


8.         We should refer to other factors which have been suggested as
causative of the crush.


           (a) Ticketless Fans
           As we have already said, it is very difficult to estimate the
           number of ticketless fans.        It has been suggested that there
           were a substantial number who were determined to get into the
           ground without a ticket.        There is some evidence, notably
           from Mr Taylor, the effect of which is that some fans were
           overheard expressing the intention to get in by way of an open
           gate or to cause a gate to be opened.        Attention is drawn to
           the arrival of large numbers of Liverpool fans at all-ticket
           League matches in the hope of gaining admission.        And it is
           pointed out that at this year’s Cup Final there were up 1000
           fans who had come to force an entry to Wembley Stadium.           We do
           not doubt that there probably were some fans who came without
                            26



tickets determined to gain entry.        But we find it impossible
to accept that the crushing was caused by such fans so as to
engineer the opening of a gate, a theory propounded by
Superintendent Greenwood.        (See Day 12, p.95).   That would
have involved a truly amazing degree of preparation and good
fortune.    However, there may well have been a number of fans
who took advantage of the situation and were happy to
exacerbate and make use of the crush.        Opportunists probably
did hope that a gate would be opened and that they would get
in through it. To that extent, ticketless fans may have
contributed to the difficulties at the turnstiles.


(b) Drink
Many witnesses, particularly the police, refer to a large
consumption of alcohol, mainly lager.        Fans arrived in
Sheffield in good time but then stayed outside the ground
drinking, either at pubs or in public places.          Some police
officers suggested that the ban on the sale of alcohol in the
ground contributed to this pattern of behaviour.          It was
pointed out that, having regard to the crowds, those seeking a
drink inside the ground, if it was permissible to sell it,
would be unlikely to succeed in getting more than a pint (i.e.
a single drink).    It does certainly seem that a significant
number of fans did decide to take advantage of the sunshine
and drink so that they arrived comparatively late and in a
condition affected by alcohol.       The drink had increased
selfish and stupid behaviour, leading to pushing and a
                                   27



        failure to take any notice of police appeals to hold back.
        There was a considerable amount of boorish and loutish
        behaviour (e.g. urinating in gardens or backyards, throwing
        empty cans all over the place, shouting, swearing and
        chanting) which sadly tends to be associated with football
        crowds.   That sort of behaviour is inexcusable.   But it was a
       minority of fans who were guilty of it and it did not cause
        the trouble.   It probably contributed to the inability of the
        police to aleviate the trouble once it had arisen.


        (c) Hooliqanism
        This is really coupled with the taking of drink, although
        those may well have been fans who did not need drink to behave
        in a thoroughly antisocial fashion.   Police horses were burnt
        with cigarettes, there was pushing and shoving and some fans
        behaved in a thoroughly selfish way, concerned only to get
        themselves into the ground without caring for the comfort or
        safety of their fellows.    But this sort of behaviour was that
        of a minority and did not cause the problem.    The primary
        cause of the crushing was the bottleneck at Leppings Lane, and
        insufficiency of turnstiles and a failure by the policy
        properly to control fans arriving before they reached the
        perimeter gates and the turnstiles.


B. The opening of the gates
1.      At 2.47 Superintendent Marshall radiped the first request tp
ppen gates.   Grpund cpntrpl was fpcussing pn gate C and   sp   it was that
                                    28



gate that was expected to be opened.     At 2.48 it opened to eject a fan
and some 200 or so outside burst in. This happened before Mr
Duckenfield was able to decide on an answer.      Shortly afterwards the
request was repeated, again that the gates should be opened.       Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield realised that to open the gates would be to
act contrary to all the planning and# would let unsearched and
possibly ticketless fans into the ground.      He had a difficult decision
to make and he took his time making it. Unfortunately, neither he nor
any of his advisers in the control room took any steps to prepare for
the consequences of opening Gate C in particular.       The inevitable
result would be an influx of fans down the central tunnel and into
pens 3 and 4: this should have been foreseen.       Mr Murray attempted,
he says, to contact Mr Lock, but was unsuccessful.       Otherwise, no
attempt was made to contact or to warn the stewards in the club.         The
suggestion that the officers on the concourse ought to have acted on
their own initiative does not bear examination: they did not know
that   the gate was to be opened nor did they know        that pens 3 and 4
were already full.     In fact, by 2.50 pens 3 and 4 had reached their
safe   capacity.     This should have been obvious to     those inthe control
box.    Even if it was not, steps should have been        taken toprevent the
large numbers who were bound to come through Gate C from going down
the central tunnel.


2.      At 2.54 the teams came out onto the field.       This resulted in a
roar from the crowd, encouraging entrants to the ground to hurry to
their places.      So it was that the greater portion of the 2000 or so
who entered through Gate C went into pens 3 and 4. They came in in an
                                    29



orderly fashion, glad to escape from the dangerous crush outside.           At
2.58 Gate A was opened, but this time there was some preparation
inside, largely because of the foresight of Sgt. Higgins.      Mr
Duckenfield took additional     steps by deploying a serial to the front
of the North Stand to cater     for that influx which might    havecaused
trouble to the seated customers in that stand.     Those standing on the
terrace were left to fend for themselves.


3.       It is clear that the failure to take any steps to prevent fans
going from Gate C to pens 3 and 4 was the effective cause of the
disaster.     The decision to open the gates cannot be criticised:        the
failure to foresee the result can.


C.   Inside the ground
1.       It has been submitted that a video showsactivity in pen 3
suggesting that the barrier broke before 2.52.     We do not find that at
all likely.     It is contrary to the evidence that is available from
fans who were in the vicinity of that barrier.     It is also less
probable, since a surge in an overcrowded pen was far more likely to
have done the damage.     It was believed at an earlier stage of the
inquiry that the surge of fans coming in from Gate C, coinciding with
the arrival of the teams on the pitch, caused the collapse.         The
evidence now available suggests it may have occurred later, possibly
even as late as 3.05, when the hitting of the bar at the Nottingham
Forest end caused a surge on the terrace.     There is much conflict, but
it seems that by 3.02 or thereabouts, when Gate 3 had been opened
properly, a pile of bodies was already obstructing it.
                                    30



2.         Since no steps were taken to prevent it happening, the pens
got fuller and fuller.     As they did, people began to be crushed to
death.     Some fell to the ground and were asphyxiated as a result:
others were unable to breathe standing up. Almost all died from
traumatic asphyxia - the crush was so great that they could not
breathe.    As this happened, they began to cry out in distress.      The
police officers at the perimeter fence were slow to react, partly
because they were accustomed to overcrowding, partly because the noise
level made it difficult to hear that the cries were of people in real
distress and partly because they were conditioned and instructed to
pwswHse the integrity of the pitch.      PC Hooson told the inquiry that
he came past the North Stand and, as he approached gate 4, he realised
that fans were in distress and he took upon himself to open Gate 4.
This was sometime between 2.55 and 3pm.     Thereafter, Gate 4 remained
open.     PC Illingworth, the officer on Gate 4, does not agree; he says
he opened that gate.     It is possible that it had originally been
opened by PC Illingworth and shut again and then reopened by PC
Hooson.     But insofar as there is a conflict of evidence to be
resolved, we would submit that PC Hooson’s account is to be preferred.
PC Illingworth must feel himself open to criticism; PC Hooson has, on
the face of things, no axe to grind.


3.         Gate 3 was opened, according to PC Smith, by the force of the
fans in the pen.     He shut it again.   The same happened again and it
was only then that he appreciated the need to keep it open to try to
help to extricate the injured.     This account, courageously given, is
corroborated by fans.     Dr Eastwood accepted that, given sufficient
pressure, the gate could have opened in the way described.
                                   31



4.      It is not possible to say precisely when the gates were
opened, since the videos available were not focussedon the pens at
the crucial time.    The photographs in Composite Album II show gate 4
open at 15.00 and gate 3 at 15.02.      Videos show both gates closed at
15.00:45 (MAP 1) and gate 4 open at 15.00:50 (MAP 3). The earliest
that Gate 3 is shown open on a video is 15.03: 49 (MAP 8). All this
makes Mr Grobelaar’s timing very suspect and his description of the
various moves in the match is not borne out by the video of the game.


5.      Not only was there a slowness to react to the situation in the
pens, but also, once fans had begun to climb over the perimeter fence
(at about 3pm), the immediate reaction was that it was a pitch
invasion.    This was unlikely for various reasons, not least because
(a) the fans did not go on the pitch and (b) there was no conceivable
cause for an invasion at that stage of the game.      Valuable minutes
were spent while those in the control box tried to find out what was
happening.


6.      Attempts were made by standing on the perimeter fencing and
gesticulating to get those at the back of the pens to move back.
These attempts failed.    This was not in the main due to cussedness
on the part of the fans, but to (a) an inability to move and (b) a
failure to realise what was going on down the front.      No senior
officer thought to send police down the tunnel to haul fans out the
back - that was left to the initiative of junior officers.
                                    32



7.     There was an absence of leadership by the senior police
officers.     Individual efforts were made to try to save lives and to
evacuate the pens, but the picture was one of chaos and lack of
organisation until Chief Superintendent Nesbitt came on the scene at
about 3.15.    No attempt was made to use the tannoy to try to summon
medical assistance until about 3.20.      Similarly, those not directly
involved, particularly the Nottingham Forest fans on the Kop, were
left ignorant of what was happening.      Chief Superintendent
Duckingfield defended his decision to say nothing on public order
grounds.    We can quite see that fans had to be kept in their places to
avoid interference with the emergency services, but we think that some
announcement should have been made.      Most football fans are decent
law abiding people and, if treated as human beings, are likely to
react sensibly.     When an announcement was eventually made, the fans
all behaved well.


8.     The club had an agreement with the St. John’s Ambulance
Brigade to provide sufficient numbers to comply with the requirements
of the safety certificate.     Their members did all they could when the
tragedy occurred.     SYMAS had very prudently, by stretching the
relevant DHSS guidelines, determined that two of their personnel
should attend the ground with an ambulance.      Two complementary tickets
had been provided for league games, but not for semi-finals.        It did
appear that there could be some criticism of the club for withdrawing
the tickets, but we heard from Mr Mackrell, and we have no reason to
doubt,that it arose from an administrative error.      In any event, the
personnel were at the ground and able to react quickly.      There was,
                                    33



however, a lack of proper liaison with the police, largely because the
police had no plan specifically to deal with a disaster at
Hillsborough Stadium.    The same comment applies in respect of liaison
with the fire service, who were eventually called to produce bolt
cutters to remove the perimeter fencing.       The first fire officer to
arrive was told he wasn’t wanted.        In addition, there was confusion
between the club and Dr Purcell as to his role.       He thought he was
present to administer to the team or directors and was not the
physician referred to in the safety certificate.


9.      Much publicity was given to the attempt by the police to
summon the fire brigade and the conversation seeking to identify the
precise location of Hillsborough Stadium.        It would be unfair to blame
the fire brigade operator for her endeavours to get the right
information for the computer.     She expected the police to be precise
and there ought to be full briefing so that the police know what is
needed of them.     There was some confusion as to what was needed from
the fire brigade.


10.     Complaints have been made of the lack of proper medical
equipment.   We do not think any football club could reasonably be
expected to carry sufficient equipment to cater for a disaster of the
magnitude of that which occurred.        But there should have been at least
a resuscitator.     The SYMAS ambulance had all necessary equipment and
oxygen was quickly available.     It became clear that a defibrillator
would not have been a sensible piece of equipment to use in the pitch.
 We were not impressed with the complaints made by Dr Ashton and Dr
Phillips in that regard.
                                    34



11.      Although there was confusion and disorganisation and a failure
to act as expeditiously in summoning the necessary assistance as was
desirable, we doubt that the delays caused deaths which would not in
any event have occurred.     We do think that, had the perimeter fence
been opened earlier and positive steps taken to get people out of the
back of the pens, some lives might have been saved.     But we doubt that
the delays in seeking medical aid and a sufficiency of ambulances made
any real difference.    As was pointed out in evidence, the first 4
minutes are crucial and immediate mouth to mouth resuscitation is the
only really effective and practical treatment.     This was given by
police officers, St. John’s personnel, fans etc.


12.      Much ill-feeling was generated by the allegation made that
afternoon that fans had taken down a fence and thereby caused the
tragedy.    This version was given by Mr Duckenfield to Mr Kelly at
about 3.15.    Mr Duckenfield has admitted that he deliberately did not
tell the truth.     That account had been given to the fire service and
to SYMAS.     There was scope for misunderstanding, since the call to
SYMAS may well have referred to the forcing of a perimeter gate.        That
possibility of misunderstanding cannot exonerate Mr Duckenfield.


D.    Radio Communication
1.       Radio communications were generally poor.   This was largely
due to the fact that over 100 officers had radios and so, particularly
as the situation became more difficult, there was a tendency for more
than one to talk at once.     In addition, shortly after 2.30 a problem
was apparent and the control box seemed to have lost transmission.
The reserve station was brought into use.    This was so badly sited
that it was impracticable to use it. Hence the control box had to use
a set instead, thus losing the ability to switch to non-talk through
so as to override all other transmissions.    It did gain the advantage
on talk through that it was able to compete on equal terms with the
other officers.


2.       The situation was wholly unsatisfactory.   Many messages did
not get through.   Officers on the perimeter were not heard trying to
announce that there was crushing and asking for ambulances.
Superintendent Marshall could not get through his request to open the
gates and had to route it via the police station.


3.       Since an inspection by a Home Office expert has disclosed no
faults, the breakdown must have resulted from too much traffic on the
air.   Too many officers had radios for the system to cope.    Clearly,
consideration will have to be given in Stage 2 to means of improving
communications and avoiding the problems which arose.


IV.1     As will be apparent, we have not sought to cover all the
matters dealt with in the evidence.   We have not thought it necessary
to suggest the resolution of disputed evidence as to who said what and
when in relation to numbers still to come into the ground.     No doubt,
those matters are important to the individuals involved.      It is
possible that some people ought to have been aware of things which
should have led them to take action which might have changed events.
We are not satisfied that identification of the shortcomings of
                                  36



individuals in those sorts of respects will help the Tribunal in its
task.   No doubt the parties concerned will, if they consider such
incidents to be important, deal with them in the course of their
submissions.


2.       This was a wholly avoidable disaster, but one which was bound
to occur so long as nothing was done to control the numbers going into
the pens and to provide a sufficiency of turnstiles and
policing to avoid a dangerous build up of fans seeking admission.
Luck prevented it happening before; that luck ran out on 15th April
1989, with the tragic consequences which have led to this Inquiry.     It
is clear that there must be education of all concerned, police,
stewards, spectators, so that overcrowding can be the more easily
recognised.    Ignorance, complacency and lack of foresight, not
deliberate callousness, led to the disaster.    Perhaps the lessons can
now be well and truly learnt and this will be the last of the series
of inquiries into disasters at football grounds which have led to loss
of life and injury.




                                         ANIJREW COLLINS Q.C.
                                                                                                npit'
                                                                                        !              1
      H IL L ^ B O IO U S H                      STEERING                    C O M Bt           T*El f H

                       C / 0 -{ Castft   JLmfcf*,   CootStmh LimrpootU, 9&X             ^
                                         f a ; Z & 0 6 2 S 70% Z 3 M 0 4 ?




R M Whalley Es
Senr«tary to ti;   Inquiry,
50 Queen Anne.'i (5a t a ,
LONDON    SWIH       $AT


Dear Mr WhaHe,

We enclose her with ten copies of the closing statement of M? B
and Mr King, C unsel for thd injured and b t a n d    would pe |jflrf?S
kindly ackno^l.    r e c e i p t . I
                                                                                                 ' ' I   '
                                                                                                *1!
                                                                                                  •          r•
Yours eliiO'3r'<iI




                     A-tyaiJ                                                                    ? jf I
                                                                                                 :i t i
    S E M SIEfi
                                                                                            i    m
                                                                                                 It
                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                j■y>r
