                                        cc   Mr Goddard


Mr F Smith
F8 Division



POLICE DEPARTMENT EVIDENCE TO TAYLOR


1. Thank you for sending me a copy of your note of 31 May to
Mr Goddard about issues for F8 which might flow from the Taylor
Inquiry.  I found it most instructive and helpful.

2. At risk of adding too much paper to all this at the present
time, I should record that your analysis reinforces my view that
our evidence needs clearly to demonstrate to Taylor the limit of
the Home Office responsibility and where therefore that of chief
officers starts.  I realise that the line is not easy to draw
given for example our role in helping to draw up and promulgate
advice which is of an operational kind.  But much of what you
identify (eg crowd handling outside) is clearly ACPO etc
territory. Should Taylor target its recommendations, Ministers
will not thank us for doing nothing to deflect from them arrows
properly directed at others.

3. Your interesting comments on touting underline the care
needed over this.  We must not have any different treatment in
principle of this from other issues, and not gratuitously set out
arguments which (though this is an interesting area where the
debate has not settled on clear conclusions) can then be picked
to pieces.  If Ministers have clear views supportable by
evidence, so be it; if this is an area not really worked through,
it is more difficult to expose safely in evidence.  The fact that
touting was not, as I understand it,  a significant factor at
Hillsborough may make this easier to do, though I recognise there
is an argument that while touting is not universally banned more
ticketless fans are likely to turn up than otherwise mighty
                                             /

                                        S W BOYS SMITH

Police Department

5 June 1989
                                           cc   Mr Goddard
Mr F Smith o\r



POLICE DEPARTMENT EVIDENCE TO TAYLOR INQUIRY


1. Thank you fq*r your note of 25 May.      I am grateful to you for
moving so quickly.

2.I recognise that you have not, as you    say, had time to deal
with everything, in particular the things which need to come out.
In case it is any help however, and accepting that there may be
some overlap from my earlier comments, I have annotated my copy,
which I enclose.

3. Mr Whalley telephoned me on another matter and I asked him
for some clarification of what was expected.  He envisaged the
whole police contribution falling into three sections -

     (i)      the law and formal statements of functions;

     (ii)     statement of government's position on crowd control,
              leading to

     (iii)    the operational angle.

T h e H o m e Office would therefore contribute (i) and (ii), ACPO
(iii). He said there had been a good deal of muddled talk by
South Yorkshire officers at the inquiry about the wide context,
and he hoped our evidence would therefore help set the
background.       This underlines the point behind some of my comments
- the need to separate the statements of policy from the law or
other factual background (which I think falls under Mr Whalley's
(i) •

4.  This leaves dovetailing with the G Department material.
The Home Secretary will want to see the whole lot together, and
Mr Turney will put it all forward.  He tells me his perception of
the evidence is as ours.  He will want to ensure the deadline -
16 June - is not broken; having pressed Taylor to be speedy there
can be no question of the Home Office being open to the charge
that it has held things up.  This meanp          «„=+■
finalised next week.




                                           S W BOYS SMITH

Police Department

2 June 1989
