From: Matthew Pyne                           cc (w/o attach)   Mr Michael
      Operational Policing                                     Mr O’Brien
      Policy Unit                                              Mr Howarth
      Room 528, QAG                                            Permanent Secretary
      9 273 - 2433                                             Mr Boys Smith
      17 February, 1998                                        Mr Pugh
                                                               Mr Granatt




Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY REPORT: APPENDIX 9

In appendix 9 of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report, he commented on a number of
issues raised with him by the families about the circumstances in which their relatives
died and the police documentation. You agreed that this part of the report would not
be included in the published report in view of the personal nature of the material and
that you would write to the families individually enclosing the relevant extracts.

2.     Draft letters are attached behind for your consideration. We recommend that
you write as soon as the report has been published to minimise any delay in the
families receiving the information.




                                             M JPyne




g:\hills\mp-0464.doc
DRAFT LETTER FOR HOME SECRETARY'S SIGNATURE



Mr & Mrs Aspinall




As you will be aware, I have now published Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's
report of his scrutiny of evidence on the Hillsborough Disaster.


I understand that, as part of his scrutiny, you raised certain issues with
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about the circumstances and the police
documentation relating to the tragic death of your son, James.


The Judge dealt with these concerns, and those of other families, in
appendix 9 of his report to me. In view of the personal nature of the
material in the appendix, I have decided that the relevant passages should
be sent direct to the families concerned rather than included in the
published report.


I, therefore, enclose a copy of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's comments.
