                        L   L   »   —   I■ t■ .>   . 4*
                                                   >   ■     1■   “   ■ ■ " — »• *   ,   .
                                    ,!sru!3tf*
                                         c                 Mr Chilcot
                                                                      S L ' ,ml          M

                                                           Mr Faulkner
                                                           Mr Hammond
                                                           Mr Hyde
                                                           Mr Moriarty
                                                           Mr Train
                                                           Mr Malone-Lee
                                                           Mr Mower
                                                           Miss Stewart
                                                           Mr Brindle (o/r)
                                                           Mr Gange
                                                           Mr Watts
                                                           Budget Support Groups
                                                                 (Vote 3)



Mr Yates



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY:   ADJUSTMENTS TO VOTE XI. 3


1.   A new subhead has to be created           in Vote XI, 3 to obtain
authority for payments for the costs           of the Hillsborough Inquiry.
The amount to be provided for in the           new subhead (which will be
H6) has tobe a substantial estimate            of the likely costs of the
inquiry.

2.   The amount to be put in the new subhead, and the equivalent
reductions in other subheads, have to be communicated to the
Treasury by close today, 4 May, because the summer
supplementaries go to the printers tomorrow.

3.   The latest estimate of the cost of the inquiry is
£1.2 million (Annex A).     I have agreed with the Treasury that
this full amount does not need to be put in now, (i) because in
the nature of things it can only be a broad estimate and one does
not want to over-allocate;    and (ii) because provision which
runs the risk of being over-generous would send the wrong signals
to Lord Justice Taylor.    I propose that the amount to be put in
H6 should be £0.9 million.

4.   Some of the expenditure on the Hillsborough inquiry will be
running costs.   But it is not necessary now to find running
costs savings.   It will be sufficient to find cash savings
amounting to £0.9 million.

5.   In my view (and I understand that this has been accepted by
Budget Support Groups generally), it would not be right to expect
Mr Moriarty's budget to identify the full savings needed.   It
would be better that the savings should be spread across Vote 3.
Understandably, it has proved difficult for Budget Support Groups
at such short notice, and at such an early time in the year, to
identify savings which can be offered up.   The total which has
been offered is £0.67 million.
6.   As the full £0.9 million has to be identified now, we have
done our best in Finance Division 1 to identify how that should
be done, including the savings already offered.   The result is
shown in Annex B.    I should be grateful if you would let me
know whether Sir Clive is content that I may inform the Treasury
that these are the reductions to be made in the summer
supplementary estimates, equivalent to the £0.9 million to be put
in the new subhead H6 for the costs of the Hillsborough inquiry.

7.   I should say that, after this has been done, there would
still be a few days in which any better ideas could be
substituted, because the proofs will not return to the Treasury
until 12 May.   And if the changes shown in the attached list
prove in the event to be unmanageable, such considerations could
of course be addressed in later supplementary estimates.

8.   For completeness, I should perhaps explain that it has not
been proposed to seek additional provision in summer
supplementaries, or to identify off-setting reductions to cover
the additional payment needing to be made on back payment for
BVPs.   That can be addressed later in the year, when the pattern
of spending across Vote 3 is more clear.   The trigger for the
urgent action needed in relation to the Hillsborough inquiry is
the need to create a new subhead, and the obligation in doing
that to make substantial provision.




                          G K SANDIFORD
                            4 May 1989


Finance Division 1
Queen Anne's Gate
