From:         MRS 6 I MOODY                 cc.   Mr Dear HMIC
              F2 DIVISION                         Mrs Catto
              Tel: 273-2621                       Miss Edwards
              20 November 1991                    Mr Goddard
                                                  Mr Miles G2
                                                  Miss Harrison E Div


Mr Pickering


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER:      LETTER FROM GEORGE HOWARTH MP



Lord Ferrers discussed with Miss Harrison and me on 13 November
the style and content of the response to the attached letter from
George Howarth MP to the Home Secretary on a number of issues
arising from the latest developments in the aftermath to the
Hillsborough tragedy.   I attach a draft for consideration, which
I hope will meet his wishes.




                                 MRS G I MOODY




GIM-717.000
Thank you for your letter of 5 November addressed to the Home

Secretary about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.



I should like to emphasize once more, as we have on earlier

occasions, how deeply we feel for all those who lost relatives

or friends in this horrific incident.    The whole Government

was, as you know, deeply saddened to hear of this dreadful

disaster at the time it happened.    It is because of our

sympathy with their appalling loss that we have always tried

to ensure that the circumstances which caused it should be as

fully and as openly exposed as possible.    I do not therefore

think it is being entirely fair to say, as you do, that "no

detailed investigation around the responsibilities of those

concerned has yet been undertaken or published" when in fact

at least four investigations of the events have been

undertaken to ensure that all the relevant issues were

properly covered.




The first of these was of course the formal inquiry by the

Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor commissioned by the Home Secretary

on the second day after the disaster.    The investigation

inaugurated by the Taylor inquiry involved some 440 officers

from the West Midlands police force, who took some 3,776

statements as well as taking advantage of video film from 3

separate sources providing, in all, some 71 hours of further

evidence.     This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted

and in my view the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor on


GIM-710.000                      1
the disaster gives a very clear picture of police activity on

the day.



The inquest into the death at Hillsborough, which took over

100 days to examine the material facts, constituted a second

inquiry into these events.



The inquest, in fact, served a separate function, in that the

law states that its purpose is to ascertain the identity of

the deceased, and how, when and where he came by his death.
The Coroners Rules provides that neither the coroner nor the

jury shall express any opinion on any other matters.   In

addition, the rules specifically prohibit the framing of an

inquest verdict in such a way as to appear to determine any

question of criminal liability on the part of a named person,

or civil liability.   Any issue of civil or criminal liability

is a matter for the civil or criminal courts and not the

coroners inquest.



If anyone is dissatisfied with any aspect of an inquest

including the verdict (as I believe some relatives are), it is

open to them, under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, to

apply with the authority of the Attorney-General, for the High

Court to quash the verdict and order a fresh inquest to be

held, either by the same coroner or by a different one from

the same administrative area.   Coroners inquests may also be

challenged by way of judicial review but anyone contemplating




GIM-710.000                     2
such a course of action would be well advised to seek legal

advice at an early stage.



In a third inquiry, which followed up their work for

Lord Justice Taylor, the West Midlands Police Force conducted

a further major investigation with a view to discovering

whether the disaster resulted from or was made worse by

criminal activity on the part of anyone.    This too was a very

large investigation, but the Director of Public Prosecutions

did not conclude that the results indicated that any one

should be made the subject of a criminal prosecution



Perhaps it would be helpful if I comment on this.     It means

that, so far as anyone can discover - and the evidence amassed

has been considerable - this terrible disaster was not the

result of any criminal activity.     In particular, neither Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield nor Superintendent Murray nor any

other person have been charged with any crime.



For anyone other than a police officer that would be the end

of the matter.     For police officers however there remains the

question of whether, without having good or sufficient cause,

they failed to fulfil all the requirements of their role as

police officers.    The fourth investigation of the events of

the day covered complaints which had been made regarding

police behaviour.     This investigation involved the taking of a

further 5,341 statements as well as the scrutiny of all the

material previously examined.     It was supervised throughout by


GIM-710.000                      3
the Police Complaints Authority, who subsequently expressed

themselves as satisfied that it had been properly and

thoroughly conducted.   The privacy of people who complain

against the police is protected by the courts and the results

of this investigation cannot therefore be published.



In order to maintain discipline within the force, the Police

Complaints Authority and the Deputy Chief Constable are

required to consider whether there are ways in which the

officer may have failed in his duty and, if so, to arrange for

a formal hearing of the charges against him.    They did so,

after receiving the report of the complaint investigation, and

the PCA decided that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and

Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges.



As you know, our sympathies are very much with all those who

were in any way caught up in this tragedy, but the way in

which your letter is written makes me think that you must be

under some misapprehension as to the scope and purpose of

police disciplinary hearings.   Such a hearing is held in

private and is concerned only with whether or not the officer

concerned may have failed to conform to police discipline.

The hearing would not therefore in any way contribute to

public knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do

more than receive and consider evidence already known as to

the propriety of Mr Duckenfield's conduct.     It is not

therefore really relevant to the question of a further




GIM-710.000                     4
investigation into police operations on the day which is, I

understand, what you are really seeking.



Another important issue in relation to police discipline which

is often ignored is that the most serious punishment which the

disciplinary tribunal would have been able to impose, had
Mr Duckenfield been found guilty, would have been dismissal or

requirement to resign.   This would be the heaviest punishment

it would be possible to award an officer for the very worst

offence he could have committed, and would be used in any case

where it was clear that the officer's behaviour was such that

it was inappropriate for him to remain a police officer.     By
retiring, Mr Duckenfield has already left the force and thus

made further action unnecessary.



It would not be proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr

Duckenfield's case since the Home Secretary is the appellate

authority in police disciplinary cases, but I can and should
say that it needs to be remembered that it is by no means

certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found Mr

Duckenfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred

against him.



If, as seems to be the case, he is a sick man it would not be

right to refuse him retirement on medical grounds in order to

hear charges which may or may not be proved and whose most

serious result could only be that he leave the service he has

already asked to leave voluntarily.     This, however, like the


GIM-710.000                     5
other matters raised in your letter, is a matter for the South

Yorkshire Police Force and its police authority and I suggest

that your concerns might best be discussed with them.




Your main concern however in writing to me was, if I have read

your letter right, the feeling that there should be some

further investigation of police operations at Hillsborough as
a whole.      In practice, successive Home Secretaries have only

commissioned to major inquiries into the conduct of a force

where they considered that the whole conduct of a force in

relation to the community it policed had been called in

question.     This is not the case with the South Yorkshire force

despite the terrible events at Hillsborough.      Furthermore, in

the light of the very wide ranging investigations which have

already been conducted and the lapse of time, I find it
difficult to see what additional useful information yet

another (fifth) investigation could produce.


I am sorry I cannot send you a more helpful reply despite the

very deep personal sympathy we feel here for all those

bereaved at this terrible event.




GIM-710.000                        6
