                                                     21st April, 1989.


Dear Mr. Jackson,

    I am writing to you about the Hillsborough tragedy on 15th April, 1989. My
name is Ian William Burke, I am 20 years old. I have only missed two matches at
Anfield all season so it's not as if I only go to matches now and again.

    We arrived in Sheffield around one o'clock. There was police all over the
place. But as we got nearer to the ground there were not as many police around.
We entered the ground at 1.20 p.m. through the Leppings lane end of the ground.

    There were seven of us. Myself, Father, Brother and    four friends. They
will also be writing to you. We all went into the right    hand side entrance on
to the terracing. At around 2.20 p.m. my friend                  and I split off
from the others and went into A Section which is just to   the left of the goal.
There was a large crowd gathering outside. We could see    that through the
openings in the turnstiles.

    The section we were now in was full but could have held a few more
supporters. I never noticed many Police around the ground or Stewards.

    At 2.55 p.m. it was full in the Section we were in but it was not much of a
crush. The crush there was gave way and you could push back.

    As kick-off approached it was still filling. They kicked-off and all off a
sudden there was a huge push, which didn't give way. It got heavier and
heavier. A young lad started to scream as he was getting crushed against the
fencing at the front.

    The Police then lined up in front of the terracing because people were
starting to spill onto the pitch. We were shouting to the Police to open the
gate which was lockied, but they ignored our pleas. By now the crush was
getting out of hand. My friend then put his arms around the young lad onto the
fencing to keep the hysterical young boy off the fencing. The force was so
great that his arms started to buckle and were bending the opposite way at the
elbow joints. He then put his foot on a wall which ran along the bottom at
around knee height. A man to my left then climbed over the fence, leaving a
gap. I was getting pushed towards the gap against the fence. So I made the
decision to climb over. I put my arms onto the fence and climbed onto my
friends leg and pulled myself up. I sat on the top of the fencing to get ray
breath back. When a W.P.C. came over and told me to get back into the crowd.
There was no chance of that; so climbed down onto the running track. A man was
caught on the spikes along the top of the fence. The spike was ripping into his
leg. He was shout for help. So I ran over and pulled him off, he thanked me
and limped away.

    My friend was still in there so I shouted him to get out which he then
proceeded to do, leaving the lad crushed on the fencing. We pointed out to a
P.C. a young fan being passed down over the top but he just said, "Never mind
about that now". I couldn't believe it. There was now people lying injured on
the pitch sane were dead.

    We were then escorted along the pitch to the left hand side entrance.
There were two lads there who then told us the Police had opened the gate to
let everyone in. One of the lads still had his ticket in his pocket. We both
then decided to leave through the back exit. We were where we told of six
deaths. I was totally gutted. At the back there was total mayhem.

    As we started looking for my relatives and friends, people were running
around crying. There were Policemen just standing around doing nothing. We
then met up with my Brother who just threw his arms around me. I asked where my
Father was. As we looked I noticed him looking and crying over dead bodies. I
shouted him and he ran over and hugged me. The he hugged     I We then found
the others and left the ground where sane of the Police were still standing
around.

    As we walked up Leppings Lane a police car with a loud speaker was driving
up and down telling us to mvoe aside to let emergency vehicles through. A man
shouted something to one of the policemen and he just gestured with two fingers.
We got into our cars and went hone.

    I would never go to another away match again if the Police treat you like
that. The policing was awful. They should take the blame for the tragedy.
Please will you do something about the sick pressmaen who gave Liverpool a bad
name and wrote those disgusting lies about us being yobs. If the press had
stopped and helped instead of taking photos there may never have been so many
deaths. I don't think I saw one drunk person. I definitely saw no-one
urinating on people or robbing dead boddies. It is just sick lies and they
should be brought forward and made to pay.

                                  Yours sincerely,

                                  J. W.Burke.
