           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



D R Fraser Esq                                                  Your reference:
Silverman Livermore Solicitors
11-13 Victoria Street                                           Our reference:
LIVERPOOL L2
                                                                Date:        ¥      November 1997




           A\/<             ,
 I have been appointed by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny o f possible fresh evidence
 relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster. I understand that you represented
 many o f the families o f those who died in the disaster, on behalf o f the Hillsborough Steering
 Committee, at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and at the Inquests. I am writing to ask for your
 assistance.

 2.      It might be helpful if I explain that the objective o f my scrutiny is to establish whether
 there is any significant new evidence about the disaster which was not previously available to
 Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities.
 If there is significant evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have affected the outcome
 of any of the proceedings. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary by the end of
 the year. I attach my terms o f reference.



 Video evidence

 3     The information which I have is that two videotape recordings from the police monitors
 were exhibited to the Taylor Inquiry, with the West Midlands police references T B 1 and TB2
 (Documents 109 & 110). The Taylor Inquiry also had as an exhibit a schedule o f their
 contents. TB1 ran from 11.59 to 15.04 and TB2 from 11.59 to 15.34.

 4.     My understanding is that all the exhibits which had been prepared for the Taylor Inquiry
 were made available to the legal representatives at the Inquests. The material required for each
 day was placed in a side room at the hearings. The rest o f it was kept at the local police station,
 where any legal representative who required access could have it.

  5.     Much o f this Taylor material was not used at the Inquests, including the two videotapes
  TB1 and TB2. The Inquest jury saw (inquest reference C278) a ‘compilation’ which the West
  Midlands police had put together for the Taylor Inquiry from footage made available by the
  police, the media, and Sheffield Wednesday. The ‘compilation included little o f TB1 or TB2
  as there was much more striking video coverage o f events from the other sources. None o f the
footage from TB2 after 15.04 was shown on it.

6.      I should be grateful if you would confirm that this accords with your recollection o f
the position. Did you view videotapes TB1 and TB2 at the time o f Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or
the Inquests?

7.     Videotape TB2 contained shots taken by camera 5 (the one mounted on the
scoreboard, near the police control box) between 14.18 and 14.23. This showed spectators in
pen 2 o f the Leppings Lane terrace, possibly following some misbehaviour. The camera
zooms and pans. The shots show very little o f the adjacent pen 3, where most o f the deaths
occurred.

8.     TB2 also contained shots from camera 5 o f the Leppings Lane pens from 15.02
showing spectators climbing over the fence from pens 3 and 4, with scenes on the pitch
adjacent to the fence. Most o f this sequence is in time-lapse and parts o f it are distorted to
some degree by whitening and ‘flaring’. The Coroner showed this to his jury on 15 March
1991, after they had asked whether there was any video evidence o f the terraces.

9.     The impression I have is that the police officers who were in the control box on the
day had an excellent view of the Leppings Lane terrace through the windows of their box and
they were looking through these rather than at their monitor screens. Was it ever your
understanding that these officers were saying that they could not see that pens 3 and 4 on the
Leppings Lane terrace were overcrowded because camera 5 was not working to its full
potential (as evidenced perhaps by the whitening and flaring on the tape)?



The aftermath

10.     During my scrutiny it has been submitted to me that the jury at the Inquest were
unaware that not all those who died did so before 3.15, and that not everybody who was crushed
and lost consciousness died.

11.    It appears to me that this must have been apparent to them from the following matters, if
none other:

            a           on 19 November 1990 (p. 16), in the course of his ruling on the 3.15 c u to ff
                        point, the Coroner said:

                        “that does not mean to say that some o f them did not in fa ct respire fo r a matter
                        o f time or even have a heartbeat [after 3.15], but the damage was done

            b           it was clear from the mini-inquests on Lee Nicol and Adam Spearitt that they
                          were alive when they reached hospital and died a considerable time later. In the
                        ' case of Philip Hammond, the summary at the mini-inquest states that he died in
                          hospital, although Dr Slater doubted this;

            c           in the course of Mr King’s submissions on day 1 of the main Inquest on the 3.15
                         cut-off he referred to two cases where recovery had taken place, notwithstanding



 G: I H IL L S B O R | M A IN \ F R A S E R . 1 4 3
                             crushing and unconsciousness - a case referred to by Dr Glyn Philips (p8), and
                             a case referred to in the statement o f Mr Saxton, a St John’s Ambulanceman
                             (who did not give oral evidence - p9);

                d           a number of witnesses at the Taylor Inquiry gave evidence o f losing
                            consciousness, passing out, being resuscitated etc. These included Bradley
                            Hennessey, Golding, and Clarke;

                e         similar evidence was given by witnesses at the Inquest, for example by Garrett
                           Crawford, Langley, (Eddie) Spearitt and Ball; and

               f          Mr Wardrope gave evidence at the mini-inquests that o f the 87 patients admitted
                          to hospital 17 were taken to the Cardiac Intensive Care Unit; and that there were
                          in addition 4 patients who were dead on arrival and 13 patients in all who died
                          It would seem apparent that 8 o f those taken to the  intensive care unit must
                          have survived.

  12.      I would be grateful for your comments on these points and particularly on whether you
  as solicitor for the families were fully aware that not all those who died did so before 3.15 p.m.
  and that not all those who were crushed and lost consciousness died.


  Privilege


  13.      I have asked that the families waive privilege and they have done so. In fact I do not
  anticipate that the information I seek is privileged and I certainly do not want to know o f any
  advice you may have given your clients.




                                                      AA   -


 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




G: | H ltL S B O R | M A IN \ F R A S E R . 1 4 3
           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



D R Fraser Esq                                                   Your reference:
Silverman Livermore Solicitors
11-13 Victoria Street                                            Our reference:
LIVERPOOL L2
                                                                 Date:              November 1997




                   Mr &

In relation to the Inquest on Victoria Hicks I have now heard evidence from a Mr Paul Taylor
that about 4 or 5 weeks after the disaster he saw Mr & Mrs Hicks and identified to them that a
girl he had helped to resuscitate was their daughter Victoria. He told them that after he tried
to give mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, a young police officer wearing gloves felt the pulse o f
both Victoria and a young lad, and told Taylor they were both dead and to leave them.

2.       No reference to Mr Taylor’s evidence was made at the mini-inquest on 24 April 1990
to this effect or at all. Mr Taylor gave evidence at the main inquest. At Day 32 p74 he dealt
with his efforts to resuscitate a girl by giving her the kiss o f life. He found she had rust in her
mouth and on her face, he then said “someone said ‘leave her she’s dead’.” At p78/9,
presumably on the instructions o f Mr & Mrs Hicks, you brought out that the girl Taylor was
talking o f was Victoria.

3.      Did you have any instructions at that stage that the person who had said this was a
police officer, that he took the pulse with gloves on, and that according to Mr Taylor, DC
McCombie had told him, when he wished to add these matters to his statement, that ‘unless
(he) knew the name and number o f the police officer (he) would be committing perjury if he
made another statement’? If you did, can you please tell me why this was not put to Mr
Taylor at the Inquest.

4.      So far as the mini-inquest is concerned, Dr Popper has told me that copies o f the draft
summaries were sent to the families or their solicitors before the inquests so that any errors
or corrections could be made. Do you know why the question o f Paul Taylor’s evidence
relating to Victoria Hicks was not brought to the Coroner’s attention. Can you also tell me
whether Mr Hicks raised any queries on the accuracy o f the summary insofar as it related to
PC Marshall’s evidence that he helped to try and resuscitate Victoria and went in the
  ambulance with him and Mr Hicks.

  5.      I would be grateful if you could give this matter your earliest attention, together with
  the questions I asked in my earlier letter.


              H      5CjuO           Ji




    ORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




G: | H IL L S B O R | M A IN \ F R A S E R . 1 6 3
