     INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH   t h e R t H o n L o rd J u s t ic e T a y lo r
     STADIUM DISASTER
                                     50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                     Ijondon SW1H 9AT
N
                                     01-2732577/3602/2370
si

c
     George Howarth Esq MP
     House of Commons
     LONDON
     SW1A OAA
                                     Date     12 May 1989



     2 )   £Lcr   K   .


     Thank you for your letter of 20 April about the
     Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. Miss Bannister
     in her letter of 26 April mentioned that your
     letter had been forwarded to me as the
     Secretary to the Inquiry.
     I have shown the correspondence to Lord Justice
     Taylor who has noted it.   yt
                                 IOVAA3


                                           R M


                                  R M WHALLEY
                             Secretary to the Inquiry




                                       *
                                From. T h e   P r iv a t e   S ecretary




                                                                             H   ome   O   ffic e

                CC     W W     UJIvcxJUbe^                                  QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                                            L O N D O N SW1H 9AT




                                                                          26 April 1989




     O s   (W   f t^         l-jcyvvc^/i^


      The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter
  of 20 April about the Hillsborough disaster. He is most grateful
^Pto you for making these suggestions, but as they are matters for
  the Inquiry which has been set up under the Chairmanship of Lord
  Justice Taylor to investigate the events of Hillsborough and to
  make recommendations it is not possible for him to comment on
  them. I have therefore forwarded your letter to Mr R Whalley,
  Secretary to the Inquiry, who can be contacted at this address.




                                                                MISS C J BANNISTER




  George Howarth, Esq, MP
  House of Commons
                                             cc   (T\r• LOKoJULeAjk



                            8 ^ 8                     C ,-

                  HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
                       L O N D O N SW1A0AA
20th April 1989

Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP.,           ;'
Secretary of State for the Home Departsmenb" -v
The Home Office                       f    u
Queen Anne*s Gate                     I
London S .W .I.                       fP3 KHE $
Dear Home Secretary,
RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER:

As I pointed out during the Statement earlier this week, I
went to Sheffield on Sunday of last week at the invitation
of the Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority, for
which I act as a parliamentary consultant on an unpaid basis.
In view of the fact that there is to be several inquiries
into different aspects of the tragic events, and also
because many of the substantial points had already been
raised by the time I had managed to catch Mr Speaker*s eye,
I decided to confine my contribution to the problems of the
emergency telephone service which you have agreed to look
into aside from the inquiries which are to take place and
for which I am grateful.
However, I did think that, arising out of my visit and
conversations with those who had been present at the
happenings here and on Saturday, I thought that the
following points might be worth looking into. If you feel
it appropriate, I am quite happy for this letter to be
forwarded to Lord Justice Taylor.
(1)    Segregation between West and North sections of the ground:
On my visit to the ground, it was pointed out to me that the
gate, which formed part of the fence segregating the west from
the north sections, had been jammed in the open position by
virtue of the fact that a porta/cabin had been placed up
against it. I cannot say that this was a contributing factor
to the problem but it could have been and should, therefore,
be investigated.
(2)    Marshalling:
Several of those who were waiting in Leppings Lane in order
to gain access to the ground, pointed out that no effort
was made by the police on duty to marshall the fans into
any orderly queueing system. It is alleged that this
apparent inaction was the most important contributing
factor. Moreover, as many colleagues pointed out, had the

                                                  (continued)..
                                                    Page two




Membership Identity Scheme been in place, this might, in the
circumstances, have added to the congestion of fans in Leppings
Lane* and consequently have caused even greater problems.
(3)    Travelling arrangements
The decision to allocate Liverpool fans to the Leppings Lane
end was, apparently, taken on the basis that it was
geographically more conveniently placed for supporters
arriving from Merseyside. However, as has been pointed out,
any benefit this might have brought in terms of logistics
was to some degree offset by the fact that the capacity at
Leppings Lane was far lower than at the other end of the
ground. Given the fact that Liverpool is a much more
heavily supported club, this must tragically have been a
contributing factor.    Furthermore, many people who had
travelled by road to Sheffield for the game have pointed out
to me that there were lengthy delays on the MI which caused
them to arrive at a later time than could have been
anticipated.    Again, this must have been a contributing
factor in terms of causing large numbers of fans to arrive late
(4)   Policing after the disaster:
Several fans have pointed out to me that for some forty to
fifty minutes there were approximately 100 police officers
at the centre of the pitch who were not utilised to assist
with bringing the injured out of the terrace. It would
appear from what they say that the response of the police
after the event was not properly co-ordinated to maximise
their effective use as potential helpers to the medical crews.
(5)    Perimeter and Barrier arrangements:
Clearly, this is a whole area which must now be fully
re-evaluated.
Finally, the Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority
have indicated that they will be available for consultation
in the Inquiry if so desired and indeed have already under­
taken to collect evidence from fans if so required.




c.c. Councillor Mr Maurice Lee
     Mr W Holland, Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority.
