 INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
        STADIUM DISASTER




                 With the Compliments of
                the Secretary to the Inquiry

           -'D
                 plOrvU.c.c, lL         fiy/ T




                                                 C\_C-0OUrsJc

J"     l» n t     r v - io J X         J)V-_tU^ <<.0jw 't-IvMl_fj

OvXj      ov^       .ej.

<S-€-vJx»a<-t      oj-     TVo. 3 S jj' cJr ^              _^n ^

  50 Q ueen Anne's Gate     °-L   c\   ryjcXvL " )    f)
  London SW1H9AT             J                   /    r?G S
  01-273 3602                                               ' 2 S //
                   PART V - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS


All-Seated Accommodation


1.   The Secretary of State should ensure that spectators are
admitted only to seated accommodation at matches played at sports
grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in
accordance with the timing set out in Recommendations 2 to 4
below.


2.   Recommendation 1 should apply with effect from the start of
the 1993/4 season at high-risk matches as defined under the UEFA
Regulations «set out in paragraph 82 above.


3.   Subject to Recommendation 2 above, Recommendation 1 above
should apply with effect from the start of the 1994/5 season to
all matches at grounds in the first and second divisions of the
Football League, the Premier Division of the Scottish Football
League, and at national stadia, subject to a reasonable extension
of time in the case of a club promoted to the second division of
the Football League or the Premier Division of the Scottish
Football League.   Standing accommodation at these grounds should
be reduced annually by 20% of the present standing capacity (such
present standing capacity to be calculated according to
Recommendation 8 below), the first 20% deduction being effective
from August 1990 so as to eliminate standing by August 1994.


4.   Subject to Recommendation 2 above, Recommendation 1 should
apply with effect from the start of the 1999/2000 season to all
matches at all other grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975.   Standing accommodation at these grounds
should be reduced annually by 10% of the present standing
capacity (such present standing capacity to be calculated
according to Recommendation 8 below), the first 10% deduction
being effective from August 1990 so as to eliminate standing by
August 1999.
Advisory Design Council


5.   The Football Association and the Football League should
establish an Advisory Design Council whose functions should be:


     (a)   to conduct and marshal research into the improvement
           and design of football stadia;


     (b)   to disseminate regularly such information and expertise
           as they acquire in this field to members of the
           Football League and, on request, to other football and
           sports clubs in England, Wales and Scotland.


National Inspectorate and Review Body


6.   (a)   If Part I of the Football Spectators Act 1989 is
implemented,   section 13 should be brought into force giving the
Football Licensing Authority the functions and powers therein
specified (power to review the discharge of functions by local
authorities).     If Part I of the Act is not implemented or is
substantially delayed, other arrangements should be made for the
discharge of the functions and powers in section 13 of the Act by
the appointment of a body to exercise them.


     (b)          In either event, the body exercising those functions
and powers in relation to association football should also be
entrusted with similar functions and powers regarding the
discharge by local authorities of their certifying and licensing
functions in relation to other sports grounds and sports
entertainments pursuant to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
and Parts III and IV of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
Sport Act 1987.


Maximum Capacities for Terraces


7.   Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which
are self-contained,    the Safety Certificate should specify the
maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or
                                  176
area.


A pen or area is to be deemed "self-contained" notwithstanding
that it has a gate or gates affording access to another pen or
area and whether such gate or gates be open or sh u t .


8.    Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in
accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide ("the Green Guide
figure") subject to the following qualifications:-


      (a)   the maximum density permitted under paragraphs 221 and
            222 of the Green Guide (when the terrace or viewing
            slope is in good condition) should be 47 not 54;


      (b)   the minimum figure specified in paragraphs 221 and 222
            (when the terrace or viewing slope materially deviates
            from the recommended guidelines, so as to constitute a
            possible hazard to individuals closely packed) should
            be 0 not 27;


      (c)   in arriving at "the Green Guide figure", proper and
            realistic allowance must be made for all factors which
            should reduce the permissible density including those
            specified in paragraphs 220 to 224 inclusive of the
            Green Guide.


9.    Arrangements should be made:-


      (a)to limit the number of spectators entering each         self-
            contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure
            assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
            either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing
            arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and


      (b)   to close off further access to such pen or area when
            its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


10.   The   maximum notional rate at which spectators can pass
                                  177
through a turnstile should be 660 persons per hour, not 750 per
hour as stated in paragraph 47 of the Green Guide.     The maximum
rate for any particular turnstile must take full account of all
circumstances including those given as examples in paragraph 47.



Fillinq and Monitoring Terraces


11.   There should be a written statement of intent, agreed
between the club and the police, setting out their respective
functions as to crowd safety and control and in particular as to
the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and
the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid
overcrowding.    Any variation of the document in respect of an
individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.


12.   (a)   At each match, there should be on the perimeter track,
for each self-contained pen or other standing area (subject to
(b)   below), a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a
police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty
is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible
overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
occupied by spectators.    Whoever is so appointed should be in
addition to any other stfeward or police presence.    He should have
ready access to a police officer who can authorise access through
gates to the pitch under Recommendation 20 below.


      (b)        This Recommendation need not be applied to any self-
contained pen or other standing area where the spectators
present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match
do not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity,
or 2,000, whichever is the lower.


Gangways


13.   Gangways should be kept clear,   in accordance with paragraphs
97 to 99 of the Green Guide.   Gangways should be painted in a
conspicuous colour whether they are sunk or not.     The Safety
                                178
Certificate should require that no standing is allowed in
gangways and that they be painted.


Fences and Gates


14.    All spikes or similar constructions on perimeter or radial
fences, and any sections overhanging or returning inwards towards
spectators,   should be removed.


15.    Perimeter fencing should be no higher than 2.2 metres,
measured from the top of the fence to the lowest point at which
spectators may stand, and including any wall or other foundations
forming part of the perimeter boundary.


16.    All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to
the standing areas and especially those with duties under
Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed and trained with
regard to the recognition of crowd densities,    to the recognition
of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics.     Training should
include demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to
enable stewards and officers to recognise different crowd
densities.


^^ •   There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or
other self-contained area sufficient gates of a minimum width of
1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to be evacuated onto the
pitch in the time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of that
pen or area.


18.    All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other
self~contained areas should be painted in a different colour from
the rest of the fence and marked "Emergency Exit".


19.    Where there is a perimeter fence in front of a pen or
enclosure, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open
during the period when spectators are in the pen or enclosure,
wherever those in command feel that this can safely be done.
Whether they be fully open, partially open or closed, they should
                                   1 79
be kept unlocked throughout the. period when the pen or enclosure
is occupied.


20.    Each gate in a perimeter fence affording access to the pitch
from a pen or enclosure should be manned by a steward or by a
police officer when the pen or enclosure is occupied.     Whether
such manning should be by a police officer or by a steward should
be decided by the Police Commander.     In either event, the Police
Commander should appoint one or more police officers with power
to authorise access through gates to the pitch immediately in the
event of an emergency.


21 .   Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided
by the club at each ground where there are perimeter fences to
permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers
of spectators if necessary.     Agreement should be reached as to
whether the equipment should be used by police,    the fire brigade
or stewards.     Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so.
Whether to use it should be a decision of     a nominated senior
police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers


22.    All crush barriers should be visually inspected each year
for signs of corrosion.     Any barrier found to be affected by a
significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.


23.    The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should
be reviewed immediately (if this has not already been done
following the Interim Report) to ensure that it complies with the
criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.     If it does
not, the assessment of the maximum capacity figure for that pen
or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 8 above,
should reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates


24.    The Secretary of State should exercise his powers under
                                  180
either section 6(2) or section 15(A) of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 so as to make mandatory in Safety Certificates
those conditions specified in the original section 2(2) of the
1975 Act.   So far as the original section 2(2 )(b) is concerned
"shall" should be substituted for "may".


25.   In assessing these mandatory requirements in the Certificate
for a particular ground,    the local authority should follow the
Green Guide criteria.    Once that is done, the resultant figures
and terms for that ground should be specified in the Safety
Certificate and no variation from them should be permitted other
than by formal revision.


26.   Where a local authority incorporates any provision of the
Green Guide into the Safety Certificate, other than one within
the scope of Recommendation 25 above, it should make clear
whether that provision is to be complied with absolutely or with
discretionary flexibility.


27.   There should be an immediate review of each Safety
Certificate (if this has not already been done following the
Interim Report) by the responsible local authority, which should
consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued,
the police, the fire service,- the ambulance service and the
building authority.     Such a review should include an inspection
of the stadium.   Its object should be to ensure that the
operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to
add or substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter
of urgency following the findings and Recommendations in this
Repo rt .


28.   Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports
ground designated under the 1975 Act for which no Safety
Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to
remedy the situation.


29.   Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local
authority at least once annually and each Certificate should
require to be renewed annually.


30.   Each local authority should review its arrangements for
issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing
Safety Certificates (if this has not already been done following
the Interim Repo rt ).        Such review should require that there
exists or is provided an accountable administrative structure
whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and
decisions are properly taken in accordance with the local
authority's rules.


31.   To assist the local authority in exercising its functions,
it should set up an Advisory Group (if this has not already been
done) consisting of appropriate members of its own staff,
representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services
and of the building authority.         The Advisory Group should consult
representatives of the club and of a recognised supporters'
organisation on a regular basis.            The Advisory Group's terms of
reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd
safety and should require regular visits to the ground and
attendance at m a t ch es .    The Advisory Group should have a chairman
from the local authority, and an effective procedure.            Its
resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to
produce regular written reports for consideration by the local
authority.


Duties of Each Football r.lnh


32.   Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of
flow measured (if this has not already been done following the
Interim Report).     Thereafter, regular inspections should be made
to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting
spectators at the rate anticipated.


33.   The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and
the turnstiles serving it should be such as to ensure that all
the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can
                                      182
pass through the turnstiles within one hour.     If that cannot be
done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
accordingly.    Since this Recommendation includes terms and
conditions within the scope of the original section 2(2)(c)(i) of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 it should be given effect
in the Safety Certificate (see Recommendation 24 above).


34.    Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of
the area served by them is about to be reached and arrangements
should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with
turnstile operators for this purpose.


35.    Closed circuit television should be so installed as to
enable crowd densities outside the ground, within concourse areas
and in pens and other standing areas,    to be monitored before,
throughout and at the end of a match.


3'6.   All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the
ground should be comprehensively reviewed (if this has not
already been done following the Interim Report).       It should,    in
relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye­
catching, simple and clear and should be designed to ensure the
rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing areas.
Any redundant signs should be removed.


37.    Information on tickets should be unambiguous,    simple and
clear and should correlate absolutely with the information
provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the
ground.    Retained ticket stubs should contain information
necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.


38.    Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in
position by a particular time should be reviewed (if this has not
already been done following the Interim Report) by clubs in
conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with
the planned arrangements for admitting spectators to the ground.


39.    Clubs should consider maintaining a record on computer of
ticket sales before the day of the match, for season tickets and
tickets for all-ticket matches for seated areas, containing the
names and addresses of those purchasing tickets.


40.   All-ticket matches should be confined to those at which a
capacity or near capacity crowd is expected.     When a match has
been designated all-ticket, clubs should not sell tickets at the
match and should take steps to advise the spectators of both
clubs accordingly.


41.   Each club should consult with a recognised supporters'     club
as to the provision of pre-match entertainment aimed at
attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


42.   Clubs should recruit and retain sufficient competent
stewards.    They should be fit, active and robust, and preferably
between the ages of 18 and 55.    Clubs should ensure that stewards
are fully trained, aware of their duties under Annex B of the
Green Guide and under the statement of intent (see Recommendation
11) and able to perform them.


43.   The club should provide a police control room which is:-


      (a)   well placed, so as to command a good view of the    whole
            pitch and of the spectator area surrounding it;


      (b)   of sufficient size for the commander, his deputy    and
            enough officers to operate the radios,   telephones and
            CCTV screens.   There should be space for others who may
            need from time to time to visit the room eg other
            senior officers, club management or a member of the
            emergency services;


      (c)   well equipped with CCTV, radio and telephone facilities
            and, where necessary, sound-proofed against excessive
            crowd noise.


It should be the duty of the club to provide a room and equipment
                                  184
to the satisfaction of the chief officer nominated under
Recommendation 44 below.


Police Planning


44.   The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there
is one designated sports ground or more should nominate a chief
officer to liaise with the management of each football club and
local authority concerned in respect of the safety and control of
crowds.


45.   The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports
ground, and the pre—match briefing of all officers on duty there,
should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any
overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking appropriate steps
to remedy it.


46.   The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports
ground should enable the police to cope with any foreseeable
pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their
departure.   It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable
rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or
outside the ground.


47.   Police planning should provide that ticketless fans should
not be allowed to enter a designated sports ground except in an
emergency.


48.   Arrest procedures inside and outside designated sports
grounds should be reviewed so as to keep to the minimum the
period during which an arresting officer is away from his post.


49.   The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion
of the officer in command at the ground.      Crowd safety should be
the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.


50.   Consideration in consultation with the club should be given,
especially for high-risk matches,     to the possibility of an early
kick-off or a Sunday fixture.

                                185
51.   There should be available in the police control room the
results of all closed circuit television monitoring outside and
inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical
counting of numbers at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any
area of the ground.    Officers in the control room should be
skilled in the interpretation and use of these data.


52.   Consideration should be given to the provision of a specific
training course for senior officers presently acting as Police
Commanders and those in line to do s o .    Such a course should
include training in the basic strategy of policing football
matches.


53.   Police authorities should review the charges they make to
clubs for the costs of policing inside grounds so as to ensure
that realistic charges are made.   The Home Office should take
steps to ensure consistency of practice, subject to local
discretion and the need to have regard to local circumstances.


Communications


54.   There should be sufficient operators in the police control
room to enable all radio transmissions to be received, evaluated
and answered.    The radio system should be such as to give
operators in the control room priority over, and the capacity to
override, others using the same channel.     Additional channels
should be used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the
airwaves.


55.   There should always be a command channel reserved solely for
the Police Commander to communicate with his senior officers
round the groun d.


56.   To complement radio communications,    there should be a
completely separate system of land lines with telephone links
between the control room and key points at the ground.
57.   Within the control room, there should be a public address
system to communicate with individual areas outside and inside
the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground.
Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to
catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in
the ground.    This arrangement should be prominently advertised on
every programme sold for every match.


58.   Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising
boards to address the crowd.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services


59.   The police,   fire and ambulance services should maintain
through senior nominated officers regular liaison concerning
crowd safety at each designated sports ground.


60.   Before each match at a designated sports ground the police
should ensure that the fire service and ambulance service are
given full details about the event, including its venue, its
timing,   the number of spectators expected, their likely routes of
entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
concerning the control or movement of the crowd.     Such details
should be readily available in the control rooms of each of the
emergency services.


61.   Lines of communication, whether by telephone or by radio,
from the police control room to the local headquarters of all
emergency services should be maintained at all times so that
emergency calls can be made instantly.


62.   Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated sports
ground of emergency vehicles from all three services should be
reviewed.     They should include routes of access, rendezvous
points, and accessibility within the ground itself.


63.   Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should
be briefed as to the contingency plans for the     arrival of
emergency services and should be informed when such services are
called as to where and why they are required.


First Aid. Medical Facilities and Ambulances


64.   There should    be at each sports ground at each       match at least
one trained first     aider per 1,000 spectators.      The   club should
have the responsibility for securing such attendance.


65.   There should    be at each designated sports ground one or more
first aid rooms.      The number of such rooms and the       equipment to
be maintained within them should be specified by the local
authority after taking professional medical advice and should be
made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.


66.   (a)   At every match where the        number of spectators   is
expected    to exceed 2,000, the club should employ a medical
practitioner to be present and available to deal with any medical
exigency at the ground.       He should be trained and competent in
advanced    first aid.    He should be present at the ground       at least
an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour
a fter the end of the m a t c h .   His whereabouts should be known to
those in the police control room and he should be immediately
contactable.


      (b)         At any match where the number of spectators is not
expected to exceed 2,000, the club should make arrangements to
enable a medical practitioner to be summoned immediately to deal
with any medical exigency at the ground.           He should be trained
and competent in advanced first aid.          The arrangements made
should be known to those in the police control room.


67.   At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by
the appropriate ambulance authority should be in attendance at
all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.


68.   The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches
where larger crowds are expected should be specified by the local
                                      188
authority after consultation with the ambulance service and
should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.


69.   A "major incident equipment vehicle", designed and equipped
to deal with up to 50 casualties, should be deployed in addition
to other ambulance attendance at a match where a crowd in excess
of 25,000 is expected.


Offences and Penalties


70.   Consideration should be given to creating an offence of
selling tickets for and on the day of a football match without
authority from the home club to do so.


71.   Each of the following activities at a designated sports
ground should be made a specific offence


^     i.     throwing a missile;


      ii.    chanting obscene or racialist abuse;


      iii. going on the pitch without reasonable excuse.


72.   Consideration should be given to extending the courts'
powers      to make attendance centre orders for football related
offences on occasions of designated football matches.       The
provision should be capable of imposition on an offender aged 21
or over and subject to a maximum of 72 hours in the case of an
offender aged 17 or over.


73.   Consideration should be given to the use of electronic
monitoring (tagging) in the sentencing of offenders convicted of
football related offences.


Green Guide


74.   As a matter of urgency,      the Home Office should set up a body
to revise the Green Guide in accordance with this Report,         these
                                     189
Recommendations and the Report of the Technical Working Party
(Appendix 3)-


75.   In any revision of the Green Guide, the values to be
achieved by way of percentage recovery after the required loading
tests on crush barriers should be specified.   Acceptable values
for various materials should be specified.


76.   When the Green Guide is revised, the need to inspect crush
barriers for possible corrosion should be specifically mentioned
and emphasised.
