                                                                                                   zh \
                                                                        TC   TEAM         CONSUL




The Right Hon.
Mrs. Margaret Thatcher
Prime Minister                                                          blumusalpsthasse             se
                                                                                 C H - 8 0 0 6 ZURI CH
10, Downing Street                                                        t e l e f'■ON
                                                                                    on Om
                                                                                       o  f/ 3e6s3 ?o
                                                                                                   70 50
                                                                                FAX 01 / 3 63 8 8 63
                                                                                                      so




London SW1

England




Zurich, May 5, 1989
H R /be




Dear Madam

The events at Sheffield’s Hillsborough stadium have been a shock not only to football fans but
to millions in the United Kingdom and abroad.
Two questions trouble most of us: ’Why did it happen?’ and ’Could it have been prevented?’
These questions lead to a discomforting thought ’Will it happen again?’.
According to reports in English and European newspapers, doubts have risen as to whether the
local police forces in Sheffield have done their job properly. Were the optimal measures taken,
were the reactions adequate? Were the police and other security forces well organized and were
they coordinated? Questions which call for answers.
No doubt you and the ones responsible for public safety and order are looking for answers to
these questions. We think that we can be of assistance to you.


Why do we think so and who are we?
We are a firm which has years of experience in the management of safety. A fter the tragic
events at the Heysel stadium in 1985 we have been entrusted by the Belgian government with
an investigation into the reasons for this catastrophe. We have subsequently he&n-gwfM^-the task
to reorganize the Belgian police force.
In Switzerland we have been asked to analyze, audit and reorganize a number of police corps in
various Swiss cantons. We are at present working in Bern, Neuchatel, Zug and Aargau.
We have done similar work in Germany, and we have recently started a project with the
Ministry of the Interior in Vienna, Austria.
                                                                        TC   TEAM
                                                                                            7C >
                                                                                    C O N S U L T AG




Our firm is headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland. We have additional offices in Geneva,
Brussels, The Hague and Vienna.
We would be happy and proud if we could be of assistance to you or to any local authority you
wish to designate. We think that due to our experience and due to the fact that we are a neutral
party, our advice could be of value to you.




  >UI   O   i. l4J.ki.Ll. t A A i y




TC TEAM CONSULT AG




Dr. Bernhard Prestel                        Dr. Rene Himmel



PS: If you wish to check our track-record, we suggest as references:
Mr. W. Martens, Belgian Prime Minister
Dr. K. Furgler, former president of the Swiss federal government, Minister of Police and
Justice
Dr. Loeschnak, Minister of the Interior, Austria
1   ^
