                     & >/




           HOME OFFICE
           Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                        Direct line 01-273
                                       Switchboard 01-273 3000
    j 30

    P Lee Esq                                             Your reference
    Department of Environment
    (SARD)                                                Ourreference     FEP/89 35 48   -


    Marsham Street
                                                          Date             29 June 1989




*   Dear Peter

    FOOTBALL SPECTATOR'S BILL:       SAFETY

    I enclose, as requested, a contribution for your 'H' Committee
    letter on the operation of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975,
    Although it is factual it is also longer than I had planned.   I
    therefore leave the editorial discretion to you. You may, for
    example, feel that the first paragraph is unnecessary.  You will
    appreciate that in the time available I have not been able to
    clear the text with our legal advisers.

                                                     Yours sincerely


                                                                                    )
                                                     David Mould
DRAFT



[The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) was

originally introduced to implement the main recommendations of

the Wheatley Inquiry set up after the Ibrox Park accident in

1971.   The 1975 Act was amended, with effect from 1 January 1988,

by Part II and and supplemented,    with effect from 1 January 1989,

by Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act

1987 which resulted from the government's proposals on sports

ground safety published in June 1986 in response to the

Popplewell Inquiry.]



The main instrument of control under [the Safety of Sports

Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act)] is the general safety

certificate which the relevant local authority is required to

issue in respect of a sports ground designated by the Secretary

of State.    The 1975 Act empowers the Secretary of State to

designate any sports ground which in his opinion has

accommodation for over 10,000 spectators.     Provision is also made

for the Secretary of State to vary, by Order, this threshold

figure;     for him to make regulations for securing safety at

sports grounds? for him to modify the application of the Act's

provisions to specific classes of sports ground;     and for him to

require obligatory terms and conditions to be contained in safety

certificates for a particular class, or classes, of sports

ground.     To date no such order has been made but safety

certificates must contain terms and conditions which the local

authority consider necessary or expedient in order to secure

reasonable safety at the ground.     In doing this the local
authority are required to consult the police and, in London and

metropolitan districts, the fire authority;    elsewhere, the

building authority.   All of these, together with the safety

certificate holder, have rights of appeal to the courts in

relation to terms and conditions in a safety certificate.

Local authorities are given the duty under the 1975 Act to

enforce its provisions and for that purpose arrange for the

inspection of designated sports grounds at least once a year.

The 1975 Act also empowers a local authority to issue notice

prohibiting or restricting the admission of spectators to any

sports ground, or any part of a sportsground, where there is

judged to be a serious risk to their safety.



Part III of the 1987 Act applies to sports grounds which are not

designated under the 1975 Act and where there are covered stands

for spectators.   It provides for a similar system of safety

certification at such sportsgrounds for stands which are

determined by the local authority to be able to accommodate at

least 500 spectators under cover.




j 31
