                                                                Date as Postmark




D ear Home Secretary,

I sincerely hope that you take the time to read and digest the contents o f this letter, as I
do not write it easily. My brother, Andrew Sefton, was killed at the Hillsborough
football disaster in 1989 and I am proud to say that I am a member o f the Hillsborough
Family Support Group and continue to fully participate in our group’s campaign.

On a personal level however, I have reached a point where I feel the need not only to
direct a series o f observations and questions tow ards you, but furthermore, demand
that discussion around these areas takes place, by those that are elected and paid to
serve us.

I will not dwell on the reservations that I have with regards to your choice o f judge in
the present unprecedented scrutiny, for Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s crassness,
insensitivity, lack o f personal contact with real people, his lack o f understanding about
the case, and the inevitable questions that they raise both about his capacity to conduct
the scrutiny, and the reasons for your choice o f him, are self-evident to the nation as a
whole - rather I will simply direct my concerns, thoughts and questions to you Mr.
Straw, for you are the new Home Secretary with all the power, responsibility, high
profile and accountability that that position entails.

M y concerns fall into two categories. The first are specific to Hillsborough and its
victims and the second are areas o f concern highlighted by the disaster, but with wider
relevance to every member o f the public. Furthermore I would urge you to remember
that your response to this letter, these issues and most notably Lord Justice Stuart
Smith’s recommendations will send not only a message to the country about your
willingness to deal effectively with what I believe to be criminal acts specific to
Hillsborough, but also with the laws, procedures and attitudes currently in operation
that allowed these acts to remain unchecked, and in some cases, seemingly rewarded.

Firstly then, having met personally with Lord Justice Stuart Smith and heard and
experienced his interpretation o f the terms o f reference for the scrutiny - 1 feel
confident in saying that the terms o f reference are on the one hand so tight as to be
practically unworkable, demanding o f us as they do, the production o f new evidence
that has never been available to the police and/or the coroner, and yet completely
ignoring the fact that after 8 V2 years there is still evidence that no one outside these
tw o agencies has ever been given access to. Yet ironically, on the other hand, the
term s o f reference and Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s interpretation o f them are, I feel
exceedingly vague, claiming to want ‘to be advised o f anything that is deemed to be in
       V or            ^iQAr("c>w>X
                      c Q-

    I ^S u   l   c   ^ W   xlJ c   <$>^0^ :

! o>A. ° \                         VW W c
      VjejC^to^ec V i '^ s-
      ^UU^JtLOUjC      V > < 2-    \fOXSr^A
|                                  w

    oJr \b- -e^Avec!r
    by£, "~                            v^ -
the public interest’, and yet when personally questioned on his understanding and
interpretations o f this, Lord Justice Stuart Smith was unable to give my family a
response, and indeed I would go so far as assuming based on my experience o f the man
that in his final recommendation, his interpretation o f the term “in the public interest”,
will bear no resemblance to my families informed interpretation o f the term!
Furthermore, it is becoming increasingly obvious that these terms o f reference
completely side-step the real complaints and concerns - they cannot effectively
highlight the issues for which I have campaigned, and I would bet that they are not
what the public believe the Hillsborough victims are getting, for they will neither bring
out the truth about the events before, during and after the disaster, or fully recognise
the urgent need for a full, honest, credible, public enquiry; for it would appear that the
lies, the corruption, the falsification o f evidence, the collusion, the convenient
promotions and retirements, the sickening police compensations, the failures o f the
inquest system and the High Court, the fact that the police have never formally
accepted any responsibility for their actions and the reality that most o f the victims died
after 3.15 p.m. and yet none o f the evidence after this time has ever been openly dealt
with, just happens to fall outside the terms o f reference for this scrutiny, - so what
exactly is it that is being scrutinised?

Having brought to your attention my concerns, specifically regarding the scrutiny, I
will now turn my attention to the questions that I feel are highlighted by Hillsborough -
concerns that need attention, discussion and reform, “in the public interest”.

1.     Why, when in cases like ours, families are deliberately prevented from having
       access to vital evidence, evidence is falsified, hidden or destroyed. As
       vulnerable lay people we are badly advised, misled and pathetically represented,
       bullied, ill informed and legally ground down, and the sheer time scale o f this
       deception means that we are prevented from gaining access to the European
       Judicial system - is there no cause for redress? If you do not examine these
       fundamental injustices, then the message you will be sending is that the Police,
       and the judicial system exist as entities beyond examination, reproach or
       change, think carefully M r Straw, if this is indeed the message o f the New
       Labour and New Britain then having lived with it as a reality for the last 8 V2
       years, I am sure I can continue to do so, but having voted for massive change -
       can the public?

2.     Why, in a democratic system as sophisticated as ours, are the police still
       allowed to investigate themselves? The internal networks are too incestuous
       and binding to ever allow proper scrutiny - we all know this, it is insulting and
       outrageous, so when will it be addressed?

3.     Why, when in cases where the police have some alleged level o f involvement in
       a crime or in an act o f criminal negligence, are they allowed to monopolise and
       control the crime scene and indeed the access, quality and quantity o f the
       evidence given to the victims who ironically need to build any case against the
       police?
Why are the police officers who have been negligent, incompetent or, as we
believe in our case, criminal and corrupt, allowed to walk away with their
professional and personal lives unscathed? I believe Hillsborough was the
inevitable culmination o f all the powers and attitude bestowed upon our police
force by the Thatcher government, their actions leading up to Hillsborough,
during the disaster and since, all clearly show that they believe themselves to be
invincible, beyond prosecution and even beyond criticism. For 854 years they
have publicly and privately laughed at my family and now they are laughing at
you and your office, - so what as Home Secretary are you going to do about it?

Why do we have a coroners system in this country that allows coroners to
select biased evidence, bury relevant statements, fail to disclose interests, insult,
bully and blame victims, mislead juries and still remain both employed and
respected. As a nation we are becoming increasingly aware o f the inadequacies
o f the coroners system, so how much longer are we going to have to live with
them before you act on our behalf?

Why do we have a state o f affairs in Britain that means that the more negligent,
inept and even criminal, individuals are in a situation the better it is for those
individuals and organisations involved - for the wider the responsibility net can
be spread the less chance there is o f internal disciplinary charges being brought,
never mind criminal prosecution. Thus it appears that the message from the
legal system in this country to all organisations and their employees is one o f
encouragement to negate their humanity and professionalism and if the worst
happens, the advice is keep denying responsibility and continually blame other
agencies and individuals, do this for long enough and the victims will simply go
away. Well, M r Straw, my family and I will not go away - 1 believe that just
because the police, Sheffield City Council, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
the engineers who installed the barriers and the Football Association are
allowed to blame each other for their contribution to the disaster and it’s
aftermath and walk away unscathed and with an air o f smug untouchability
does not mean that I am unable to point the finger at the people that I feel to be
responsible - surely a judicial system as highly developed as ours can adapt to
counteract this appalling loophole, or is the foundation o f a criminal charge o f
‘neglect o f duty’ totally beyond us?

Finally, I would draw your attention to the issue o f ‘Sleaze’; a huge impetus in
your recent general election success. The nation voted resoundingly in your
favour because they were sick o f the deception, corruption and the rewards
that apparently went with this - please remember that the Hillsborough
campaign presently has a large measure o f public support, simply because
people can smell the sleaze around Hillsborough, the lies and the injustice stink
and the majority o f people have realised that people like myself continue
against unbelievable hurdles specifically because no-one has ever been held
responsible for their actions, but more broadly because the inept procedures
and systems that failed our family 814 ago are still in place ready to fail the next
        set o f ‘disaster’ victims. Be assured M r Straw, until the issues that I have
        outlined in this letter are addressed, regardless o f the findings o f Lord Justice
        Stuart Smith’s scrutiny and regardless o f your response to these findings my
        family and I will continue to fight for our right to justice and police
        accountability and full public disclosure on this m atter by whatever means
        remain possible.

Yours sincerely




Julie Fallon

cc     Lord Justice Stuart Smith
       Prime Minister
       M P’s for the Liverpool Wards
       David Mellor
       The M inister for Sport
       The Editor o f The Guardian
       The Editor o f The Times
       The Editor o f The Daily M irror
       The Editor o f The Independent
       The Editor o f The Liverpool Echo
