                                                              113
                                                           1 5 AUG 1983


                                                 C.C.
                                                    J$r - Go

               From-. T he P rivate S ecretary


                                                  H om e O ffice
                                                 QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                 LONDON SWIH 9AT
                                                   14 August 1989




     Thank you for your letter of 7 August to the Home
Secretary about the misbehaviour of fans at sporting
events.

     The Home Secretary is absent from the o'ffice on
holiday at present, but I have passed on your suggestion
to the officials in this Department responsible for
safety at sports grounds.                   »




                                        MISS C J BANNISTER

Hal Shaper, Esq.
41a Onslow Square
LONDON SW7 3LR
                                      HAL SH A P E R

                      Lord o f th e M anor o f S to k e B ruerne



                                                              7th August 1989.


  The Home Secretary,
                                                                   cc Iftr- B o M r w v
  The Right Honourable Douglas Hurd,                                    fOr. GodcSkxjnS
  The Houses of Parliament,
  WESTMINSTER,
' LONDON.




   ear Mr. Hurd,


  I understand you have issued a circular to police, football clubs and local
  authorities, etc., ordering certain specific measures which are hoped will
  prevent a repeat of the Hillsborough tragedy. Might I add a suggestion which
  you might yet consider.

 I am in the United States frequently on music business. As sport is considered
 a business to the extent that no disruptions to the flow of spectator
 enjoyment, the protection of both the audience and the players, is tolerated.
 The disciplines which disappeared at nearly all levels of our society and
 which are the root of lawlessness and hooliganism would be minimised, if the
 authorities in every sporting arena made it entirely clear that any spectator,
 leaping on to the track, invading the pitch, in any way causing a disturbance
 would be ejected from the ground.

  In the case of fans misbehaving on terraces or even at football matches,
  the Authority should rest with the Club to remove fans from the ground.

 The invasion of pitches and the possible danger to spectators and players
 in almost every arena of sport has spread to a great extent and should be
 looked at. The earlier, young people coming to sporting events, learn that
 they are required to behave well or miss the match, as it were, the sooner we
 start to re-establish the codes of behaviour when you and I were younger.

 Hope this letter has been helpful. I have read the action you are taking
 which is most welcome and just as an aside, mention that I am an acquaintance
 of your daughter in law, Kim.

 With e; ry good wish,

 Yours sincerely,




 HAL SHAPER.




               41 a O n s lo w S q u a re L o n d o n S W 7 B L R 01 - 5 8 4 2 4 2 8
