MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512

Date:       12 January 1998

To:       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




The attached monster package from Trevor Hicks arrived on Thursday. It is his response to
your letters of 21 November and (so far as it affects him personally) 9 December. He also
pursues various points which come out of the transcript of your meeting with him and Mrs
Hicks in Liverpool and discusses various other questions, notably ones to do with the body
files for Sarah and Victoria.

2.       This material is not as dreadful as it looks (or at least as it first looked to me!). It is
coherent and systematically put together. All the same I thought some commentary might be
helpful.

3.        Page 2 of Mr Hicks’ letter sets out the contents. He covers 12 topics.


Topic t - transcript

4.     I don't think he adds anything we don’t already know (apart from a couple of typos
which I have corrected on the ‘official’ copy kept in my room).


Topic 2 - response to your letter of 21 November

5.      I attach your letter. Mr Hicks goes through it paragraph by paragraph. Paragraph 2
of your letter says that Paul Taylor did not mention the gloved policeman at the Inquest - Mr
Hicks thinks this is because Taylor was stressed out and had been threatened by McCombie.
I don’t think this affects the conclusions about the Taylor/McCombie episode which you have
come to in your report.

6.     Paragraph 3 of your letter asked Mr Hicks why he didn’t tell Mr Fraser about the
gloved policeman so he could pursue it at the Inquest. I don't think he answers this.

7.     He has more to say about PC Marshall (4 and 5 of your letter) later on. You asked
why he didn’t raise his doubts about Marshall’s role with the Coroner - his answer is that he
was stressed at the time and beginning to distrust his own memory.


G :\HILLS BO R\S -S \048.DO C
Topic 3 - body files

Victoria

8.       Mr Hicks says that pages 117-126 of the copy of the body file he has got are missing
and puts a sinister construction on that. These pages contain part of a statement by Nurse
                who helped with efforts to resuscitate Victoria in the Northern General
Hospital, and statements by Dr Doore, who afterwards certified Victoria as dead (and says
that in her view she was dead on arrival at the hospital). Not clear why Mr Hicks hasn’t got
these pages - 1 can’t see anything sinister about them although Mr Hicks does try to make
something of                   evidence, which he has got from another source (see para 10).

9.     He queries the exclusion from the file of statements by PC’s Steven Taylor and
Andrew Shiel who dealt with Victoria in the hospital mortuaryj                  a supporter at the
ground, and 1                the hospital mortuary attendant. I think it is clear why these
statements are not on the body file - they amplify the story in limited ways but do not help
with the inquest questions of who, when, where and why.        He also casts doubt on what PC
Marshall says, but it is not clear what follows if one accepts Mr Hicks’s criticisms of
Marshall’s evidence. Marshall evidently was involved to some degree with both Victoria
and Sarah even if he exaggerated what he had done to help.

10.    Mr Hicks says he is concerned that he and his wife did not know that Victoria had
received treatment at the hospital. He says that the West Midlands police assigned to the
case should have told him and had some hidden motive for not doing so. I am not quite clear
what that would be, but it may have something to do with his beliefs about skulduggery
behind the 3.15 cut-off.

11.     Of course Mr and Mrs Hicks should have known about Victoria’s treatment, but I
don't see much in the conspiracy angle. Mr Hicks says that                    Statement
(among others) would have shown the hospital treatment which Victoria got and that
        made this statement ‘to’ WPS Julie Appleton, who was his liaison officer, so why
didn’t she tell him? However the copy of                     statement on Victoria’s body file
is not witnessed by Julie Appleton, but in fact witnessed by a


Sarah

12.     The main issue Mr Hicks picks up here is that the body file has Sarah being carried
out of pen 3 by Paul McCaffrey (spectator), or PC Marshall, or both, while Mr Hicks has
also seen a statement by another fan, Tony Barnbrook, which says that Sarah was passed to
him from pen 4. Mr Bambrook’s statement is not on the body file. But it looks like a
misidentification. The reference to Sarah Hicks has been added in manuscript over another
name which has been inked out.

13.      Mr Hicks thinks that Paul McCaffrey was leaned on by the police to minimise his
role in dealing with Sarah Hicks and maximise theirs. It would be impossible to say now
what the truth of that might be. But Mr McCaffrey’s statement is on the body file.

14.     The statements from the off-duty Lincolnshire police, Mr Greaves and Mr Maddox,

G:\HilLSBQR\S~S\048.DOC
which Mr Hicks mentions are worth reading as he says (and I have read them before).       But
they don’t add anything new.


Topic 4 - possible identification of Sarah Hicks on the mortuary video, receiving
treatment


15.     Mr Hicks has seen a copy of the mortuary video (he got it from Yorkshire TV, to
whom ex-Chief Constable Peter Wright gave a copy along with a copy of all the other police
videos - a state of affairs which casts a curious light on South Yorkshire Police’s stance on
not letting relatives see it). He has seen somebody whom he believes to be Sarah being
resuscitated. The time at which this is happening is hard to pinpoint, but it is somewhere
between 1550-1620 given that doctors can be seen on the video examining people to confirm
their death.

16.    The person is surrounded by attendants (mainly firemen). You can’t see their face or
much else above the waist. But Mr Hicks says ‘the hips and general form appear female’,
which is probably right. The person is lying under no. 6 in the part of the gym set aside for
recovery. They are not with the laid-out bodies. They are wearing a white top (probably),
dark shoes cut below the heel, and light blue jeans with sharp turnups of 1 to 2 inches.

17.     If this is Sarah Hicks it does as Mr Hicks says make a nonsense of the body file
evidence. The person’s top and shoes match those pictured in the Sarah Hicks file. It is a
matter of guesswork, but I would say the trousers do not match. The trousers shown in the
body file are also jeans, but darker in colour and do not seem to have had regular turnups -
their bottoms are partly turned over but not sharply creased and there is no sign of a sharp
crease.

18.     I have asked South Yorkshire Police if they have any idea who this person is. My
guess is that it is a survivor. Dr Flenley, GP and Liverpool fan at the match, says in his
statement (p.97 body file) ‘I looked at Sarah’s eyes and the pupils were fixed and dilated, that
is a sign of brain death’ (around 3.15).


Topic 5 - video evidence

19.    There is nothing here we haven’t picked up for ourselves. On the videotape Mr Hicks
has sent us are scenes from camera 2 (the colour one) as preserved on TB1. The camera is
looking at the Leppings Lane terraces. He says this shows that Bichard’s evidence was
wrong. It does not show that - you have I think dealt with all the points Mr Hicks makes in
your report.


Topic 6 - police discipline and conduct

20.    Mr Hicks makes points with which we are familiar about Mr Wells, Deputy Chief
Constable Hayes, CS Duckenfield and others. The thrust is that South Yorkshire were
reluctant to discipline anybody and had to be dragooned into doing so, and that Wells was

G :y if LLSBOR\S~S\048.DOC
  dishonest in the way in he let Duckenfield resign, thereby scuppering the case against both
  him and Murray.

  21.     I don’t recall reading about DCC Hayes’s press conference before (when he said in
  June 1989 that ‘no further action’ was needed against Duckenfield). But that aside there are
  no new facts here. I don’t think this affects what you say about police discipline in your
  report (but Mr Hicks wants you to ‘include commentary and sweeping action’ about the rules
  under which all this was done).


  Topic 7 - Peter Wright

  22.     The complaints here are that Mr Wright did not resign on the spot after the Taylor
  Interim Report, and that when he did resign (February 1990) he said at his press conference
  that the inquest would ‘right the wrong’ that Lord Taylor had done. Mr Hicks says that this
  is evidence of the ‘culture’ of South Yorkshire Police, which I suppose it is, but I don’t think
  that has any bearing on your scrutiny.

  23.    More to the point Mr Hicks says that Wright’s remarks about the inquest point to him
  having been improperly in cahoots with the Coroner. But he brings in no evidence of that.
  It seems to me that what Mr Wright said was more a case of a (rightly or wrongly) discredited
  Chief Constable trying to conceal his embarrassment.


  Topic 8 - Sir John ‘.Tack’ Lavdon

  24.     Mr Hicks says that Laydon (now dead), a senior figure in Sheffield politics, was
  chairman of South Yorkshire Police Authority at the time of Hillsborough and after. He was
  also a Director of Municipal and Mutual Insurance - MMI - which insured the City Council
  and the Police Authority (but apparently not Sheffield Wednesday as Mr Hicks says).

  25.     Mr Hicks says that as far as he is aware Laydon did not declare his interest in MMI
  when the police authority dealt with Hillsborough (Hillsborough aside, I find it odd anyway
  that the Chairman of a public body such as a police authority should also be a Director of the
^/company that insures it).    Mr Hicks also says he believes that Laydon’s position had an
  improper influence on the way the Police Authority dealt with Hillsborough.

  26.     He produces no evidence for this. But I wonder whether it is worth contacting the
  Authority to ask whether Laydon did chair them at that time and whether he had and declared
  an interest as Director of MMI.


  Topic 9 - Taylor Report

  27.     Nothing new here. Mr Hicks says that Taylor did not look at the aftermath of the
  disaster in much depth. Taylor says that ‘it is improbable that quicker recourse to the
  emergency services would have saved more lives’. Hicks disagrees with this. But I don’t
  think there is anything new (to us) in what he says (see also topic 12).



  G:\HiLLSBQR\S~S\048.DOC
Topic 10 - Dr Usher’s ‘withdrawn’ report

28.    I don't understand why Dr Usher’s overall report on the 95 post-mortems was
withdrawn. But neither do I understand why Mr Hicks is so critical of it. He says ‘i f one
examines the whole thing, it is clear that he is approaching the “analysis” with a strong and
pre-determined objective'. I see nothing in it to justify that.

29.    Mr Hicks says that post-mortems generally use methanol tests to pick up substance or
solvent abuse and that these ones instead used ethanol tests, which pick up alcohol. Mr
Hicks says that was wrong, but I don’t see anything wrong with that in the circumstances.
Nobody was suggesting that the people in pen 3 had been sniffing glue or were high on drugs.
But there were suggestions that some of them were drunk - and the tests showed that was so.


Topic 11 - Coroner

30.    I don’t think there are any criticisms of Dr Popper here that you have not covered in
your report.


Topic 12 - Disaster plan

31.   The material which Mr Hicks provides at 50 is worth looking at, though you’ll have
seen most of it already. But I’m not sure there is anything here that should make us
conclude that there is a need for a fresh public inquiry.


Overall

32.   I think we might chase up the Jack Laydon business with the Police Authority.
Otherwise, despite its bulk, I see nothing in Mr Hicks’s submission that might add to what
you have already done.




C F BONE




G :\HILLSBO R\S-S\048. D O C
           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Trevor Hicks                                                  Your reference:
Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                              Our reference:

                                                              Date:        ^     December 1997




                 Ak a .

Thank you for your letter of 5 December.

When I began work in July, I understood that your Group had important new evidence for me
to see. You gave me your submission in September. I met you to discuss it with your
barrister, Alun Jones QC, and I have since considered it in great detail.

As you know I also visited Liverpool, where - in addition to the open session to which all the
Hillsborough families could come - 1 had private meetings with you and Mrs Hicks and with
many of the other families who were affected by the disaster. I have also had numerous
meetings here in London, some with relatives of victims and some with police, lawyers, the
Coroner and other people who were involved. These meetings continue.

I do not need to tell you that I am looking at very serious matters. It is important that I
should let the Home Secretary have a report within a reasonable timescale and you are quite
right that the work cannot be an ever-moving feast. My letter of 25 November nevertheless
made it clear that last Friday was not an absolute ‘deadline’, as you put it, for the submission
of material to me. I said when I began the scrutiny that I expected to report to the Home
Secretary by the end of the year, and I believe that I should be able to keep to that timetable.
But my letter said that this could change if further important new evidence is presented to me.

You say that you have new evidence which you regard as important (and information from
the video of the temporary mortuary). I should be grateful if you could let me know more
about the nature of this evidence and why you believe it to be important. Perhaps you could
also let me know when you received it, from whom, and when it was asked for. If it is, as
you suggest, under investigation or awaiting expert opinion, please let me know the nature of
the investigation or opinion and who is carrying it out or providing it. Would you also let

G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\HICKS.203
me know when I can expect to receive it.

I note that you will be sending me the evidence relating to Sarah. I hope that you will do so
as soon as possible. I should also be grateful for any response you have to my letter of 21
November.
                                                     %




                                           La
LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




                                              2
           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Trevor Hicks                                                   Your reference:

                                                              Our reference:

                                                              Date:              November 1997




       2 )j£CX/ A v             H u i-C J

I have interviewed Mr Paul Taylor about the contents of his statement dated 23 September
1997, a copy of which was supplied to me by Miss Adlington. I attach one in case you do not
have it conveniently to hand.

2.     Mr Taylor gave evidence at the Inquest about your daughter Victoria. He said (day 32
page 74) that he had given her the kiss of life. His exact words at the inquest were “I tried to
blow into her mouth, and then someone said ‘Leave her, she’s dead’.” He did not say who that
person was and he had not at that stage told the Court that the girl he was trying to help was
Victoria.

3.      These facts were brought out by Mr Fraser (pages 78 & 79 of the transcript) but neither
he nor any other lawyer asked Mr Taylor the identity of the person who told him Victoria was (kX ,^
dead or what, if anything, this person had done. Did you tell Mr Fraser that Mr Taylor had told
you the person was a policeman and that he had taken Victoria’s pulse with gloves on? If you
did, do you know why Mr Fraser did not ask about this? If you did not, can you tell me why
not?

4.     There is one further point on which I would like your assistance. At our meeting in
Liverpool on 7 October 1997 you told me you were bothered about the evidence of PC
Marshall. Specifically, you said you did not believe he had done all the things he said he had,
and you had no recollection of his being in the ambulance. The gist of Marshall’s evidence was
summarised at the mini-inquest (24 April 1990, page 9).

5.      My understanding from the Coroner is that draft summaries were circulated to the
families before the mini-inquests, so that any errors or corrections could be made. Did you raise
your doubts about PC Marshall’s role with the Coroner? If not, it would help if you could say
why that was. I should perhaps mention that PC Marshall says that there were two police
officers in the ambulance. The other was PC McGuiness, but PC Marshall did not know his
name then. Mr Edwards, the ambulance attendant, also says that there were two police officers

G:\HILLSBOR\M AINW ICKS.162
    in the ambulance.

    6.     There was no reference to                  evidence at the mini-inquest. By this time
    you knew thal           had apparently been involved with Victoria. Did you raise this with
    the Coroner?

    7.   I am sorry that I have to raise these points with you. But I would be grateful for your
    comments on them as soon as possible.

          M 0 \x * 0     l




y i X j t ORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




    G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\HICKS.162
         AYyppO^'

                                 Hillsborough Family Support Group

      1 -.'I'd Jlisticc Stuart-Sm ith
      i he H ills b o ro u g h Scrutiny
      Room 1106
      50 Queen A nn e 's Gate
      LONDON
      S W I M 9A1
                                                                                                        BY F A X A N D HOST

      ■'til December !997



      D e a r Lo rd Justice Stuart-Sm ith.


      U b u'Uh dismav ihat I received your letter o f the 25th Novem ber (received IT'' ) regarding
     the i n t r o d u c t i o n o f a deadline for submissions to the SeruUny.


     1 appreciate that this cannot be an e v e r -m o v in g feast and that you w i l l have m any o ilie r
     du']^s calling for y o u r tune. Y o u r comment "I think this would be in the heat interests o f
     nil concerned" i.s certainly not tin e in mine or m any o ilie r ot the fa m ilie s eases.

     l l . i v m g campaigned   to r more than eight and a h a l f years, we be lie v e d that Jack S tra w 's
     announcement o f ihe scrutiny w o u ld at Iasi give us an o p p o r t u n i t y to ensure matters were
     l u lly investigated and c o rre c tly acted upon. Sadly the ship is being s p o ile d “ Ibc a h a 'p t h o f
     lar"


      Y-.ni are well aware, fr o m the many          communieaiion.s copied to y o u r o ffic e , o f the long
      c.ciaNS we have encotm iered in securing the release o f in fo r m a tio n fr o m South Y o r k s h i r e
      police    ( l a v i n g fin a lly got some o f the in f o rm a tio n released, w e are n o w b eing giv e n a
      t o t a l l y disproportio nate tim e to consider and c o m m e n t on m a n y o f the            new a n d in o u r view
      i m p o r t a n t m aile rs arising fro m the in f o rm a tio n o n ly recently            received.   Some o f these
      issues require us to seek external advice and expert o p in io n and this is p r o v i n g im p o s s ib le
      w u h in the deadline imposed.


      fVis d itfie u h and heartbreaking process ts not helped when y o u d is c o v e r b o d y files are
      incomplete and staieinems relating to one person, c ro s s -re le r to o th e r v ic tim s som etim es bv
      n a m e (c g   my daughters') Yet neither Sarah o r V i c t o r i a ' s body file s do not c ontain those
      statement*.


      The F a m ily G roup, let alone in d iv id u a l fam ilies, do not have endless resources that can he
      ih i o w n at mailers ol concern to ensure a speedy e valuation.                       I f o r instance have spent most
      o' this week tra v e llin g overseas on business, hence the delayed response to y o u r letter.

». lUIHMW                                            V k T . - r n A IH M W '/S IT H K T A K Y                     I Kl W K I ' U
                                                     P   H . m in i'll.1
                                                                                                                   M r.   I   I I - , , . , , ,,,
DEC-gn i n : 24        TREUOR HICKS                                 0   01535 691483




 I wish to place on record that the Hicks family and indeed the Hillsborough I-'amily Support
 Croup consider the imposition of a deadline only six working days from receipt of formal
 notification is unrealistic and totally unacceptable.

 Arc vou aware for instance that your press office told the Liverpool licho only a couple of
 days before your letter that there was no intention to impose a deadline!!

 We note your comment regarding “important new evidence” and your timetable but V we
 reserve the right to submit any matters important to us, currently under investigation,
 a n d /o r awaiting e x p e rt opinion. The delays at the start o f the process were not of our
 m ak ing and w e are not prepared to be disadvantaged by them.

 I nersonallv will be sending documents and an extract of the hand held “temporary
        r ! " v iZ thut Jenni and I have just confirmed shows Sarah receiving attention after
 4 7i) pm. None of this is in the bodyfile we received and is contrary to evidence previous y
 presented and I wish to register this before the deadline.

  I repeat that wc consider the scrutiny is now proceeding with mdcccnt haste and that such
   , « e s not our wish, nor is it in our best interests. We will contmuc to p r e s s lack St,aw
  ,m ,h „ e matters and reserve the right to place the whole n a tte r » the publrc domam.


  Yours sincerely,




  T revor Hicks
  Chairman

   (and b ere a v e d la th e r .)
