           South Yorkshire
           POLICE
           JUSTICE        with   COURAGE




MrC Bone
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1108                                                    Our Ref:         D&C/AMH/EMR
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate                                         Date:            9 October 1997
LONDON
SW1H 9AT



                                               l^OrJl

                                              ^        \)C c .   Ia ^ J v x U . > y u .        /H -

                                                   In® /G flcw cV -               cu^




RE: APPROACH BY GRANADA TELEVISION TO HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST JURY MEMBER

On Monday 22 September 1S97, both you and I received telephone calls from
Her Majesty's Coroner for South Yorkshire (West) Mr Christopher Dorries, regarding an approach
made to a               a member of the Hillsborough Inquest Jury by Katy Jones, a researcher
for Granada Television. As I understood Mr Dorries, the approach was to a s k i f          she
would be prepared to express her views on the "new evidence" and he was concerned that
Granada Television may be in breach of legislation.

When we met on 24 September 1997 we briefly discussed the above and you suggested that the
Juries Act 1974 might be an appropriate place to start. I have therefore researched that
legislation, but to my mind no offence is revealed by the actions described in my first paragraph.

Of far more interest is the Contempt of Court Act 1981, although it would require a detailed
interview with                  |to establish whether an offence has been committed under
Section 8 of the Act. This covers the Confidentiality of Jury Deliberations and states that it will be
contempt of court to obtain, solicit or disclose any particulars of statements made, opinions
expressed, arguments advanced or votes cast by members of a jury in the course of their
deliberations in any legal proceedings. The prohibition against disclosure of deliberations made
by members of a jury extends to further revelation of that information by publication, where the
facts published were not already known. However on the information provided to us it is not
possible to establish if an offence has been committed under Section 8.




            Discipline and Complaints Department
           Windsor Road

9M;         Sheffield S8 8UB
           Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3855
                                                             The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                             Superintendent Hepworth
            Direct Dial No:
                                                             (0114 ) 296 3084
From this point I have gone on to look at what would be the result of Granada Television
publishing comment by former jurors from the Hillsborough Inquests on the "new evidence", if
there were to be further legal proceedings as a result of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny.
In addition would publication prior to such proceedings tend to interfere with the course of justice,
or create a substantial risk that the course of justice would be seriously impeded or
prejudiced and thus be liable to be treated as Contempt of Court, within                  S2(2) ofthe
Contempt of Court Act 1981.

I have used the Police National Legal Data Base for this research and rather                than tryingto
summarise my findings, I enclose copies of the print outs as follows:-


1    Contempt of Court Act 1981        Section 1         The Strict Liability Rule

2    Contempt of Court Act 1981        Section 2         Limitations of the Strict Liability Rule

3    Contempt of Court Act 1981        Schedule 1        When Proceedings are Active
                                                         regarding Section 2

4    Contempt of Court Act 1981        Section 19        Definitions



I have also looked at a number of cases in the All England Law Reports, including:


Attorney General     - V-   MGN Ltd & Others 1997

Attorney General     - V-   Sport Newspapers Ltd & Others 1992

Attorney General     - V-   Hislop & Another 1991

Attorney General     - V-   News Group Newspapers Ltd 1988

Attorney General     - V-   News Group Newspapers Ltd 1986

Attorney General     - V-    English & Another 1982




                                                    The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                    Superintendent Hepworth
                                                    (0114 ) 296 3084
                                              -3-




It is clear that the Contempt of Court is not committed until publication and that
Granada Television in merely researching material for a programme and possible publication has
not committed an offence. Speaking hypothetically, if Granada were to publish prior to
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's findings and proceedings for Contempt of Court were commenced, I
think there would be some interesting legal arguments as to whether proceedings were imminent
or pending; in the case of a public enquiry does it constitute legal proceedings, did publication
pose a substantial risk of serious prejudice to the administration of justice and whether
publication was specifically intended to impede or prejudice the administration of justice.

I have discussed my findings with Her Majesty's Coroner, Mr Dorries and as far as the approach
to               py Katy Jones of Granada Television is concerned, he neither wishes myself, nor
South Yorkshire Police to take any further action. Mr Dorries did ask me to convey my findings to
you in writing and this I have attempted to do, in what I hope is a not too convoluted manner.




/$U.
A M Hepworth
Superintendent

Enc




                                                 The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                 Superintendent Hepworth
                                                 (0114 ) 296 3084
Title    MEANING OF STRICT LIABILITY RULE - CONTEMPT OF COURT
        ACT; 1981; CONDUCT; JUSTICE; INTENT; COURSE; INTERFERE; LEGAL;
        PROCEEDINGS;

Section 1 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 explains what is meant by the
"strict liability rule" (ie the rule of law whereby conduct tending to
interfere with the course of justice may be treated as contempt regardless of
intent).

(1) THE STRICT LIABILITY RULE
means the rule of law whereby conduct may be treated as a contempt of court
[*A] as tending to interfere with the course of justice in particular legal
proceedings [*B]
regardless of intent to do so.

NOTE
This section merely introduces Part I of the Act. It replaces common law rules
regarding comments about sub judice proceedings, although some forms of
prejudicial comment or actions still remain at common law by virtue of section
6 (contempt of court - other provisions [*C]).

For limitations as regards the "strict liability rule", please refer to
document D4102 limitations of the strict liability rule [*D].
Title    LIMITATIONS OF THE STRICT LIABILITY RULE
        CONTEMPT; OF; COURT; ACT; 1981; SCOPE; PUBLICATIONS; PROGRAMME;
        COMMUNICATION; SPEECH; WRITING; PROCEEDINGS;

Geographic Region E&W

Section 2 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 as amended by the Broadcasting Act
1990 outlines the limitations of the strict liability rule in that it is
limited to include publications, and then only if a publication creates a
substantial risk of impediment or prejudice to the course of the proceedings in
question.

(1) The strict liability rule [*A] applies only in relation to publications, and
for this purpose 'publication' includes any speech, writing, programme included
in a programme service [*A] or other communication in whatever form, which is
addressed to the public at large or any section of the public.

(2) The strict liability rule applies only to a publication which creates a
substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in question will
be seriously impeded or prejudiced.

(3) The strict liability rule applies to a publication only if the proceedings
in question are active within the meaning of this section at the time of the
publication.

SUBSTANTIAL RISK

This is intended to exclude a risk that is only remote. The risk must be a
practical and not a theoretical one. Each case will depend on its own facts,
but the place of trial, the nature of the proposed publication and the
proximity of the publication to the date of trial are factors of considerable
importance in assessing whether the criteria as set out above is met.

The judgment as to risk and prejudice is made at the time of publication. A
later acquittal, for example, is no defence.
See A.G v English (1982) 75 CAR 302 and A.G v IBN [1995] 2 All ER 370 which
provide the basis for these interpretations.
Title    TIMES WHEN PROCEEDINGS ARE ACTIVE REGARDING SECTION 2
        CONTEMPT; OF; COURT; ACT; 1981; CRIMINAL; APPELLATE; OTHER;

Geographic Region E&W

Schedule 1 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 provides what is meant by
proceedings being active under section 2 (limitations of the strict liability
rule [*A]).

"CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS" means proceedings against a person in respect of an
offence, not being appellate proceedings or proceedings commenced by motion for
committal or attachment in England and Wales.

"APPELLATE PROCEEDINGS" means proceedings on appeal from or for the review of
the decision of a court in any proceedings.

Criminal, appellate and other proceedings are active within the meaning of
section 2 at the times respectively prescribed in the following paragraphs; and
in relation to proceedings in which more than one of the steps described in
those paragraphs is taken

CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS
(1) Criminal proceedings are active from the relevant initial steps as outlined
below until concluded.

(a) arrest without warrant;
"APPELLATE PROCEEDINGS" means proceedings on appeal from or for the review of
the decision of a court in any proceedings.

Criminal, appellate and other proceedings are active within the meaning of
section 2 at the times respectively prescribed in the following paragraphs; and
in relation to proceedings in which more than one of the steps described in
those paragraphs is taken

CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS
(1) Criminal proceedings are active from the relevant initial steps as outlined
below until concluded.

(a) arrest without warrant;
(b) the issue of a warrant for arrest;
(c) the issue of summons to appear,
(d) the service of an indictment or other document specifying the charge;
(e) oral charge.

(2) Criminal proceedings are concluded -

(a) by acquittal or, as the case may be, by sentence;
(b) by any other verdict, finding, order or decision which puts an end to the
proceedings;
(c) by discontinuance or by operation of law.

 (3) Proceedings are discontinued-
(a) in England and Wales, if the charge or summons is withdrawn or a "nolle
prosequi" (unwilling to prosecute) entered;
(b) in England and Wales, if they are discontinued by virtue of the Prosecution
of Offences Act 1985;
(c) in the case of proceedings in England and Wales commenced by arrest without
warrant, if the person arrested is released, otherwise than on bail, without
having been charged.

(4) Criminal proceedings before a court-martial or standing civilian court are
not concluded until the completion of any review of finding or sentence.

(5) Criminal proceedings in England and Wales cease to active if an order is
made for the charge to lie on the file, but become active again if leave is
later given for the proceedings to continue.

(6) Where proceedings in England and Wales have been discontinued by virtue of
section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, but notice is given by the
accused under subsection (7) of that section to the effect that he wants the
proceedings to continue, they become active again with the giving of that
notice.

(7) Criminal proceedings against a person cease to be active-
(a) if the accused is found to be under a disability such as to render him
unfit to be tried or unfit to plead; or
(b) if a hospital order is made in his case under section 51(5) of the Mental
Health Act 1983,
but become active again if they are later resumed.

(8) Criminal proceedings against a person which become active on the issue or
grant of a warrant for his arrest cease to be active at the end of the period
of twelve months beginning with the date of the warrant unless he has been
arrested within that period, but become active again if he is subsequently
arrested.

APPELLATE PROCEEDINGS

(9) Appellate proceedings are active from the time when they are commenced-

(a) by application for leave to appeal or apply for review, or by notice of
such an application;
(b) by notice of appeal or of application for review;
(c) by other originating process,

until disposed of or abandoned, discontinued or withdrawn.

(10) Where, in appellate proceedings relating to criminal proceedings, the
court-

(a) remits the case to the court below; or
(b) orders a new trial or a "venire de novo" (writ ordering a retrial after a
mistrial),
any further or new proceedings which result shall as active from the conclusion
of the appellate proceedings.

OTHER PROCEEDINGS AT FIRST INSTANCE
(11) proceedings other than criminal proceedings and appellate proceedings are
active from the time when arrangements for the hearing are made or, if no such
arrangements are previously made, from the time the hearing begins, until the
proceedings are disposed of or discontinued or withdrawn; and for the purposes
of this paragraph any motion or application made in or for the purposes of any
proceedings, and any pre-trial review in the county court, is to be treated as
a distinct proceeding.

(12) In England and Wales arrangements for the hearing of proceedings to which
the above paragraph applies are made within the meaning of that paragraph-

(a) in the case of proceedings in the High Court for which provision is made by
rules of court for setting down for trial, when the case is set down;
(b) in the case of any proceedings, when a date for the trial or hearing is
fixed.
ACTIVE PROCEEDINGS
For the meaning of "active proceedings" please refer to document D4114 Times
when proceedings are active regarding section 2 [*A]. This involves the police
in taking great care when issuing "wanted" notices or naming individuals as
suspects, since at that stage the proceedings are not active. The police might
then tell the press not to publish some details. See A.G v Sport Newspapers Ltd
(1991) 1 W.L.R 1194.

NOTES
Prejudice caused by private conduct, such as an offer by the press to witnesses
of payment for their story contingent on the outcome of the trial, will not
normally be an offence under the strict liability rule and will normally only
constitute contempt if it can be proved that the conduct was intended to impede
or prejudice the administration of justice.
A fairly robust attitude was taken in the recent trial of Rosemary West, but it
may not necessarily be replicated in less newsworthy cases.

As well as the media, the police must take care not to infringe the rules when
announcing an arrest or charge. They must resist the temptation to crow about
their success and to give too many details. A typical example of this was the
case of the "Yorkshire Ripper" Peter Sutcliffe and the press conference given
by the then Chief Constable Gregory after the arrest of Sutcliffe. It was not
the way it should have been done, although perhaps understandable at the time.

Where proceedings are to be heard by a judge, rather than being tried by a
jury, there is less likelihood of the course of justice being seriously impeded
or prejudiced. However see R v Evening Standard ex parte A.G (1976) Times 3
 Nov. which concerns prejudice to lay witnesses.
Title    CONTEMPT OF COURT ACT 1981 - INTERPRETATIONS
        EXPLANATIONS; DEFINITIONS; MEANING; LEGAL; PROCEEDINGS; TRIBUNAL;
        SUPERIOR;

Geographic Region E&W

Section 19 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 provides certain definitions which
are used throughout the Act. These have been listed alphabetically.

COURT
includes any tribunal or body exercising the judicial power of the State, and
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS shall be construed accordingly.

SUPERIOR COURT
means the Court of Appeal, the High Court, the Crown Court, the Courts-Martial
Appeal Court, the Restrictive Practices Court, the Employment Appeal Tribunal
and any other court exercising in relation to its proceedings powers equivalent
to those of the High Court, and includes the House of Lords in the exercise of
its appellate jurisdiction.
