           Lyngor
          Chwcircieon
            Cymru
  Cadeirydd/Chairman: John H. Powell OBE MC
  Cyfarwyddwr/Director: Linford Tatham
                                                   m                                  The Sporty
                                                                                      Council for
                                                                                        Wcile^
                                                                                         Gerddi Sophia/Sophia Gardens.
                                                                                         Caerdydd/Cardiff CF1 9SW.
                                                                                         9 0222 397571
  Ein Cyf/Our Ref                              Eich Cyf/Your Ref                         Dyddiad/Oate
SCW9/18C                                                                                15 J u n e      1989




  1 1*   - t



Hillsborough            Stadium         Disaster   Inquiry

T h a n k y o u for y o u r l e t t e r of 23 M a y 1 9 8 9 i n v i t i n g the C o u n c i l to s u b m i t
its c o m m e n t s to the I n q u i r y h e a d e d b y L o r d J u s t i c e Tay l o r .  T h e s e are
a t t a c h e d and I s h o u l d be g i a d if y o u w o u l d n o t e that my C o u n c i l w o u l d
be p l e a s e d to e l a b o r a t e on a n y of the p o i n t s r a i s e d s h o u l d it be
required.

P l e a s e a c c e p t m y a p o l o g i e s for the d e l a y in m a k i n g our s u b m i s s i o n ;           we
s h a l l l o o k f o r w a r d to m e e t i n g L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r at a l a t e r s t a q e
s h o u l d he so d e s i r e .




Li afo rd Tatham
Director




F< M W h a l i e y , Esq.,
Secretary,
I n q u i r y into the H i l l s b o r o u g h
    Stad iu m Disaster,
50 Q u e e n A n n e ’s G a t e
L o n d o n S W 1 H 9AT
HILLSBOROUGH   STADIUM   DISASTER   INQUIRY


Introduction

1. The Sports Council for Wales, in response to your letter of 23 May
1989, is pleased to submit written comment for the Inquiry's
consideration.

2. The Council submitted evidence to the Popplewell Inquiry of 1985
and considers that the points made then are equally valid in the
context of your current inquiry.  A copy of the previous submission is
appended (Appendix 1).

3.   This submission:-

3.1 highlights particular aspects of the Council's evidence to the
Popplewell Inquiry; and
3.2 comments upon further elements in the light of subsequent events.

Facility Design

Green Guide

4. The value of the Home Office publication, Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds (Green Guide), was commented upon.  In particular, attention
was drawn to its need to be expanded to embrace other types of
facilities for sport.  Of much more importance, and certainly in the
light of the particular inadequacies identified in the emergency exit
arrangements through the security fence at Hillsborough, the Council
believes that the terms of the Green Guide need to be legally
enforceable and to be mandatory requirements for those seeking a
licence of a sports ground.

Perimeter Fences

5. The Council previously questioned the advisability of erecting
physical barriers rather than seeking to make pitch invasion a criminal
offence (paragraph 19, Appendix 1).  Certainly if there is to be a
fence it must be capable of being opened or collapsed by order of the
management.  However, the Council considers that the physical barrier
loses, in part, its deterrent effect if it is known, by unruly
elements, that dangerous behaviour will force the opening.

External Approaches

6. The location of many grounds, with lack of car parking, confined
access and egress immediately onto public streets, severely hinders
crowd control.  However, examination of the attendance records at the
majority of football league clubs shows that the problems arise on
comparatively few occasions such as "derby" matches, important cup
ties.  It is considered that the control of spectators through the
proposed membership scheme will have an effect on this.  The Council
believes, however, that it is more realistic to consider restricting
cup matches, etc where crowd control problems are anticipated likely to
arise to designated grounds which have adequate facilities.  Thus major
expenditure could be confined to a few strategic locations rather than
imposing it upon all clubs.

7. Without doubt more changes need to be made to the design of
entrances to grounds to allow better marshalling of the crowds and
particularly to cope with the surge of spectators arising shortly
before the scheduled kick-off time.  Recent events suggest that there
may well be a minority of spectators who have no tickets but who
effectively "storm" the ground thus forcing entry.  The dilemma facing
the police of whether to allow them into the ground where the problems
can probably be contained or whether to exclude them and face a public
disorder situation possibly extending throughout the town is
considerable but could be alleviated through control of tickets
(membership schemes, all ticket matches, etc) and particularly by the
re-design of entrances and approaches to grounds.

First Aid and Ancillary Facilities

8. In our previous submission reference was made (paragraphs 7 and 8,
Appendix 1) to the inadequate standard of facilities.  The (often)
primitive toilet arrangements and rudimentary catering outlets
certainly raises questions as to the extent to which the environmental
health and health and safety regulations are being abused or ignored.

9. Of particular concern is the inadequate arrangements made for first
aid. Accidents and incidents are probable wherever large crowds are in
attendance.  To assume that this is a matter entirely for the voluntary
agencies such as St John's Ambulance Brigade (who certainly provide a
first class service) is an abrogation of management.

Legislation

10. Reference has been made earlier (paragraph 4) to the need for the
Safety at Sports Ground Act to specify that local authorities must
apply building regulation control.  It is important, too, to have
consistency in application of standards to the licensing of grounds.

11. The Council believes that there is also need to ensure that
existing law is properly and consistently up-held.  The tolerance of
unacceptable standards of behaviour by those going to and leaving
football grounds has led to a considerable worsening of the situation
since the Council's submission in 1985.  Away from football matches the
police and licensing authorities would be expected to take action on
the sort of behaviour that is accepted in a football context.
Similarly if other commercial enterprises such as night clubs, dance
halls and public houses were associated with unruly behaviour of the
magnitude tolerated in respect of football there is a strong likelihood
of the enterprise having its licence revoked.

Management and Training

12.   Far too many of the football grounds fall well below acceptable
standards of provision.  The quality of the total experience is
diminished by surroundings from which the customer can infer that he is
poorly treated.  The lack of respect this generates is self-evident.

13.  It would appear that management has insufficient regard for, or
skill in, customer service and care.  Indeed, it can be argued that
this is aided and abetted by a tax system which permits vast sums to be
expended on players but penalises clubs who seek to invest in the
facilities.

14. The skills in dealing with large numbers of people, arriving in a
short time scale, in a friendly and courteous manner, are demanding.
There is little evidence to suggest that currently staff are properly
trained either to undertake these duties or to cope with emergencies.

Conclusion

15.  The Council shares the Inquiry's concern and is prepared to assist
in any way that it can to ensure not only that tragedies are avoided in
the future but that the experience of attending football matches is
enhanced and that the general interests of the wider public are
adequately and properly safe-guarded.


SCW9/18C
LT/AS
June 1989
The Sports Council for Wales
Cyngor Chwaraeon Cymru                                   Appendix 1



COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY     IN    CROWD   SAFETY   AND   CONTROL   AT
SPORTS GROUNDS                   ’     .



Introduction

1. The Sports Council for Wales welcomes the opportunity to submit
evidence to the Committee of Inquiry.

2. The Council does not own or.manage any sports grounds but, never­
theless, has considerable experience in advising sports clubs about
facility provision.  It is fortunate, too, that amongst its members
are several with practical first hand experience of the problems.

Background

3.  It is important to see the problems of ill disciplined crowd
behaviour at football grounds as a manifestation of a much wider
social problem.  Whilst the immediate priority must be related to
those sports grounds giving rise to all the current concern, it is
necessary to consider the implications for all sports grounds since
there can be no guarantee that similar problems of crowd safety and
control will not occur in other sports in the future.  Indeed, there
is already evidence of a marked decline in the general conduct of
spectators at other sporting events such as cricket test matches and
at Wimbledon.

4. The Council believes it important that attention should be
focussed upon the facilities to ensure that whatever the sport or
event they afford safety to the spectators and enable those concerned
to exercise appropriate control.

5. The Council considers that there are a number of factors that
are of significance in planning for the future:-

5.1   there will be a considerable increase in leisure time available
      to everyone;

5.2   participation in sport and recreational activity is low for the
      socio economic groups D and E;

5.3   increasing emphasis is being given to encouraging participation
      in sport particularly amongst disadvantaged groups such as the
      unemployed, teenagers and young people 12 - 24 years, and women;

5.4   there will be a marked increase in the population over 45 years
      in age whose interests in the more active sports are more likely .
      to be confined to being spectators;

5.5   there needs to be a re-emphasis upon personal and societal
      responsibilities, i.e. priority to be on self rather than
      external control.

Hooliganism

6. Whilst the incidence of hooliganism in Wales is not excessive there
is, nevertheless, evidence to indicate that it is an expanding problem.
It cannot, however, be attributed to either the home or visiting
supporters since undoubtedly situations arise because of provoca' 'on
and retaliation.

7. For many years there has been criticism of the standard of            ,
facilities at football grounds.  The need for covered seating
accommodation, better toilet and refreshment facilities and, if
necessary, complete segregation of home/visiting supporters, etc has
been stressed.  The lack of positive action by the majority of clubs
has had two marked effects:-

7.1 _ fewer families, young children (accompanied by a parent) and
    •
    ’'older people have attended.  Thus their controlling influence
      is removed from the predominant groups of young, active men;
      and

7.2   there is increasing abuse of the poor facilities which further
      exacerbates the problems.

8.  It is the Council's view that better facilities would be respected
by spectators and would have appeal to a wider cross section of
society.   However, it is necessary in the short term to reduce the
problem .to manageable proportions through effective segregation of
rival factions.

9.  Increased seating would also facilitate the easier identification,
isolation and control of trouble makers by those responsible.  Whilst,
therefore, it is difficult to prevent hooligans from entering grounds
initially it should be possible to exclude persistent trouble makers
through their becoming known offenders provided that good liaison is
maintained for the transfer of such information amongst clubs and
police forces, etc.

10.  It is considered that past attempts to control the issue of tickets
to bone-fide supporters have all failed, e.g. F A Cup Final, Wimbledon.
The ingenuity of those determined to obtain tickets is such that it
is difficult to conceive of any administrative system that would be cost-
effective.  It is suggested that the emphasis ought to be focussed upon
more effective measures of control by ground improvement, by better
crowd surveillance, by. more rigorous screening of those seeking to
enter (see paragraph 14 ove r).

Offences

11. There appears to be a tolerance of behaviour both outside and inside
the ground which would not apply in other circumstances.  For example
verbal and minor physical abuse of the general public by those on their
way to and from a ground appears to be acceptable provided it is not
excessive.  A rigorous application of the requirement to meet acceptable
and constantly applied standards of public behaviour may well reduce--
the over-exuberance of spectators and thus contribute towards the
reduction in offences.

12. The Committee of Inquiry, through the posing of the questions about
ticket control, clearly is concerned with finding a method of excluding
trouble m a ker s. One obvious answer to the problem would be to ensure
that those found quilty of offences were prevented from attending events
by requiring them to report to police stations during the time when     __
events are being held.

Alcohol

13.   As in society in general, many of the problems association with
hooliganism are drink related.   The control of drink, particularly
within grounds or on transport^ to grounds would be expected to have
 • material effect upon crowd behaviour.

14.  It is important, too, for there to be rigorous screening of those
entering grounds to ensure, as far as is practicable, that alcohol is
not taken into the ground and that anyone who has clearly been
drinking heavily is prevented from entering.

15.   Equally important isthe vigilance of thepolice and stewards
within the ground toidentify, exclude and prosecute those seen to be
drinking or possessing drink within the ground.   Again, more seating
accommodation being provided within grounds'would facilitate this.

Designation - Other Sports

16.  It would be foolish to believe that the present malaise affecting
football may not spread to other sports and it would be prudent,
therefore, to ensure that facilities meet safety requirements.   However,
it is suggested that in this respect the issue might appropriately be
divided into:-

16.1   crowd safety;

16.2   crowd control.

17.  With the former the emphasis needs to be on ensuring that
structures meet specified standards (see paragraph 22 below) whilst a
value judgement requires to be exercised on the extent to which crowd
control measures are necessary.

18.  It must be borne in mind, too, that increasingly sports facilities
are being used for other than their primary purpose.  Thus football
grounds may be needed for pop concerts, horse shows, boxing matches,
religious conventions.

Legislation

19.  The Safety at Sports Grounds Act 198 5 has generally worked well
in controlling crowds at designated grounds.   It is questionable, how­
ever, whether the prevention of pitch invasion should be effected by
the requirement to erect physical barriers rather than on making it a
criminal offence.  This would put the onus on the individual rather than
the facility provider.

20.  Given that in due course there is likely to be a need to designate
other than football grounds, it is important to consider the financial
implications of erecting fencing around, for example, major cricket
grounds.

21.  The Act refers to grounds in total- whereas in many cases what is
required is the need to impose regulations in respect of particular
areas or facilities. It is important that any spectator stand or
pavilion can be vacated in 2 - 3 minutes.   This requirement is related
to the capacity of the stand not of the total ground.

22.  There are, too, in relation to fire precautions, a number of
requirements that ought to be enforced:-

22.1   regular training of all full time and temporary staff;

22.1   regular fire drills;
22.3    the publication of procedures dealing with both.fire prevention
       .and fire fighting;

22.4   that all doors, entrances that are locked must be manned during
       events.

Green Guide

23.  The guide provides an excellent analysis of the problems of crowd
safety and gives firm guidelines regarding the general construction of
ground installations.   The emphasis is, however, upon football grounds
and it •needs either to be written in a wide context or expanded to
include advice in relation to other types of facilities or sports.




SCW9/18/a
LT/AS
5 July 1985
