From: Jim Bradley                                   cc     Home Secretary
      Police Resources Unit                                David Omand
      Room 614                                             John Lyon
      273 2996                                             Sir David O'Dowd
                                                           Jonathan Duke-Evans
             8 November 1999                               Colin Harnett
                                                           Richard Komicki
                                                           Clare Stocks
                                     C~r~   ^   <
                                                           Ed Owen
                                                           Justin Russell

Mr Clarke


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - HILLSBOROUGH COSTS

Issue

A reply to the South Yorkshire Police Authority following your meeting with them on
2 November about their request for additional funding to help with the legal costs of 2
former officers, and the compensation payments to victims of the Hillsborough
football disaster in 1989.
fT ' •   •
Timing

2. No particular timing considerations.

Summary


3. The South Yorkshire Police Authority asked for special financial assistance to meet
the increasing costs that they are incurring in respect of compensation payments to
victims, and the defence costs o f two former officers, Mr Duckenfield and Mr
Murray, who are facing criminal proceedings. These costs are, in the view of the
Authority, beginning to affect the force's ability to police South Yorkshire.

4. In their paper to you before the meeting the Authority also asked if you could make
representations to the Treasury on their behalf against a decision by the Inland
Revenue that any payments to the officers would be fully taxable.

5. At the meeting you acknowledged the Authority’s concerns about the escalating
costs but made it clear that you could make no commitment to providing financial
assistance. You also indicated that it would not be appropriate for HO Ministers to
seek exemptions or other exceptional treatment for individual police officers on
taxation matters. However you did offer to make enquiries about the possibility of
fast-tracking the appeals process.

6. I have been in touch with the Inland Revenue. In this case the District Tax
Inspector has given a “pre-transaction” ruling. There is no appeal to the Tax
Commissioners against such a ruling. Before the appeals process can be initiated , the
defence costs would first need to be paid to the officers and then an assesment made
of their tax liability. ( It was not clear whether the officers would have to make a self
assessment.) Once an assessment is made by the Revenue there is a right of appeal to
the Tax Commissioners in the first instance.

7. You may wish to write to the Police Authority setting out the result of our
enquiries of the Inland Revenue, and your position on providing financial assistance.
This is considered further in paragraphs 9-12 below.

Recommendation


8. That you offer to consider further the Authority ‘s request for financial assistance
in respect of the personal injury claims from victims, and write to the Authority as in
the draft at Annex A.

Consideration

9. In the letter you may want to take the opportunity to set out a reasoned position on
the question of providing financial assistance to the authority in the case of the
officers defence costs. In my view our position should be:

         i. since it was a decision of the authority to agree to meet the officers’ defence
costs, it should be for the authority to find the money.

        ii. it is not reasonable for the authority on the one hand to decide to meet the
costs and then on the other expect the Home Office to contribute.

 10. Ministers could be criticised by the Hillsborough victims’ families if financial
assistance for the officers was provided by the Home Office. In other cases where
special payments have been made, the additional costs incurred by the force have
been largely unavoidable. In this case, South Yorkshire Police Authority have chosen
to meet these former officers’ costs to date. It is open to them to seek a contribution
from the Superintendents’ Association.

11. The Authority are perhaps on stronger grounds in seeking financial assistance
with the escalating costs of settling personal injury claims, now that their previous
public liability insurance cover limit of £8.5 million has been exhausted. The costs to
the authority could be £8 million and would have to come from the current budget or
from reserves. We should perhaps seek to make a distinction between these costs and
the officers’ defence fees. In these circumstances, we could offer to consider this
part of the bid further, since we have some spare resources available - see paragraph
13. I suggest that officials obtain further information on these costs from the
Authority’s Treasurer.

12. Until this year we had established criteria for special grant payments. These were
that the additonal costs must be exceptional and of a scale likely to threaten the
efficiency of the force. An informal threshold of 2% of budget was applied. However
we did not apply these criteria when the Home Secretary made special payments to
Devon and Cornwall, Kent and others this year.


Sypa3
Resource Implications

13. There is no separate fund available which we can use to make special
contingency payments. As advised previously, we did set aside a sum of grant this
year to rectify an earlier an underpayment to Derbyshire. This was top-sliced from
total police grant provision. In the event the money was not used for that purpose and
the Home Secretary was able to use it to make special payments to a few forces as
stated above. A further £1 million was top-sliced for the “beacon scheme” challenge
fund for police authorities. However further scrutiny of the baseline balances
suggests that this sum was set aside twice as we have discovered a balance of just
over £1 million still available in the present financial year. This sum might increase
slightly as we do not expect that the additonal costs incurred by Devon and Cornwall
for policing the Eclipse will be as high as the £520,000 which we originally offered.

14. The upshot is that Ministers should have a further £1 million available in this
financial year to allocate as special payments of grant. A decision on how to use this
would be best deferred until nearer the end of the financial year when we can consider
other bids for assistance. However it does provide scope to offer some help to South
Yorkshire.


Handling/presentational issues

15. None at this stage.




                                    Jim Bradley
                                                                ANNEX A


                 DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY MR CLARKE


        Clarence Swindell
        Chairman
        South Yorkshire Police Authority
        PO Box 37 Regent Street
        BARNSLEY
        South Yorkshire S70 2PQ




        I am writing to follow up my recent meeting with you, the Chief Constable, and
        others to discuss Hillsborough costs. I found the meeting very useful. It gave
        me a clear insight into the continuing implications of the tragic Hillsborough
        disaster for the force and the authority.


        I have had some quick enquiries made on the question of expediting any appeal
        on the taxation issue. I understand from the Inland Revenue that there is no right
        of appeal to the Tax Commissioners against the “pre-transaction” ruling which
        has been made in this case. An appeal can only be made after the defence costs
        are made to the officers and the payments are assessed for tax. Once that stage
        were reached I would be happy to try again to expedite any appeals process,
        without any guarantee of success, of course.


        On the specific issue of the Home Office providing financial assistance to the
        Authority in support of the two former officers’ defence costs, I have carefully
        considered all the points you made.         In this case the Authority has taken a
        decision to meet the officers’ legal costs to date. I fully understand your reasons
        for reaching such a decision. Having done so, my view is that it should be for
        the Authority to find the money. I do not believe that it is reasonable for the
        Authority on the one hand to agree to continue to pay the defence costs and then
        to look to the Home Office to contribute some funding. You may want to
        consider whether the Police Superintendents’ Association could contribute.




Sypa3
t




            I have looked separately at your request for support in respect of the personal
            injury claims from victims. Given the circumstances I would be prepared to
            consider further whether we may be able to offer some limited form of financial
            assistance. I have asked my officials to obtain further information from the
            Authority’s Treasurer on the breakdown of these costs to enable me to reach a
            decision.




    Sypa3
