 From: Peter Edmundson                                          cc   Permanent Secretary
       O perational Policing                                         Mr Pugh
       Policy Unit                                                   Mr Butler
       Room 527, QAG                                                 Mr Warner
       a 273 2621                                                    M r Owen

            6 February 1998


 1.        M r M ichael

 2.        Home Secretary


 HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - LETTER FRO M LOUISE ELLMAN M P


 Issue

 The attached letter o f 29 January from Louise Ellman MP, enclosing copies o f the
 letters to you from Colin Moneypenny o f Liverpool City Council, and Trevor Hicks,
 Chairman o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group, both o f which were sent in
 November 1997.

 Tim ing

2.    In view o f the likelihood that the report will be published in the week
beginning 16 February, an early reply would be helpful.

Recomm endation

3.        That you reply to Ms Ellman along the lines o f the attached draft.

Consideration

4.      Both Mr Hicks and Mr Moneypenny expressed concern at alleged delays on
the part o f South Yorkshire Police in releasing information, and requested that the
timetable o f the scrutiny be extended. Ms Ellman now expresses her support for these
earlier representations. You (Home Secretary) replied to both Mr Hicks and Mr
Moneypenny on 4 December 1997 (copies attached).

5.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith indicated at the time that he had not experienced any
difficulty with access to the information held by South Yorkshire Police. The Judge
was at all times responsible for the conduct o f the scrutiny, including the timetable. In
the event, he was unable to complete his report before the end o f the year as he had
intended, due to the number o f representations he received.




f:\oppu\complnts\shortsub\mjw-0202.doc
6.     Ms Ellman does not raise any additional issues to those raised by Mr Hicks
and Mr Moneypenny and it therefore seems appropriate to respond to her along the
same lines as your earlier replies to them.

Handling/presentation

7.        There are no additional handling considerations.




                                                             -



                                         PETER EDMUNDSON




f:\oppu\complnts\shortsub\mjw-0202.doc
DRAFT REPLY FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE

Louise Ellman MP
House of Commons
London
SW1A OAA




Thank you for your letter of 29 January enclosing copies o f earlier letters to me from
Mr Colin Moneypenny of Liverpool City Council and Mr Trevor Hicks o f the
Hillsborough Family Support Group about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny into
the Hillsborough Disaster.


As you may be aware, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith submitted his report to me on
29 January and I am carefully considering it. I hope to publish the report shortly.


I requested the views o f both Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire on the points raised in Mr Hicks’ letter. From what they have told
me, I am satisfied that all the material which should have been available for
examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the purposes o f the scrutiny was
available to him, and that the scrutiny was able to investigate fully the issues raised by
the Family Support Group and others. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith assured me that he
was given full access to the material held by South Yorkshire Police, and that the
force had contributed fully throughout his scrutiny.


When I established the scrutiny and set its terms of reference, I was clear that the
scrutiny should be thorough and that it should be able to examine whatever matters
the judge considered relevant. I am satisfied that the families and the public can have
confidence in the report and in the integrity of the scrutiny process itself.




f:\oppu\complnts\shortsub\mjw-0202.doc
                                               Q U E E N A N N E ’ S G A T E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9AT

                                                                                 0 4 DEC 19*n

Trevor Hicks Esq
Chairman
Hillsborough Family Support Group




        iW .

Thank you for your letter of 9 November about the difficulties which you say
have been experienced in obtaining material from South Yorkshire Police and ;
others and the need, therefore, to extend the timescale for Lord Justice Stuart-'
Smith's scrutiny/';"r i'‘'

As you know, I asked for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's advice on the issues which
you raised. Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, has also
written to me after the contents of your letter were disclosed to him by the ti
media.

I should make it clear that, having appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to
conduct this scrutiny, the management of the scrutiny is entirely a matter for the
Judge. Although I indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we hoped it
would be possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale
is ultimately a matter for the Judge to decide, i have told Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith that if he reached the conclusion that more time was needed to complete
his work, this would certainly be within his discretion. However, Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has indicated to me that he hopes to be able to keep to his original
timescale for completion of the report. I understand that he has now written to
you and other interested parties to confirm this.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also assured me that he has been given full access
to the material held by South Yorkshire Police and that the force has co-operated
throughout his scrutiny. He has not seen any sign that the police are
deliberately obstructing requests for information from other parties. He has also
expressed surprise that difficulties should have been encountered in obtaining
                               "* ^       b' * =                        ™ i-« ^ i « i , ir th.

 »      s   ~   „ ■" • s   k     s    i s     t s       s   s   s   z     s       r   *   ?    • '- * ■

 Co^oners^Rules'and                  '?

 s r ^ r * ,uests,or ph0,09raphs,rom,w° ^                           £         ^           ^       32,s

^ E S » - £ f ?                                                 S K K i
s r . ^ s x * s r 'r ™“                                         * s s s s r r

s . j                                                                         -       ^   01
                                                                                          h    materiai
therefor™"19 T       ®     ther8' bUt that this was not his view. *iS does not* “ ‘ °
costs i n v i Z T s u T T o Z l Z t ' 1" *he ° 0nSiderable l09iStiCal                              and

You have also written to me about the scrutiny's terms of r»f»f«n~A i •..
consider the points you have raised and r   e      ^   s      T    ‘ ' W"'


                         ¥,»Vr-A                    J                                     ^




                                      JACK STRAW
                                                  Q U E E N A N N E ' S G A T E L O N D O N S W l H 9 AT


                                                                                    0 4 DEC
 Colin Moneypenney Esq
 Clerk to the Hillsborough Disaster
 Working Party
 Liverpool City Council
 PO Box 88
 Municipal Buildings
 Dale Street
 Liverpool
 L69 2DH




                  A/Vo                     /


Thank you for your letter of 14 November on behalf of Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party in support of the Family Support Group's request for the
timescale of the scrutiny to be extended.

Although I indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we hoped it would be
possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale is
ultimately a matter for the Judge to decide. I have told Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith that if he decides that more time is needed to complete his work this
would certainly be within his discretion. However, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
has indicated to me that he expects to keep to his original timescale for
completion of the report.

Trevor Hick's letter expressed concern about access to information held bv the
South Yorkshire Police. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also assured me that he
has been given full access to the material held by the force and that the force
has co-operated throughout his scrutiny. From what I have been told bv the
Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith it
appears that, for the purposes of the scrutiny, all the material which should be
availaWe for examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been available to him
and that the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully the issues raised bv the '
Family Support Group and others.

The terms of reference which I have given Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the
Scrutiny will allow him to establish conclusively whether any material evidence
was overlooked in the consideration of the causes of the disaster or the
consideration of criminal or other proceedings. The Judge will also be able to
recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest His
terms ° f reference are, therefore, very wide indeed and I am confident that thev
win allow him to carry out a full scrutiny of the evidence which has been
submitted by the families and others.

As you know, the Judge spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families of
those who died and listening to their concerns. He has said that he found these
meetings fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to write his report
m Du°f C0UrSe, understand the distress caused by the Judge's comment to
Mr Phil Hammond. The Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this
remark, which he made off-the-cuff and without any intention to offend or for it
to be taken seriously. He has made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not
the subject of the Scrutiny.

I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a thorough report in
which the families and the public can have confidence. As I have indicated
before, t will make public the advice given by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his
report, and will take whatever action is needed if he suggests material evidence
about the disaster has been overlooked.




                                                           /




                                 JACK STRAW
                                                                                      - 3 FEB 1998               ,
                                 H ouse o f Commons                       cc\   M/
                                 London SW 1A OAA
                                   0171 219 3000
                                                                          M/              X   ma
                                                                                                                1
                             LOUISE ELLMAN M.P.                                       7       t \

               MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR LIVERPOOL RIVERSIDE   hV 0
                         LABOUR AND CO-OPERATIVE            fj^ 0O ^~ \
29 January 1998                                t     „s   __

The Rt. Hon. Jack Straw MP                    r
Secretary of State for the Home Department        cd^X U t
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                       c k rz jy                                                        f- h
London
SW1H 9AT                                                                                                       1 X-
                                             C i^ /t J                h

                                                            0 -/2
Dear Jack                                                                       9     ^             ?

RE: Hillsborough Scrutiny

Please find enclosed a letter sent to me by Liverpool City Council.

I am writing inform you that I am fully supportive of HFSG’s representations.

It is very important that this scrutiny is dealt with in a very careful manner. However,
some of the problems that Trevor Hicks refers to seem to show a complete lack of
sensitivity.

I do hope you will feel able to extend the timescale as suggested to enable all the
relevant submissions and evidence to be gathered in the first place and then to be
properly scrutinised.

After 8 Vz years I hope that the families involved will be able to finally achieve some
sense of justice, but it appears that they may need a little more time.

I look forward to hearing from you soon.

Best wishes.



                               RECEIVED BY
Louise Ellman                       0? FEB 1998
enc
                               Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                               Direct Line; 0151 225 2431
                               Your R e f :
                               Our R e f : P&R/CM

R c . Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON                                         14th November,
SW1H 9AT


Dear Mr. Straw
Hillsborough Scrutiny
You will be aware from our previous correspondence, when I
expressed the welcome of Liverpool City Council to your decision
to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to undertake a Scrutiny of
evidence related to the Hillsborough Disaster, that the City
Council, through its Hillsborough Disaster Working Party has
continuously and unanimously s u p p o r t e d the Hillsborough families
throughout their eight year quest for justice.

I have now been requested by a recent meeting of the Working Party
to write to you again to express the full support of this Council
for the comments contained m the letter to you, dated 9th
November 1997, from Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group. The Council considers that in .particular you
should give serious consideration to responding positively to the
requests made in that letter for you to extend^the timescale of
the Scrutiny to ensure that all the concerns or the families are
properly and fully investigated and for Lord Justice Stuart Smith
to be allowed to take possession and control of all the
documentation and evidence to ensure their integrity and their
disclosure to all parties.
 In endorsing the above requests, the City Council feels that for
 vou to act upon them would be entirely consistent with the
 comments made by you on 30th J u n e stating that you were determined
 to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and that
 you did not reach a conclusion without a full and independent
 examination of the evidence. The Council, as I have said, did
 support the a n n o u n c e m e n t of the Scrutiny and was particularly re­
 assured by your comments, even though its own position at that
 time, w a s that s u f f i c i e n t reasons and sufficient cause for concern
 had already been demonstrated to justify the establishment of a
 new Inquiry into the Disaster.
You should be aware that Liverpool City Council has now expressed
extreme dissatisfaction with the entire Scrutiny process. There is
a specific concern, I understand being expressed to you by the
Family Support Group, which is again sharea by this Council, that
its terms of reference are so narrow that _ney prevent the
assessment of all the evidence which the families believe, in the
interests of justice, need to be assessed.

Furthermore I have been requested also to place on record the
extreme concern of this Council that the appalling remarks made by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith - a reference to Liverpool fans arriving
late for which he subsequently apologised - prior to his meeting
with families on October 6th, do appear to indicate a severe lack
not only of judgement but more importantly of the impartiality
      should be the most crucial attribute necessary for ensuring
the independence of the judicial assessment he was appointed to
make.
While the City Council will await the outcome of the investigation
with great interest, there is no doubt there is a widespread
feeling, certainly amongst the Members of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party but also throughout the wider Merseyside
community, that the offensive comments made by M r . Stuart-Smith at
the Albert Dock, indicating at least some pre-judgement of the
issues, may well have demonstrated that, m addition to the other
difficulties discussed above, he personally is not able to provide
the balanced and fully independent assessment of the evidence to
which the Hillsborough families after all ihese years are surely
entitled.
I would be m o s t grateful if you would be able co take on board a_i
of the above comments in considering your response to the letter
from Mr. Hicks and in determining the future progress of the
Scrutiny.


 Yours sincerely



 Colin Moneypenny
 Committee Clerk to the Hillsborough
 Disaster Working Party.
PaV SENT BV     :                                ANN IDLINGTON                A4->A4    10/11/97           11:45           PG:    2




                                                                                         1 0 / 1 1 /9 7    1 0 -5 1         P6:
   FAX FROM : 8 1 5 3 5 691483                                                   gg 01535 691403              i            P01
    10-t-C'U-Sn 1 0 :5 3 TBEUOR HICKS




      v•. •
         4 K i£        -
                                                                                                     \ -    W
                                                                                                           SUPV<$*
          Sl/ppO^
                                    Hillsborough Family Support Group


          Rt. Hot) Jack Straw MP
          Home Secretary
           Home Office
          50 Qvjeen Anne’s Gate
          London
          SW1H 9 AT
                                                                                                9th November 1997
                                                                                             |)Y l'AX AND POST

              Dear Mr Straw,

              r e ; Hillsborough Scrutiny

              It ih with deep rogtvt that w e teel w e have n o alternative but to write to you to se e k your         ■


              intervention in the timetable for the scrutiny. Sincc your announcement of the sa-utmy on the
                                .    ___         .                 rtf infnmmtinn hv South Yorkshire Police




              We have already made «1ircct representation and ensured the problems were known to lo rd
              Justice Stuart Smith’s team / the- 1k,uc O f t*    despite arnll t « W
              our attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation oi our case arc being thwarfcd.

               You will recall from our meeting at the Commons that lamllics expressed
               (and apparently control!!) of the evidence /documents should remain with South YorkjJwe
               Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster h central to the scrutiny ;
               Rattier than the spirit o f “openness" so vigorously espoused by N ew labour the continuation
               o f the problems o l’the last eight and a half years is realising our worst fears.

               They appear to have absolute po*cr to determine what we set pnd when, if cvor, we jee it.
               It cannot be right, fair or just that they have the scope 10 manipulate the proceeding*            hy denial
               ov ticlay of information.                                                                           I

               Examples of the problems we are cncountcring arc:-                                                 j

                1) As late as the 6* N ovem ber we received lour important photographs - they were requested
                ■■\ mi- <t-iVf* OMM'th't **                                                         !
FAJS'oENT bv                                       ANN ADLINGTON                A4->A4    1 0 /1 1 /9 7   1 1 :4 8   PG:   1
* .     t




      FAX FBOn : 0153S &91483                                                              10/11/97       10:51      PG:   2
       10-HOM-9'*! 1 0:£4 TREVOR HICKS                                                 01535 5314B3                  P02




            2)SevciuI families arc still waiting to receive ail or parts of thcii' loved ones “body file-,"

            3)On the 24"' September our solicitor was denied access lo medical records despite having
            written authority from the relatives concerned. Access is still being denied!!

            4)Mcdieal records of the Into Phillip Hammond have apparently been trade tivtuJable to Lord
            Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such records did not exist.

            The initialfldeadline” for submissions was 111September but this had to be relaxed when it
            became clear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin lo comply with requests for
            information until late August. The 1.JPSC made preliminary submissions mid-September and
            lodged others on the 25* September. Both o f (hose documents made it clear that our efforts
            were being hampered by the painfully slow information release by South Yorkshire Police.
                                                                                                        |
            Clearly if the scrutiny attempts to report "at the turn of the year” full consideration of newly
            disclosed cvidcnec cannot take placc and hence it could not form purt of any deliberation or
            conclusion.

            It is our belief that Lord Justice Stuart Smith should l«U* possession and control o f all the
            documents/evidence to safeguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely disclosure to all
            parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim lo the troth than the families o f the deceased.

            Wc further submit that it is now imperative that you extend the timescale for submissions und
            their proper consideration by the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the families and the
            public as fair and exhaustive.

            All of us want this matter concluded, but having waited for so many years the families implore
            you to introduce a one or two month extension to the. timescaic to ensure all our concerns can
            be property investigated and “scrutinised”. It is the families view that this ts our lust chance
            for justice to be done and clearly it must be “seen to be done properly” ii tarth in tte judicial
            process is to be regained by the many thousands of voters who wrote to you, at en e           t
            justicc concert, and wrote/telephoned the media in support of our cause.

             Wc shall be writing under separate confidential cover regarding deep concerns relating to the
             Terms o f’Reference you have set down for I />rd Justicc Stuart South and these may v gi\ <■
             rise for revision of the scrutiny programme.

             Yours sincerely,



              Trevor Hicks
              Chairman. -1 1FSG
