                              .   ( .   H t-\c ,.ic

                              ~x *

                                                              H om e O ffice
                                                            QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                             L O N D O N SWiK 9AT



42-2.JS


C J Anderton Esq CBE CStJ QPM CBIM                               273 2746
Chief Constable
Greater Manchester Police
PO Box 22 (5 West PDO)
Chester House
Boyer Street
MANCHESTER Ml 6 ORE                                   16 F e b r u a r y 1990




           ST                                                              4
             <✓

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR *S FJMAL /RETORT

•On 29 January the Home Secretary made a statement in the House
 about the final report of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into
 the tragedy at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989. In
 his statement the Home Secretary referred to a schedule placed
/in the Library of the-House setting out the Government's
xesponse- to '-each -ofthe xecommendations set -out in Chapters 3,
-4 and 5 of /-the ■report..--:;'/! -enclose m-^copy of .the-schedule.
The -purpose .-of /this 'JitterVis -W , a s k ;you/.foinnally to bring the
attentionvof ,^CPQ.?^piavefjio/«oubt|l^t ACPO '^iil mlsh ,t.o
necessary ‘action -‘to'implement -
the -police service."''-:/Many -of the                     substantially
                                                               f o r 'w h ic h
                      was grateful

                                                        1 wish to make

Recommendation 11 revises to some extent interim
recommendation 4. It is now made clear that the agreement
«»f-4»4ng out the club’s and the police’s respective functions-'-
        crowd safety-and:control .is seen.as. a -statement of •
        ,-■*iot'a binding contracts .
                                    ‘
                                    .^Paragraph '214 of the report
says explicitly, "I -am, content that [the document] -can be
subject to alteration without breach of contract should
circumstances so demand." 1 hope that the re-formulation of
this crucial recommendation will ease the problems that I know
 were seen to arise from the wording of the interim
.recommendation.

    Recommendations 19 and 20, dealing with the closure and
    manning of gates provide greater flexibility than did the
    earlier interim recommendations (9 and 10). It will now be at
    local discretion whether the perimeter gates are left fully
    open, partially open or closed but unlocked. Also for local
    decision, by the Police Commander, will be whether the manning
    of a perimeter gate should be by a police officer or a
    steward. This new flexibility is no doubt desirable for
    operational reasons but it does underline the need for a clear
    agreement about such matters to be embodied in the statement
    of intent agreed between the police and the club.

    Turning to the batch of recommendations (44-58) covering
    police planning .and communications, these will no doubt all
    receive careful consideration, but I pick out three which are
    of particular concern to the Home Office.

 .Recommendation 52 dealing with the training of present and
  future Police Commanders is a key one in this group. I
 presume that your own sub-committee and the Training Committee
  have an interest here. I understand that the Police Staff
  College at Bramshill is planning to hold during 1990 a
  conference which will have as its theme the operational
 -management of football matches. Within the Police Department
; Gay Cat to will be .following up this recommendation with you or
 .whoever /you advise her -is the appropriate contact.

^Recommendation S3 .'deals,with; charging for police services
 »^James Addison will /be:-following up the Government’s response
^3to ^this recommendation through h.is normal contacts with the


 ;^Recoromendation 55 for /the provision of a dedicated command
 ■•channel seems to'be -crucial to effective police control. The
^Home Office ;has therefore made extra channels available for
f^se''at^eyehts including .a channel for command purposes.:
-f Information -about these channels has recently been circulated
  "to forces.'

-/Recommendations 59-r63 cover co-ordination of the-emergency
  services.. I simply wish to reiterate the Government's
  response that those concerned will l>e urged to comply with the
- one recommendation (61) which was not in the interim report.

4 There-ares:two more general matters which call jEor some
I comment^Tirstlyi^recommendation 42, directed at clubs, calls
 rfor a significant.change in the recruitment, training and
  eventual quality of stewarding. There are obvious
  repercussions here for the call on police resources. The Home
  Secretary made this connection in his response 'to a question
        following his statement when he said, "I therefore wholly
        applaud Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation that stewards
        should be trained so that fewer police officers -are required
        at grounds".

        Second, Taylor's recommendations (70-73) for some new offences
        and penalties call for careful study. The Home Secretary has
        said that he will be examining these recommendations as a
        matter of urgency. John Goddard will shortly be writing to
        you separately about this but I can say now that we shall want
        to take careful account of ACPO's views on the enforceability
        and resource implications for the police of implementing these
        recommendations.

        ^ ty°u think it would be. helpful to discuss .any of    matters
        raised in this letter or any other issues arising from the
        Taylor report I should be glad to arrange a .meeting here with
        those concerned. We shall, of course, be reporting back to
        Ministers on the response by the police service to Taylor in
        due course and a meeting with you at'that stage, perhaps after
        Easter, would provide a convenient opportunity for you to
        bring us up to date. In the meantime, we will be meeting at
        the NFIU Steering Committee on 26 February, and you might like
        a preliminary informal word then.




                                               -S "W.30YS...SMITH
                                               Police ^Department




"^Bcc "Mr C h i l c o t ' r r      -‘                                   . r
       Mr H a m m o n d ■- ■'■-•••.              ••                           ‘ •.’Wiri:
                                4   -    ‘              ?               Ov   ’’     ■'
:• -   JMr A ddison’ :                                              -
        Mr Goddard '                                        ^   -   ■

        Mrs Reisz           ^

l^-r^ ’'
       ■'-Mr C a n e                    '7 '
      . Miss Goose
         Mr Cogbill
