MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512


Date:       26 November 1997

To:        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




I attach

                  my note of your meeting with Mr Wells (for your approval)

                  the letter from Mr Alderman at the police authority about the civil cases.




C F BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\033.DOC
HTT/TSBOROIJGH SCRUTINY


Note of a meeting on 25 November 1997.


P resent   -   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
               M r Wells, C h ief Officer o f South Yorkshire police
               M r Bone



Mr Wells visited Lord Justice Stuart-Smith at LJS-S’s request.


Police evidence

2.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith recapped the process by which officers involved in
the disaster were asked to provide full recollections of it, and these were then sent on,
after ‘vetting’ to the West Midlands police who were collecting evidence for the
Taylor Inquiry. The ‘vetting’ consisted of removal of expressions of opinion and
intemperate language. Mostly this was quite proper but there was a tendency to
remove opinion and intemperate language about senior police officers but leave in
similar material about misbehaviour by Liverpool fans.

3.      This plainly did not affect Lord Taylor, because he made serious criticisms of
senior officers. But it was of concern that there seemed to be a pattern of changing
this material in this way. LJS-S noted that Sheffield Wednesday FC also took
statements from their people and could cut out what they wanted so long as the
authors were prepared to sign them.


Assistance by South Yorkshire police

4.    LJS-S had good cooperation from the South Yorkshire police. He wasn’t
aware of any indication that the police were dragging their feet over requests for
information from him or from the Hillsborough families.

5.      R W said the force were committed to openness. There was an element in the
Family Support Group which seemed to be trying to make them stumble and appear
as if they were holding up release of information - for instance a recent request for
sheaves of ‘body files’ had a slight feeling of red herrings being drawn across the trail.
But the force would still respond as quickly as it could.

6.    LJS-S said it would help him to be able to show that the police had acted
promptly on requests from the families - the Support Group might well say he had cut
his scrutiny short before they had been able to assemble their material. RW would
let LJS-S have a schedule of what the force had supplied the families with and when.


Mr Duckenfield

7.      LJS-S said that one person he had met had said that RW had told them that Mr
Duckenfield would be prosecuted, and that it was announced very soon afterwards
that he wouldn’t be.

8.      RW was sure he had not guaranteed that anybody would be prosecuted. That
was not in his gift. He might have said that one or two officers might face discipline
- and two did, though in the event neither went before a tribunal.


Liability and expressions o f regret

9.     LJS-S had had no clear answer as to whether South Yorkshire Police had
admitted liability or simply accepted it - albeit that this was, in legal terms, a
distinction without a difference. RW recalled that he was continually going on public
platforms to express the force’s regret. An example was of his          TV interview on the
day of the inquest verdicts. He gave LJS-S a videotape of this.

10.   RW acknowledged that South Yorkshire police had made four main errors at
Hillsborough. These were

               not breaking out of the assumption that there had to be a 3 o’clock
               kick-off

               not foreseeing where the fans would go after Mr Marshall had (rightly)
               had Gate C opened (this was the critical error)

               not noticing or taking full account of the building up of pressure
               in the pens behind the goal

               not being able to distinguish between distress and disorder.

11.    LJS-S noted that these were the things which Lord Taylor had criticised. The
police disputed why they had lost control of the crowd outside the Leppings Lane
gates.

12.    RW recalled that Lord Taylor had drawn a distinction between junior and
senior police and between those senior police who realised what was going on and did
something about it and those who did not. His aims in dealing with the issue over the
years had been to be as open as possible, to express sorrow, both personal and
professional, over what had gone wrong and to make sure that the force stayed
capable of doing what it should be doing.
 13.    But he could not and would not say that South Yorkshire police were the only
cause of the disaster. He had to talk about shared responsibility as between the police,
the club and the licensing authority. He asked whether he should write to all the
affected families, or go to Merseyside to meet them. But LJS-S could not advise on
that.

 14.    LJS-S thought that the police had been unwise to try to persuade Lord Taylor
that they had not made any mistakes and the disaster was all the fault of the fans. Mr
Duckenfield’s lie about the forcing of the gate had sown dragon’s teeth. His report
to the Home Secretary would say something about the force having gone on record as
apologising for what had happened. He would show this part of it to RW before the
report was submitted to the Home Secretary.




Scrutiny Secretary
26 November 1997
