                                                     CLAUSE 6


FOOTBALL (OFFENCES) BILL
HOUSE OF COMMONS
NOTES ON CLAUSES



CLAUSE 6:   PENALTIES


Clause 6 provides the penalties for those convicted of offences
under the Bill.    The offences are triable summarily only (ie in a
magistrates' court).


Subsection (1) provides a penalty of a fine of up to Level 3 on
the standard scale.     At present, Level 3 is equivalent to a
maximum fine of £400.     The Criminal Justice Bill now in the House
of Lords will increase this to £1,000.


Subsection (2) provides for attendance centre orders to be
available to courts in dealing with offenders convicted of
offences under the Bill, either instead of or in addition to a
fine.   The main provisions relating to attendance centre orders
are contained in the Criminal Justice Act 1982.     Section 17(1) of
the 1982 Act limits the availability of attendance centre orders
to offences carrying a penalty of imprisonment.     Since
imprisonment is not available for offences under this Bill,
subsection (2) disapplies section 17(1) of the 1982 Act in
relation to offences committed under the Bill.


Section 16(2) of the 1982 Act limits the availability of
attendance centre orders to offenders under 21 years of age.
Paragraph (a) of subsection (2) disapplies the age restriction in
section 16 of the 1982 Act.     Attendance centre orders would, thus,
be available for people of any age convicted of offences under the
Bill.


Section 17(3) of the 1982 Act limits the availability of
attendance centre orders where the offenders have previously been
given a custodial sentence.     Paragraph (b) of subsection (2)
disapplies this restriction in the case of people convicted of
offences committed under the Bill.   This means that attendance
centre orders will be available for such people whether or not
they had previously been given a custodial sentence.   (The
Criminal Justice Bill will remove this restriction on the use of
attendance centre orders in section 17 of the 1982 Act.)




DS330
                                                              '   ~ li)
GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT



EFFECT


1.      The amendment would delete clause 6(2) of the Bill.       Clause 6
provides the penalties for offences under the Bill.     Subsection
(1) provides for a maximum fine of level 3 on the standard scale
(currently £400, but being increased to £1,000 by the Criminal
Justice Bill).     Subsection (2) would allow a person convicted of
an offence under the Bill to be given an attendance centre order,
if this would help prevent violence or disorder at football
matches.     The amendment would mean such orders were not available
for offences under the Bill, and limit the penalty to a level 3
fine.     This is because, for the reasons set out in the speaking
note, the Government does not believe that offenders under the
Bill should be liable to attendance centre orders.


SPEAKING NOTE


2.   I beg to move amendment [      ].


3.   Clause 6(2) of the Bill would allow     courts to make attendance
centre orders for people convicted of offences under the Bill,
where such orders would help prevent violence and disorder at
football matches.     The Government has sympathy with the underlying
purpose of this provision, but does not agree that attendance
centre orders should be available for the offences the Bill
creates.


4.   It may be helpful if I say something about     attendance centres
and how they operate.     Attendance centre orders are available only
for people under 21.     Their purpose is to deprive the young people
of some of their free time and encourage them to make better use
of their time.     They are open on Saturday afternoons normally
every other week, for 2 or 3 hours.      The staff are all volunteers
and employed by the Home Office.     Many of them are serving or
retired police officers.     Each centre offers a programme of
activities normally including some physical education and
instruction in a useful activity, such as first aid or basic DIY
skills.     Most centres are based in school premises.


5.      It will be apparent from what I have said that the attendance
centre order caters for a particular type of young person.          In the
Government's view offenders being dealt with under the Bill are
unlikely to make them successful clients of attendance centres.
Attendance centres cater for the young.      They are most used, and
likely to be most effective, for people in their mid-teens.          There
are some centres - about 25 - which cater for 17-21 year olds.
There are no centres for older people.      This is because, in the
Government's view, older people are unlikely to be amenable to
what attendance centres have to offer.      Attendance centre orders
are also only available for those convicted of imprisonable
offences.     None of the offences under the Bill are punishable with
imprisonment.     So, in terms of seriousness, they do not meet the
present threshold for attendance centres.      Finally, and crucially,
attendance centres are most useful for those who are going to
respond positively.     The young people have to be cooperative, for
without their cooperation orders cannot be carried through
successfully.     I think that experience shows that football
hooligans are not the most disciplined and amenable of people.


6.      Attendance centre orders are undoubtedly a useful disposal
when they are used for the right type of offender.        The
Government's fear is that the Bill would allow them to be used for
people for whom they were not designed and for whom they are
likely to be unsuitable.


7.      What we are seeking to achieve   in the criminal justice
process is to match the penalty to the offence.       That is one of
the purposes of the Criminal Justice Bill now in another place.
The objective of that Bill has been warmly applauded.           I am bound
to say with some regret to my honourable Friend that in this
respect the present Bill conflicts to a degree with the
Government's own measure.      Whilst I understand my hon Friend's
purpose in including this     provision in the Bill, I am afraid that
its effect is likely to be counter-productive.       That is why we
think this amendment is necessary.       I beg to move.

DS331
