                                                 cc   Mr Sandiford
                                                      Miss Stewart
                                                      Mr Creedon

Mr Malone-Lee

CONTINGENCY FUNDS

Thank you for your note of 4 May.

2.   I attach a note from Mr Creedon about the Bellwin rules,
which are now being embodied in the Local Government and Housing
Bill which is currently before Parliament. The rules and the new
statutory provision will not apply to central government
expenditure.  But you will see that, in the case of contingencies
which do not constitute a "clear continuing function of the Home
Office", the Treasury has no objection to our continuing the
present practice of making special payments based on the general
authority of the Appropriation Acts. Although I can see it might
be desirable if the Home Office had some kind of contingency
reserve, it would be very difficult to calculate the amount
needed each year, and we would still be bound to have to haggle
with the Treasury about which costs be could be met from it and
in what circumstances.  I doubt whether the availability of a
contingency reserve would make our life much easier.

3.   So far as the police service is concerned, special grant has
been paid on a number of occasions where the police authority has
been faced with exceptional and unforeseeable expenditure. The
criteria and thresholds for payment of grant have been quite
complex.

4.    Perhaps I might just comment on the costs of the
Hillsborough inquiry. As you know, while the Home Office will
meet the entire costs of the Taylor inquiry, we shall be refusing
to meet the cost of the police inquiry carried out by West
Midlands on behalf of South Yorkshire.   If the press reports
about the scale of the West Midlands investigations are accurate,
the bill to South Yorkshire will be very substantial and we
s-hould be bound to end up with a wrangle over whether the case
for a special grant is justified.   If it is, as seems possible,
we shall have a great deal of hassle with the two police
authorities; the Exchequer will also end up paying 80-90% of the
total cost of the inquiry (through a combination of RSG, specific
grant and special grant). Might it not be better to save a lot
of wasteful time by recognizing that the police inquiry is so
closely related to the Taylor inquiry as to warrant payment on
the same basis? Otherwise we risk having to open two separate
subheads on different Home Office votes, with very different
financing arrangements, to cater for two aspects of what to
Parliament and the outside world is a single connected inquiry.




FINANCE DIVISION 2
                                       %
                                    N A NAGLER

9 May 1989
