106-4.AH                              cc   Mr Goddard
                                           Miss Edwards
                                           Ms Moody
                                           Ms Jago




Mr Mould


HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP


I attach a contribution on the current police investigation
following Hillsborough,    for Lord Ferrers' meeting on Thursday
3 May.     Ms Moody and I will attend Lord Ferrers' briefing
meeting at 10am.     I gather the main meeting itself is in the
'television interview room' at the Lords, and the rendezvous
point is 3.20 pm at the day pass office.


2.   None of us was clear on what was happening in relation to
the police investigation,    the criticism of Mr Wright, etc: the
attached note should bring recipients up to date.     While there
may well be more lessons to come from policing football -
which will interest F8 - the present action is also of close
relevance to F2, though some digging was necessary to
ascertain that.


3.   I should be very grateful if police issues could be dealt
with first at the briefing meeting as I have to go to another
meeting: I have asked Miss Nicholson to arrange the agenda
that way,    if you are content.


                                      F. J. SMITH

                                     F J SMITH
                                     F8 Division




1 May 1990
   100-4.AH



   POLICE INVESTIGATION


   Line to take


   Hillsborough tragedy shocking for everybody - terrible loss
   for the bereaved, who all have our deepest sympathy.


   In relation to the main inquiry all questions of blame must be
   very carefully investigated - that I am afraid takes time and
   must be completed before any comment can be made.


   On the specific complaint against Mr Wright I gather that Mr
^ ^ S h a r p visited you (Mr Hicks) and Mr Devonside and Mr Hammond
   within the last week to explain his conclusions.      I do hope
   this was helpful, and that it indicated the care and
   thoroughness with which all this must be examined.


  Background note


   The main police inguirv. by West Midlands Police, centres on
   any possible criminal actions by South Yorkshire Police,
   Sheffield Wednesday football club, Sheffield city council and
   their advisors, or disciplinary matters in relation to the
  police.     While each element is being examined in its own
  right, all aspects are inter-related and there is close co­
  operation between the police conducting the investigation,         the
  Director of Public Prosecutions, and the Police Complaints
  Authority.


  The initial (very detailed) assessment of evidence is nearing
  completion and interviews with those directly involved on 15
  April 1989 will shortly begin.     No conclusions on criminal or
  disciplinary matters are likely for some time - perhaps three
  months or m o r e .
Separate police inquiries are being pursued personally by Mr
Sharp. Chief Constable of Cumbria, concerning the involvement
of senior police officers of ACPO rank (Assistant Chief
Constable and above) - ie Mr Jackson,     the then ACC
(operations) and the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Mr
Wright.     Consideration of Mr Jackson's actions may be on a
similar timescale to the main inquiry.      Mr Sharp has also
recently taken charge of all police investigations related to
Hillsborough.


Mr Sharp has however just completed his investigations into
alleged remarks by Mr Wright which were reported in the press
as being critical of     supporters, eg for being drunk.This has
cleared Mr Wright of     any impropriety inthis matter:
essentially because the press reports were exaggerated from
the more cautious words spoken by Mr Wright - a tape recording
of the interview, by the journalist concerned, was crucial in
establishing this.


Although entirely outside his obligations, Mr Sharp decided
(with the agreement of the Police Complaints Authority) to
visit Mr Hicks, Mr Devonside and Mr Hammond who had made the
complaint against Mr Wright - all three are from the
Hillsborough Family Support Group - to explain why Mr Wright
had been exonerated.      These visits took place in the last few
days.     A bland statement in writing alone might well   have been
painful to the complainants and hard to understand.


The suggestion for the visits was compassionate and touching,
and Mr Hicks greatly appreciated this initiative (Mr Sharp
visited him on Monday 30 April).      He agrees that no blame for
the press reports lies with Mr Wright.      Indeed, he commented
that this was the first time he had been "treated like a human
being"    (by officialdom).   This may therefore be an opportunity
for Lord Ferrers to emphasize that those investigating the
case are very sympathetic to the bereaved, but are also
tightly constrained in what they can say until their work is
complete.
