                  Treaty Series No. 57 (1985)



       European Convention
     on Spectator Violence and Misbehaviour at
Sports Events and in particular at Football Matches

                         Strasbourg, 19 August 1985

   [The Convention entered into force for the United Kingdom on 1 November 1985]




                          Presented to Parliament
    by the Secretary o f State fo r Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
                      by Command o f Her Majesty
                               November 1985




                                   LONDON
             H E R M A JE S T Y 'S ST A T IO N E R Y O F F IC E
                                     £1.85 net
Cmnd. 9649
                 EUROPEAN CONVENTION
   ON SPECTATOR VIOLENCE AND MISBEHAVIOUR AT SPORTS
     EVENTS AND IN PARTICULAR AT FOOTBALL MATCHES

   The member States of the Council of Europe and the other States party to
the European Cultural Convention1, signatory hereto.
   Considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater
unity between its members;
   Concerned by violence and misbehaviour amongst spectators at sports
events, and in particular at football matches, and the consequences thereof;
   Aware that this problem is likely to put at risk the principles embodied in
Resolution (76) 41 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
known as the “ European Sport for All Charter” ;
    Emphasising the important contribution made to international understand­
ing by sport, and especially, because of their frequency, by football matches
between national and club teams from European states;
   Considering that both public authorities and the independent sports
organisations have separate but complementary responsibilities to combat
violence and misbehaviour by spectators, bearing in mind that the sports
organisations also have responsibilities in matters of safety and that more
generally they should ensure the orderly conduct of the events they organise;
considering moreover that these authorities and organisations should work
together for this purpose at all appropriate levels;
   Considering that violence is a current social phenomenon with wide reper­
cussions, whose origins lie mainly outside sport,-and that sgort is often the i
scene for outbreaks of violence;        =                                    ~-
   Being resolved to take common and co-operative action to prevent and
control the problem of violence and misbehaviour by spectators at sports
events.
    Have agreed as follows:

                                     A rticle 1

                              Aim o f the Convention

 1. The Parties, with a view to preventing and controlling violence and
 misbehaviour by spectators at football matches, undertake, within the limits of
 their respective constitutional provisions, to take the necessary steps to give
 effect to the provisions of this Convention.
 2. The Parties shall apply the provisions of this Convention to other sports
 and sports events in which violence or misbehaviour by spectators is to be
 feared, as appropriate to the specific requirements of such sports and sports
 events.

                       ’’T reaty Series No, 49 (1955). Cmd. 9545.

                                           3
                                     A rticle 2
                              Domestic co-ordination
   The Parties shall co-ordinate the policies and actions of their government
departments and other public agencies against violence and misbehaviour by
spectators, where appropriate through setting up co-ordinating bodies'.

                                      A rticle 3
                                      Measures
1. The Parties undertake to ensure the formulation and implementation of
measures designed to prevent and control violence and misbehaviour by
spectators, including in particular:
   a. to secure that adequate public order resources are employed to counter
outbreaks of violence and misbehaviour, both within the immediate vicinity of
and inside stadia and along the transit routes used by spectators;
   b. to facilitate close co-operation and exchange of appropriate information
between the police forces of the different localities involved or likely to be
involved;
    c. to apply or, if need be, to adopt legislation which provides for those
found guilty of offences related to violence or misbehaviour by spectators to
receive appropriate penalties or, as the case may be, appropriate administra­
tive measures.
2. The Parties undertake to encourage the responsible organisation and good
 conduct of supporters’ clubs and the appointment of stewards from within their
 membership to help manage and inform spectators at matches and to accom­
 pany parties of supporters travelling to away fixtures.
 3. , The.Parties sh 4 1 .e n q )u r^ e the fio:o r 4 i n < t ^ i f > ^ P ^ ^ o ^ ^
 o f the o r g a n isa tio n ^ travel arrangements from the place of departure, with the
 co-operation of clubs, organised supporters., and travel agencies, so as to
 inhibit potential trouble-m akers from leaving to attend matches.
 4. The Parties shall seek to ensure, where necessary by introducing appro­
 priate legislation which contains sanctions for non-compliance or by any appro­
 priate means, that, where outbreaks of violence and misbehaviour bv
 spectators are to be feared, sports organisations and clubs, together with,
 where appropriate, stadium owners and public authorities, in accordance with
 responsibilities defined in domestic law, take practical measures at and within
 stadia to prevent or control such violence or misbehaviour, including:
      a. to secure that the design and physical fabric of stadia provide for the
  safety of spectators, do hot readily facilitate violence between spectators, allow
  effective crowd control, contain appropriate barriers or fencing, and allow
  security and police forces to operate;
     b. to segregate effectively groups of rival supporters, by allocating to
  groups of visiting supporters, when they are admitted, specific terraces:
     c. to ensure this segregation by strictly controlling the sale of tickets and to
  take particular precautions in the period immediately preceding the match;
                                             4
   d. to exclude from or forbid access to matches and stadia, insofar as it is
legally possible, known or potential trouble-makers, or people who are under
the influence of alcohol or drugs;
    e. to provide stadia with an effective public address system and to see that
full use is made of this, of the match programme and of other publicity outlets
to encourage spectators to behave correctly;
    /. to prohibit the introduction of alcoholic drinks by spectators into stadia;
to restrict, and preferably ban, the sale and any distribution of alcoholic drinks
at stadia, and to ensure that all beverages available are in safe containers;
   g. to provide controls so as to ensure that spectators do not bring into
stadia objects that are likely to be used in acts of violence, or fireworks or
similar devices;
    h. to ensure that liaison officers co-operate with the authorities concerned
before matches on arrangements to be taken for crowd control so that the
relevant rules are enforced through concerted action.
5. The Parties shall take appropriate social and educational measures, bear­
ing in mind the potential importance of the mass media, to prevent violence in
and associated with sport, in particular by promoting the sporting ideal through
educational and other campaigns, by giving support to the notion of fair play,
especially among young people, so as to enhance mutual respect both amongst
spectators and between sports players and also by encouraging increased active
participation in sport.

                                     A rticle 4
                            International co-operation


 tion and e n c o u r a g e - ^                     appS priate"Between-national:
 sports authorities involved.                   . . . . . . .....
 2. In advance of international club and representative matches or tourna­
 ments, the Parties concerned shall invite their competent authorities,
 especially the sports organisations, to identify those matches at which violence
 or misbehaviour by spectators is to be feared. Where such a match is identified,
 the competent authorities of the host country shall arrange consultations
 between those concerned. Such consultations shall take place as soon as
  possible and should not be later than two weeks before the match is due to take
  place, and shall encompass arrangements, measures and precautions to be
  taken before, during, and after the match, including, where necessary,
  measures additional to those included in this Convention.

                                     A rticle 5
                     Identification and treatment of offenders
  1. The Parties, respecting existing legal procedures and the principles of the
  independence of the judiciary, shall seek to ensure that spectators committing
  acts of violence or other criminal behaviour are identified and prosecuted in
  accordance with the due process of the law.
                                          5
2. Where appropriate, particularly in the case of visiting spectators, and in
accordance with the applicable international agreements, the Parties shall
consider:
   a. transferring proceedings against persons apprehended in connection
with violence or other criminal behaviour committed at sports events to their
country of residence;                         '
    b. seeking the extradition of persons suspected of violence or other crimi­
nal behaviour committed at sports events;
   c. transferring persons convicted of offences of violence or other criminal
behaviour committed at sports events to serve their sentences in the relevant
country.

                                   A rtic le 6

                              Additional measures
1. The Parties undertake to co-operate closely with their appropriate
national sports organisations and clubs and where appropriate, stadium
owners, on arrangements regarding the planning and execution of alterations
to the physical fabric of stadia or other alterations, including access to and
egress from stadia, necessary to improve safety and to prevent violence.
2.   The Parties undertake to promote, where necessary and in appropriate
 cases, a system laying down requirements for the selection of stadia which take
 into account the safety of spectators and the prevention of violence amongst
 them, especially for those stadia used for matches likely to attract large or
 unruly crowds.
 3. The Parties undertake to encourage their national sports organisations to
 review.                                                                           X-
 to outbreaks of v L ^ M cejjjipla^ersV fs'^tatfl^"

                                    A rticle 7
                            Provision of information
     Each Party shall forward to the Secretary General of the Council of
 Europe, in one of the official languages of the Council of Europe, all relevant
 information concerning legislative and other measures taken by it for the
 purpose of complying with the terms of this Convention, whether with regard
 to football or to other sports.

                                    A rticle 8
                               Standing Committee
  1. For the purposes of this Convention, a Standing Committee is hereby
  established.
  2.  Any Party may be represented on the Standing Committee by one or more
  delegates. Each Party shall have one vote.
                                         6
    3. Any member State of the Council of Europe or other State party to the
    European Cultural Convention which is not a Party to this Convention may be
    represented on the Committee as an observer.
    4. The Standing Committee may, by unanimous decision, invite any non­
    member State of the Council of Europe which is not a Party to the Convention
    and any sports organisation concerned to be represented by an observer at one
    or more of its meetings.
    5. The Standing Committee shall be convened by the Secretary General of
    the Council of Europe. Its first meeting shall be held within one year of the date
    of the entry into force of the Convention. It shall subsequently meet at least
    every year. In addition it shall meet whenever a majority of the Parties so
    request.
    6. A majority of the Parties shall constitute a quorum for holding a meeting of
    the Standing Committee.
    7. Subject to the provisions of this Convention, the Standing Committee shall
    draw up and adopt by consensus its own Rules of Procedure.

                                        A rticle 9
    1. The Standing Committee shall be responsible for monitoring the applica­
    tion of this Convention. It may in particular:
      a. keep under review the provisions of this Convention and examine anv
    modifications necessary;
       b. hold consultations with relevant sports organisations;
        c. make recommendations to the Parties concerning measures to be taken
    for the purposes of this Convention;
       d. recommend the appropriate measures to keep the public informed
.   ^ the
      e- make recorfirnendtionsHto the-Committee of Ministers concerning riori-
    member States of the Council of Europe to be invited to accede to this
    Convention;
       /. make any proposal for improving the effectiveness of this Convention.
    2. In order to discharge its functions, the Standing Committee may, on its
    own initiative, arrange for meetings of groups of experts.

                                       A rticle 10
        After each meeting, the Standing Committee shall forward to the Commit­
    tee of Ministers of the Council of Europe a report on its work and on the
    functioning of the Convention.

                                       A rticle 11
                                     Amendments
    1. Amendments to this Convention may be proposed by a Party, the
    Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe or the Standing Committee.
    2. Any proposal for amendment shall be communicated by the Secretary
    General of the Council of Europe to the member States of the Council of
    Europe, to the other States party to the European Cultural Convention and to
    S f c r l n '“' T “ State ,which has acceded to or has been invited to accede to
    this Convention m accordance with the provisions of Article 14.
    3. Any amendment proposed by a Party or the Committee of Ministers shall
    be communicated to the Standing Committee at least two months before the
    ! " 5 nat w!“ ch Il] s *° be considered. The Standing Committee shall submit
    to the Committee of Ministers its opinion on the proposed amendment where
    appropriate after consultation with the relevant sports organisations. *
 4.     The Committee of Ministers shall consider the proposed amendment and
 amendment11 SUbm,tted by the Standing Committee ind may adopt the

 5. The text of any amendment adopted by the Committee of Ministers in
 acceptance *   paragrap 4 of thls Artlcle shall be forwarded to the Parties for

 6u nAny amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article
 shall come into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a
 period of one month after all Parties have informed the Secretary General of
 their acceptance thereof.

                                      Final Clauses
                                       A r t ic l e 12

r nn l l ! snf c nventl0n j ha" bec °Pen for signature by member States of the
S n Sh l            Pe      0tuer States party t0 the European Cultural Conven­
tion, which may express their consent to be bound by:
      fl. signature without reservation as to ratification, acceptance or approval,,

       -sl_gMture o b je c t to ratiffcatiorij- acceptance or approval^ followed bv~
ratification, acceptance or approval.
2 Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with
the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

                                       A rticle 13
}  The Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month
            exp‘ratI° " of a P fnod of one month after the date on which three
E d hv i r       the Council of Europe have expressed their consent to be
bou d by the Convention in accordance with the provisions of Article 122
m J nJ Sf^ CK 0f, a!Ly T at0ryState which subsequently expresses its consent
to be bound by it, the Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the
month following the: expiration of a period of one month after the date of
approval ^            dePoslt of the instrument of ratification, acceptance or


                  3 The Convention entered into force on 1 November 1985

                                            8
                                   A rticle 14
1. After the entry into force of this Convention, the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe, after consulting the Parties, may invite to accede to
the Convention any non-member State of the Council of Europe by a decision
taken by the majority provided for in Article 20.d of the Statute of the Council
of Europe and by the unanimous vote of the representatives of the Contracting
States entitled to sit on the Committee of Ministers
2. In respect of any acceding State, the Convention shall enter into force on
the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of one month
after the date of the deposit of the instrument of accession with the Secretary
General of the Council of Europe.

                                   A rticle 15
1. Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument
of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, specify the territory or
territories to which this Convention shall apply.
2. Any Party may, at any later date, by declaration addressed to the Secretary
General of the Council of Europe, extend the application of this Convention to
any other territory specified in the declaration. In respect of such territory the
Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the
expiration of a period of one month after the date of receipt of such declaration
by the Secretary General.
3. Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect
of any territory mentioned in such declaration, be withdrawn by a notification
addressed to the Secretary General. Such withdrawal shall become effective on
the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of six months
after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary General.


1. Any Party may, at any time, denounce this Convention by means of a
notification addressed to the Secretary General oftH eC officifof E u ro p e ’
2. Such denunciation shall become effective on the first day of the month
following the expiration of a period of six months after the date of receipt of the
notification by the Secretary General.

                                    A rticle 17
   The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member
States of the Council of Europe, the other States party to the European
Cultural Convention and any State which has acceded to this Convention, of:
    a. any signature in accordance with Article 12;
   b. the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession in accordance with Article 12 or 14;
   c. any date of entry into force of this Convention in accordance with
Articles 13 and 14;
   d. any information forwarded under the provisions of Article 7;
   e. any report established in pursuance of the provisions of Article 10;
   /• any proposal for amendment or any amendment adopted in accordance
with Article 11 and the date on which the amendment comes into force;
   g. any declaration made under the provisions of Article 15;
   h. any notification made under the provisions of Article 16 and the date on
which the denunciation takes effect.
   In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have
signed this Convention.
    Done at Strasbourg, this 19th day of August 1985, in English and French,
both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in
the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of
Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of
Europe, to each State party to the European Cultural Convention, party to the
European Cultural Convention, and any State invited to accede to this
Convention.

                   SIGNATURES AND RATIFICATIONS
State                   Date of           Date of deposit
                        signature         of instrument of
                                          ratification or
                                          acceptance (AC)
Austria*                19 August 1985
Belgium*                19 August 1985
Denmark                 19 August 1985    Not required
Greece*                 19 August 1985
Italy*                  23 September 1985
Luxembourg*             19 September 1985
Netherlands* „
Portugal*                 - 4-$eptem6eM985*--*—■—
Sweden                     13 September 1985    Not required
United Kingdom             19 August 1985       'N ^ re q ln fe d
‘Subject to ratification or acceptance]




              Primed for H er M ajesty's Stationery Office bv Meicalfc Cooper l.imiled. Lumion
                                    Dil 601649 f S 5353596 CIO 11*5
