                  hoc
                          Miss Bannister
                          Mr Chilcot
                             Boys Smith
                         Mr Turney
                         Mr Mower                      H   ome   O   ffice
                         Mr Addison                   QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                         Mr Goddard                   LONDON SWIH PAT
                         Mr Le Vay   /
                        Mr Nagler /
                        Mr Whalley /
                        Mr Townsend
                        ”r Lidington
                        Mr Godfrey
                                                  ^        August 1989




METROPOLITAN POLICE CHARGES FOR FOOTSAT.T. MATfHTPg

          !?r y°ur letter of 31 July. I am grateful to you
for responding so swiftly to my letter of 28 July.

i n o ™ = r°FKlitun Police are today announcing the decision to
       2?fh !?? c£arges • The announcement will be low-key - a
ahoni-       *     ening Standard - and will not go into details
             i?CrStSe? J ° r each club* The Police will also be
themselves                 League and of course, the clubs

         ?ecretary and I considered carefully your suggestion
 K   5   1”creases Should be made in one go, rather than
phased   The Metropolitan Police Policy Committee were
    2- 7 °!     VleW that Phasin9 would be preferable, given
       *6° some.of the increases. Since they formed that
                   pollce Pay and rent allowance have been
       ?   ?    * " irresPective of the proposed changes to
    contracts - increase the cost to the clubs by about 17%.

            r®asons' and because of the haste with which the
SS        k    Jges Wil1 have to be introduced, we decided to go
    Zit E£aS2d aPProach* The decision to increase charges is
2        ^ e.”on,e Secretary, as Police Authority, so we shall
    1 ■ uZ   i 5e t?e announcement of the further increase in
the light of developments. We need not wait until



                                            /I was grateful...

The Hon Colin Moynihan MP
I was grateful for your helpful suggestion that we should
write to those MPs in whose constituencies the clubs are. On
reflection we decided that such letters might give the
impression that the decisions to raise the charges had been
made at the Government's insistence. Since we would prefer
the decision to be seen - as it is - as a Government agreement
to a police initiative, we decided against writing.




                           FERRERS
Cl
      <§>

< /
