                                42


                                                   T. B I C H A R D

      Gate A - that is the alignment of the camera puts it out
      of view.

Q.     Which camera was it that was used to go in on Gate A?
      A.   It would be the camera on Leppings Lane.

Q.    So the same camera?    A.   It is the same camera; it is
      just that its position is high up and directly in line
      with the top of the doors and therefore you cannot actually
      see the gate, you see the tcpsection to it.

Q. Gate A you can see just inside the gate, can you not?
   A.   You can see into the rear area heading towards the
   rear of the Stand.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       This camera is on the south
      corner of the West Stand,      is it?

           MR. COLLINS:       I think it is on the model, where the
      Usher is pointing.

Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, that is it.        That is the
      one?      A.   That is correct, sir, yes.

q.         MR. COLLINS:    There is also a Club camera, is there
      not, which has a view of the Leppings Lane turnstiles?
      A.    I do know Lhat there are Club cameras but I have
      not really been involved in that system at all;   it is
      purely a Club system.

q     The purpose of the Police system is basically what?
      What is it there for?   A.   Command and control initially
      but we are now going into areas of evidence-gathering,
      and I would say  that the trend is moving into that field.

Q.     Is that what the close-up is really for?         A.        That's right,
      sir, yes.

Q. So you can zoom in on an individual if there is a trouble­
   maker?   A.   That's right.     People sometimes misunderstand
   the video system that you : are quite capable of identifying
   somebody from a picture just by enlarging it but, in fact,
   if you look at your television screen and have more than
   six heads and shoulders on it, you wilLnot be able to
   get sufficient identification from that, and therefore
   you either have to increase the power of your lense or
   move your camera nearer to the people you want to take
   a picture of.

 Q.    Apart from the camera that looks over the turnstiles you
       have, I think,    a camera which looks over the West terracing?
       A.    That is correct, yes.

 Q. Where is that positioned?    A.   It is situated just to the
    left-hand side of the Contr'ol Box and near to the score­
    board .

    Q. Again, roughly where the Usher is pointing?           A.       That is
       tne position,   yes,   sir.
                                       T. B I C H A R D

We have heard that on the day in question there was something,
wrong with that one;  is that correct?   A.   For a number
of weeks we have had difficulty with the camera and they
have been looking into having the camera replaced or
improvements made.   In fact, on the day when I arrived
at the ground Mr. Roger Halsworth, who is the Technical
Officer for the Club, was in fact working on that camera
to try and upgrade the picture that we were actually
gettin g.

What was the trouble?   A.   When the system had been
switched on, after an amount of time, the picture would go
white - you would lose actually what you could see.    We
believed initially it was in relation to the lighting inside
the ground but we seem to think that it may be a problem
with the electrical supply to that camera.

What was the effect of that on the day in relation to your
ability to look properly at the terraces, the West terraces?
A.   On that particular day, the picture had been — the
quality had been improved.    It was not  up to mark but it
was  a lot better than it had been.    We were getting
pictures, that is the best  way of describing it.

Could you zoom in in the normal way on to the terraces if
you wanted.v.to? A.  The actual control facilities were
fully available.

 What I am getting at is this, would it have been possible,
.if you were afraid, for example, that they were becoming
 overcrowded, could you take a close-up with that camera?
 A.   You can move -----    A   close-up is available to move
 into those centre two pens.    However, because of its
 position and angle, it does give you a false impression about
 the crowd that is in there.   It is quite low down and it
 is set at 90 degrees to the pens rather than looking face
 on.

 So what is the falsity of the impression?   Does it show it
 fuller than it really is or emptier, or what?   A.   It is
 just the illusion.   The picture creates a bit of an illusion
 about the crowd that is in there.   You may be looking at
 somebody who is stood in the far corner of Pen 3 and it may
 give you the impression that in fact he is stood in the
 far corner of Pen 4.   It is because of the angle of the
 c amera.

 I follow   that but we know that those pens did          become over­
 crowded.     A. Yes, sir.

 Is there something in the positioning of that camera which
 means that itis more difficult to assess that?   A.    The
 physical position it is in is difficult to assess that the
 pens would be getting overcrowded.

 Is there anywhere else where you think the camera could be
 which would improve on that?   A.   That is available?
 Really you are looking at a position directly in front of
 the terraces.
                                       T. BIC H A R D

One point, please, on the two video monitors in the right-
hand corner of our picture.  Who decides what should be
recorded on each of those video tapes?   A.   As with
actually dealing with the monitors, either I see something
and switch it on to tape or I am instructed to tape a
particular incident.

I think about the time that Gate C was ordered to be opened by
Mr. Duckenfield, did he not ask you vvhether or not the scene
outside Leppings Lane ws being recorded?      A.   Certainly
before 3 o'clock I was asked, "Are we taping the scenes
out there?"

Can you recall, Mr. Bichard, whether you were taking it
down on both videos or just on one of them?   A.   I
cannot recollect whether it was both or one.

And the tapes from those videos, were they kept by you and
then handed over in due course to other Officers?   A.  Yes,
that is right.

Did either of them stop jn the course of that afternoon?
A.   Yes, the tapes are 3-hour VHS tapes.    One expired
just after 3 o'clock.

What about the other?   A.   The other tape, somewhere
between 2.30 and 3, the actual function of the tape, the
mode of operation, was altered inadvertantly.

 By whom?   A.    Again, the assumption is that when the radio
^repair-man came into the Control Box, Mr. Duckenfield
 actually came and stood to my right-hand side, behind the
 controls and I would then move into the left-hand corner
 and I have caught the video with my knee - the actual
 operating buttons.

 With your knee?   A.   Yes,   sir.

 One of the buttons on the desk there that we see?
 A.  No, sir, the two videos themselves are actually mounted
 to the left-hand side of that control pannel at knee height.

 When you were asked by 'Mr. Duckenfield whether or not the
 scene outside Leppings Lane was being recorded, did you not
 check the video monitor to make sure that they were - that
 is the machine itself?    A.   Yes, I looked down to the
 machine and they were both functioning right.

 Did you then not notice that one of them was not running?
 A.   It did not stop running until after 3 o'clock, sir.

 Did you not notice that one of them was not running?
 A.   They were both running, sir.   We are talking about
 the time around half past two to quarter to three.

 Yes.   A.   And it finished about 6 minutes past 3, I believe*
 one of the tapes.
                                         T. BIC HARD

I thought you told me a moment ago that one of them, due
to an inadvertant malfunction, I think is how you described
it.   A.   Yes.

Did you not notice when you checked to see whether or not
the pictures that Mr. Duckenfield wanted recorded were in
fact being recorded?   A.   Yes.

That one of the machines - had it been switched off, or
what?   A.   No.   What happens was the system was designed
to operate on a time-lapse mode so that a 3-hour tape would,
in fact, cover 18 hours of pictures.   Basically it is

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   A picture every few minutes,
is that it?   A.   Seconds we are dealing with really, sir,
and I, when I took over the system, altered it so that the
tapes would run at a normal speed so that people could view
them on normal video recorders.   However, that also means
that the tapes have to be changed during the match.   At
this particular time when I checked them, they were running
in the correct mode, that is normal speed.

     MR. KALLIPETIS:   Yes, the time that you are talking about
is when you were asked whether the scene outside Leppings
Lane was being recorded?   A.   That's right, sir.

So you are raying it is after that that somehow the switch
is knocked, are you?   A.   Yes, that's right.

•And which switch was knocked?    A.   There are three buttons
’ on the front of the video recorders and one of those which
  changes it from normal mode to 18-hour time lapse system.

 When you were asked to take over the VHF  link with Force
 Control, can you remember when that was?     A. My concentration
 was applied to that just after 3 o'clock, basically when we
 realised that things were going wrong.

 Because up to that time your main and primary duty would be
 with the videos, would it not?   A.   It   was,yes.

 You have had a chance to see the transcript from Snig Hill,
 I think, Mr. Bichard, have you not?   A.   I have now got
 that with me, yes.

 Can you tell me when, in fact, you took over from looking
 at the transcript?   Do any of the messages ring a bell with
 you?   A.   There were certain messages that were passed
 by me prior to 3 o'clock.   I would say around 5 past, 6
 minutes past 3 is when I made a conscious decision to pay
 the full attention to the VHF radio, if you like, when the
 rescue operation had begun.

 Who was .operating the VHF radio in contact with Force Control
 before you gave your conscious attention to it?    A.   I was
 monitoring it and operating it on the odd occasion when I
 used it.
