     5 - 4 . JS
                                                    HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                Direct line: 01-273 3 3 1 4
                                               Switchboard: 01-273 3000

                                               (w   as
Our reference:
Your reference:
                                                          10 April 1990

  C J Anderton Esq CBE C St J QPM CBIM
  Chief Constable
  Greater Manchester Police
  PO Box 22
   (S West P D O )
(■Chester House
  Boyer Street
  MANCHESTER M 1 6 ORE




   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT

   Your letter of 21 February in reply to Stephen Boys Smith's of
   16 February indicated the initial response by ACPO to Lord
   Justice Taylor's Final Report.  In his letter Stephen said
   that we should be reporting back to Ministers on the response
   by the police service to Taylor and suggested a meeting with
   you sometime after Easter.  This letter follows up Stephen's
   and lets you know that Lord Ferrers has asked us to arrange a
   meeting for you with him so that he can have a first hand
   account of progress by ACPO in responding to Taylor.  He would
   like the meeting to be sometime in May, if possible.

   I should like to suggest that the most convenient way to
   prepare for Lord Ferrers' meeting might be for you to let me
   have a short written account of the ACPO response so far to
   Taylor generally and, in particular to the recommendations
   highlighted in Stephen Boys Smith's letter.  If any particular
   problems have arisen it would be helpful to know of them and
   of any possible solutions.

   Turning to Taylor's recommendations for some new offences and
   penalties, my letter of 26 February asked for ACPO views on a
   number of specific questions, mostly relating to police powers
   and enforceability.  Lord Ferrers may well wish to discuss
   these matters, too, at his proposed meeting.  I did ask for
   ACPO views on these questions before Easter, if possible, but
   I know from Malcolm George that this timetable was a tight one
   for ACPO.  No doubt you will be letting me have the ACPO
   response to these questions as soon as it is available.
Returning to the progress report which I have suggested that
you might let us have in advance of Lord Ferrers' meeting, may
I ask for it within the next month? Meanwhile, could you let
me know who you would like to be at the meeting with you -
someone from the ACPO training committee might be helpful as
Lord Ferrers is interested to hear of any training programmes
being prepared - so that we can arrange with Lord Ferrers'
Private Secretary a convenient date and time for those
attending.




m
                                   J L GODDARD
                                   F8 Division
I




    hcc   Mr Chilcot
          Mr Hammond
          HMCIC
          Mr Boys Smith (o/r)
          Mr Addison
          Ms Edwards
          Mrs Catto
          Mr Cane
          Miss Goose
          Mr Cogbill
          Mr Rhodes
