                                    DRAFT ORAL STATEMENT

                                   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



With permission Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


2.         On 30 June 1997 I announced to the House that the Attorney General, the
Director of Public Prosecutions and I had agreed that it was in the public interest to
establish an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there was any new evidence
relating to the disaster which was not previously available.          Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, was appointed to conduct that
scrutiny. His terms of reference were:


           To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
           Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


           (a)        to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


           (b)        to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for the
                      purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities;
                      or


           (c)        to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
                      disciplinary matters; and in relation to (a) to advise whether any
                      evidence not previously available is of such significance as to
                      justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
                      Department o f a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
                      (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously
                      considered by them which may be relevant to their respective
                      duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which
                      should be taken in the public interest.



c:\dos\pp0556pd.doc
3.         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report, which I am publishing
today.


4.         He had two essential tasks. The first was to advise me whether any evidence
not previously available was of such significance as to justify a further public inquiry.
The second task was to identify for the Attorney General, the Director of Public
Prosecutions and the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire police any evidence that
might be relevant to their decisions which has not previously been considered.


5.         With any major disaster, it is inevitable that over the course of time some new
information may become available which was not known at the relevant time. There
were many thousands of people present at Hillsborough on that awful day and
millions more watched it on their television screens. There will always be some new
shred of information which might be gleaned. But that does not always mean that
the previous outcomes would have been any different. We must be satisfied that
any re-opening of previous proceedings would be merited, and that any new
information is not simply new, but also material to those proceedings.


6.         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail all the evidence
which has been put to him. He has looked equally rigorously at all the information
presented to him, whether that information came from individuals or official bodies.
His clear conclusion is that there is no basis on which there should be a further
public inquiry, nor is there any basis for a renewed application to quash the verdict of
the inquest, nor is there any material which should be put before the Director of
Public Prosecutions or the disciplinary authorities which might cause them to re­
consider the decisions they have already taken. He concludes that none of the
evidence which he was asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence
which was available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.


7.         I, the Attorney General and the DPP have considered Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s report very carefully. We have decided that his conclusions are right.



c:\dos\pp055Spd.doc
8.         Few events in recent history have been subject to such lengthy and detailed
examination. The public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor considered fully
the causes of the disaster and made wide ranging recommendations about crowd
control and safety at sports events which have had a profound effect on safety at
football grounds and the policing of football matches.


9.        The deaths that occurred were also the subject of inquests conducted by the
Coroner for the Western District of South Yorkshire. The inquests, conducted in two
parts in April and May 1990 and between November 1990 and March 1991, involved
over 80 days of public hearing. A further investigation was conducted by the West
Midlands police, supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether
there were any grounds for criminal or disciplinary proceedings. That investigation
involved the taking of more than 5000 statements. At a later stage in November
1993, there was a judicial review of the coroner’s proceedings, which upheld the
inquest verdict of accidental death and the conduct of those proceedings. We have
now had this further detailed scrutiny by a senior Lord Justice of Appeal.


10.       The main causes of the disaster are clear.         They were identified by
Lord Taylor in his interim report in August 1989. He did not attribute all the blame to
a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear that “the main
reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”. The South Yorkshire police
have accepted the main share of responsibility for the disaster. They, together with
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the Local Authority, who were also
criticised by Lord Taylor, have paid many millions of pounds in compensation -
although money is little compensation for the loss which so may families have
suffered.


11.        I fully understand why those who lost loved ones at Hillsborough should feel
betrayed by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and for
the state of the ground on that day. I hope and believe that the changes which
resulted from the Taylor Inquiry mean that it could never happen again.



c:\dos\pp0556pddoc
    12.        But there is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough
    families. As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report,


               “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has personally
               been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or
               even to the extent o f losing theirjo b ”.


    13.        There are profound shortcomings in the police disciplinary system.             The
    Home Affairs Committee produced a report on 15 January which makes
    recommendations for change. I will be responding fully to that report soon. But
    what happened after Hillsborough is a prime example of why we have to improve the
    current arrangements.


    14.        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also comments on the coroner’s proceedings after
    a major disaster, which has been subject to a public inquiry.               He endorses the
    recommendation of a Home Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests,
    published in March 1997, that the role of the coroner after such a public inquiry
    should be limited.

>


    15.        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith highlights in his report the exceptionally difficult task
    which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest. I believe that it would have
    been better if that inquest had never taken place. The Taylor inquiry, which all have
    accepted as an excellent report, would then have remained unchallenged as the last
    word on the causes of the disaster.


    16.        I     therefore   agree    in   principle    with   Lord   Justice   Stuart-Smith’s
    recommendations about the conduct of inquests after a major disaster.


    [17.       This report is substantial and detailed. I appreciate that Honourable Members
    will not have had the opportunity to read it fully. With the agreement of my Right
    Honourable Friend the Leader of the House, I am able to indicate that the



    c:\dos\pp0556pd.doc
Government would be willing to make time available for Honourable Members to
debate the report further, if that were the wish of the House.]


18.       When I established the scrutiny I said that I would do my best to ensure that
the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published. Most of the
main material which he has considered is contained in the Appendices to his report.
Much of the other evidence which he considered is already in the public domain,
consisting of transcripts of public hearings or material considered by the Taylor
Inquiry. I am arranging for other material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to
be placed in the Library of the House.


19.       All Honourable Members will have the most profound sympathy with all the
families and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to
comprehend what they have suffered. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in his report:


           “   I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
          especially since they have had their hopes raised that something more could
          be done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had
           to look dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in
           the light o f the evidence which had previously been considered”.


20 .       I, the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions must consider
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same light. We must at some point draw a
line under what happened at Hillsborough and move on. However painful that must
be for those who lives have been touched by that disaster, I believe that now is the
time to draw that line.




c:\dos\pp0556pddoc
