E.R.
                                         cc   Mr   Turney
                                              Hr   Spurgeon
                                              Hr   Soden
                                              Hr   Brook


    Hr Bolton
    DISASTERS AND THE LAW
    Thank you for copying to me your note of 14 Harch to Hr Turney
    with its attachments.
    2. I support the line in your draft. Your point about the lack

•   of formal authority by which the HSE could have investigated the
    Hillsborough Disaster is telling.
    3. I read the background papers, and in particular the note of
    the meeting on 13 December 1990, with considerable interest.
    While I can understand the pain which the Lord Chancellor's
    Department must feel about the expense, both in terms of judge
    power and finance, of non-statutory inquiries, I frankly do not
    see how Hinisters can be persuaded that an HSE investigation will
    compare in public response with an inquiry by a High Court Judge
    or a QC. The pressure for Hinisters to act quickly, publicly,
    and with due regard to the gravity of events, is overwhelming.
    They would, in my view, take considerable persuading that an
    inquiry by the HSE would look as good in public relations terms.
    That is not to denigrate the HSE, but simply to note that what
    Hinisters want at the critical moment is to show that they are
    bringing in an individual of standing, not a department with
    which the general public are largely unfamiliar. In any case,
    in a situation as complicated as Hillsborough, I do not see how
    the HSE could have been expected to investigate matters of police
    planning, the conduct of the Football Association, the actions
    of the fire and ambulance services, the competence of the local
    authority and so on.        Certainly, the emergency services
    themselves would I suspect not have tolerated judgement being
    passed on them by the HSE alone.
    4.   The points, discussed under Advantages and Disadvantages,
    about the relative length of time which each kind of inquiry
    might take, how well it is controlled, and whether the Chairman
    has the necessary expertise, seem to me largely to depend upon
    the calibre of the person chosen.      The traditional view of
    choosing a lawyer is that lawyers can be expected to get at the
    heart of any issue, however technical, since they are doing that
    all the time. Some, of course, are more competent than others.
    Huch would depend upon how each inquiry chairman used his
    assessors. We were fortunate during Hillsborough in that Lord
    Justice Taylor readily turned to his assessors for advice, kept
    in very close touch with them throughout, and involved them
    fully.
       5.   Finally, it was perhaps fortuitous that the investigation
       division of the Health and Safety Inspectorate were located in
       Sheffield, but they proved invaluable in carrying out the
E.R.
   technical work which the Hillsborough Inquiry commissioned. This
   was done formally under the direction of one of the assessors,
   Professor Maunder, but I was surprised how easy it was to build
   up and establish informal working links between the Deputy
   Director of the laboratory at Sheffield, the West Midlands
   Police, Counsel for the Inquiry, and our own Secretariat.      It
   meant that we could combine the advantages of the technical
   expertise available to HSE with the senior level judicial
   chairmanship which the gravity of the disaster seemed to require.




                                                      R M WHALLEY

   Establishment Division 2
   14 March 1991
