          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Ms Lynne Fox                                                 Your reference:

                                                             Our reference:
BRIGHTON
BN1                                                          Date:                        10 February 1998




               / ■ Aj Fok

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


As promised over the telephone today I enclose the project and album of photographs which
you sent to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to assist him in his scrutiny of the evidence about the
Hillsborough disaster.

The Judge has asked me to pass on his thanks for letting him see this material.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




                            C»                         ^    s u<c«^-   s   LA j U l   ^

                                 &3j\w               W
                                                                                      Lynne Fox,



                                                                                   BRIGHTON.
                                                                                     BN1

                                                                      Tel; (Mobile)

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 1106,
50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
LONDON
SW1H9AT



10th October 1997



Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,

I lost my brother at the Hillsborough Disaster. He was just 21 years old. One day he went to a
football match and never came home, that's all I know.

On the day of the disaster my parents spent the most part trying to get through on the help-line.
On the rare occasion they did no-one was able to offer any information. Even after they leamt
of his death through a friend who was at the disaster with my brother they were never officially
notified. Yet when all of his belongings were returned to my parents they discovered both his
driving licence and picture I.D. in his wallet, which was on his person at the time of death.
Within his driving licence was a donor card. Why did nobody check for any identification?
Why was he not put on life support machine so somebody else could make use of his organs?
Why were my parents never notified?

I realise the Coroner s court is to establish ‘how, when and where the deceased came by his
death;’, but I feel the way Dr Popper conducted his court denied my family and many others
this right. Many people are still asking how, when and where their relative died.

Last year I graduated from the University of
               For my final year of this course 1 chose to research the Hillsborough Disaster. I
did not expect to find so much evidence, so easily, that proved what a whitewash the inquests
really were. I conducted many interviews with the bereaved families and survivors. I read
books and articles that had been written about the disaster. I read through many back-dated
issues of newspapers. I discovered a lot of conflicting evidence. There are statements from
experts who disproved evidence that had been given at the inquests, yet they were never called
to give this evidence. It appeared that any evidence conflicting with the police evidence was
never brought before the jury.

I have many, many other points I would like to make that could possibly sway your decision
on whether to order a new inquest, but this letter would just turn into another dissertation on
the subject. It is for this reason that I have enclosed my dissertation. I don’t claim to be a
literary expert, but I feel I have made a lot of valid points on the failure of the Coroner’s
inquests. I can appreciate that you are very busy, but I feel certain that this may help you come
to the right decision. I have also enclosed work completed in my final year which appeared in
the Observer Life magazine last December.

I also find it quite remarkable that both my research and that done by Granada T.V. for Jimmy
Me Govem’s drama-documentary both uncovered the same evidence and made all the same
points, yet these were two completely independent projects.

I ’m sure you knew and respected your predecessor the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor, and have
read his conclusions in the interim report. It is with this overwhelming evidence that I feel the
system of justice has somehow been coerced. With such powerful establishments like the
Police force and the former Conservative Government it is easy to see how certain conclusive
evidence was overlooked. I believe it would take a strong, brave and dedicated man of justice
to dust away the cobwebs and look beyond the surface, but now with a new government it is
time for the truth and justice; “for once and for all, lets gets to the bottom of all this”.




Yours Faithfully,




Lynne Fox
