                          November 1991




jWikr.
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

Thank you for your letter of 4 November to
the Home Secretary.
Enquiries our being made and a substantive
reply will be sent to you in due course.




                R J PICKERING    '
         Assistant Private Secretary




George Howarth Esq MP
                            —        /     r*     jJk-            rwiuMA
                                     UM      vsl^

                                                             •.   H (na
               HOUSE OF C O M M d N S
                    L O N D O N SW1A OAA             /        '
                                                    "V?
5th November 1991                                                 fa H d k


Rt Hon Kenneth Baker M.P.                     /^
Home Secretary                                 */■ •
50 Queen Anne's Gate                              •'
London SWIH 9AT
                                                         }
                                                         /
Dear Home Secretary
RE:- HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I am writing to protest at the way in which South
Lancashire Police have effectively side-stepped the
proposed disciplinary investigation into Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield for his part in the
Hillsborough tragedy.
As you are aware, the policing of the Hillsborough
tragedy has consistently been a subject of criticism,
not least in the Taylor report. However, to date, no
detailed investigation around the responsibilities of
those concerned has yet been undertaken or published.
This means, in effect, that specific responsibility
for certain decisions will never, unless you
intervene, be fully pinned down.

Let me say that I am not seeking to hound Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield, or question the fact that
he was allowed to take early retirement on the basis
of his ill-health, which, I understand, has been the
subject of a proper medical examination. However,
if the families of those sadly killed at that event,
or, indeed, any of the survivors, are to be'satisfied
that the justice they were promised by the then Prime
Minister has been obtained, then surely the policing
of the event, irrespective of the medical circumstances
of anybody at this time, must be subject to a detailed
investigation. Whether this is achieved by a
disciplinary process or some other means, does not, it
seems to me, really matter.


                                               (continued).
*
                                -   2   -


    Having met a large group of the families, I can assure
    you that they are far from happy at the whole process
    which has so far taken place up to and including the
    Coronor's Inquest and this latest decision, which
    incidentally they predicted several weeks ago to me and
    my colleague, Peter Kilfoyle, only adds to their sense
    of frustration and injustice.
    I have written separately to the Attorney General, arising
    out of a letter from the Prime Minister's office to one of
    the families and hope to meet him in the near future.
    However, I do believe it is within your ppwers’'fa 1o7?^\
    very closely at the implications of Soutfe^Lancashire1s ^
    Police decision to effectively evade an inv§si?igatjLoa-^tnto
    the role of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
    Although I have copied this letter quite widely to a
    number of interested parties, it has not been written with
    a view to publication.r
    There is, however, a very serious issue at stake here,
    namely the fact that at the time of the Hillsborough tragedy,
    the families were given very clear assurances by not least
    a person than the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, that
    everything would be fully investigated and that no stone
    would be left unturned.
    Whilst I realise that it might be convenient to leave this
    matter as it stands, I am painfully aware that all of these
    people are left feeling that every promise they were made
    has not been honoured, either in the spirit or the letter.

    It is in_Jthis_^art that I seek your intervention in finding
    some wa¥--of,TJrepfeJ^ly investigating in detail the role of
    South (LancashireP^lice in general and the role of the
    officers-1— responsible specifically* in the policing of
    that day of that event.

    Yours sincerely



                frth M.P.
    Knovteley ftLorth

    c.c. Mr     Peter Joynes
         Mr     P Hammond, Hillsborough Family Support Group
         Mr     Peter Kilfoyle M.P.
         Mr     Eddie O'Hara M.P.
         Mr     Eddie Loyden M.P.
         Hr     Bob Parry M.P.
         Hr     Bob Wareing M.P.
         Mr     Frank Field M.P.
         Mr     Joe Benton M.P.
         i-lr   John Evans M.P.
         Hr     Gerry Bermingham M.P.
