                                         HILL
                                      DICKINSON
EQ U ITY & L A W HO U S E
4 7 C A ST LE STREET
                                                       &co                       TELEX: 6 2 7 3 2 7 HILD IC G
                                                                                 CABLES: HILLDICK LIVERPOOL
LIVERPOOL L2 9U B                                                                D X 14153 LIVERPOOL
                                           S O LIC ITO R S   ■   NOTARIES        FAX: 0 5 1-22 7 1352
TELEPHONE: 0 5 1-22 7 3151



                                                                                                                <•   J   c
                                                                                 YOUR REF
R.M. Whalley Esq
Secretary to the Inquiry into the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                                                    OUR REF
                                                                                              PWJ.KEL.1860-002
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON                                                                           DATE28th July 1989
SW1H 9AT


                                                                                                                         1
Dear Sir

                                                   HILLSBOROUGH



           We enclose herewith six copies of the balance of our client's
recommendations for Part II of the Inquiry.                                     We also enclose six
copies of an index to accompany the text.                                    The index and the text
should follow on from Page 22 of Part I of our recommendations.


                                            Yours faithfully,




                                           HILL DICKINSON & CO.




                             ROY G. HILL
J.D . GREGSON                PETER JACKSON                   DAVID WAREING   LONDON ADDRESS          THIS FIRM IS REGULATED
ANTHO NY HARDING-HUBER       RICHARD MARTINDALE              JOHN WOLFE      IRONGATE HOUSE         BY THE LAW SOCIETY
MARTIN G. h|ILL              JOHN MAXW ELL                   ASSOCIATE:      DUKE'S PLACE           IN THE CONDUCT OF
JOHN HUllMES                 DAVID SWAFFIELD                 ANNE DOBIE      LONDON EC3A7LP         INVESTMENT BUSINESS
        *v

,-5\ l«v89
                              INDEX

                             PART II




Membership Scheme




(a)    Introduction

(b)    Current forms of membership

(c)    The Football Supporters7 Bill
                                PART II




1.    MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES

(a)   Introduction



      The concept of "membership" for football supporters is one

      which the FSA wholeheartedly supports.     The Association was

      launched with the principle aim of seeking representation for

      supporters, precisely to realise their potential as important

      members of the footballing body politic.     "Membership" is

      normally defined essentially as "belonging"; "taking part" and

      (in a parliamentary or societal sense) as "one formally

      elected to take part in the proceedings" etc.     The FSA

      therefore seeks "membership" for football supporters both

      generally, so that they may feel to belong and, specifically,

      so that their elected representatives might take a full part

      in the proceedings of the game at club, national and

      international levels.



      The kind of membership that supporters have been invited to

      assume so far however, has usually fallen well short of the

      real thing.    For supporters to date becoming a member in

      association with a football club has often amounted to the

      dubious privilege of paying money for a service which

      previously was free of charge.      It has offered no "rights" for

      members and little responsibility either.      It has included no

      incentive of a deeper involvement with the club, nor the

      possibility of controlling one's own affairs as a member.

      Membership, therefore, exists only in word for football fans,

      not yet in deed.
                                - 2 -




(b)   Current Forms of Membership



      The most striking feature of the development of current

      membership schemes at League Clubs has been the

      unco-ordinated, individualistic manner of their emergence.

      Over the past twenty years, various schemes at a variety of

      clubs have sought to limit access to section of the ground to

      provide either "family" or "members only" enclosures.     The FSA

      has generally supported these schemes.   Other schemes have

      sought to control, in some way, the admission of visiting

      fans.



      Following the Popplewell Inquiry Report in 1985, the

      Government began increasingly to look upon "membership" as a

      means to indentify and exclude supporters who were potentially

      troublesome.   The Football League, however, has had difficulty

      seeing partial or voluntary schemes as of any service in

      defeating hooliganism, and thinks a compulsory scheme to be

      completely impractical.   Consequently, the dialogue between

      League and Government has been at constant cross-purposes.

      Despite Mr Justice Popplewell's recommendations that voluntary

      membership schemes offering real advantages should be

      "encouraged at the expense of the potential hooligan" (Final

      Report 4.22.145), existing schemes have signally failed to

      provide positive advantages to supporters, apart from minor

      concessions at local businesses.
(i)   The 50% Membership Scheme



Early in 1987, under pressure from the Government, the

Football League's Anti-Hooligan Committee recommended the

imposition of a 50% membership scheme at League Clubs.     This

recommendation was undoubtedly an attempt to ward off the

possible imposition of a 100% scheme and, the League met (in

Autumn 1986) with FSA representatives for the first time prior

to producing their report.   The FSA presented its own document

to the Anti-Hooligan Committee which outlined various positive

approaches to the problem of crowd misbehaviour (Tab 7).     This

document and the ideas it contained were completely ignored.

(Correspondence with the Football League, Tab 9).



The subsequent attempts by clubs to provide a 50% scheme were

confused and confusing to supporters.   Most clubs

(understandably given the League's attitude) could see little

point in the requirements. To date, there still remains one

club, Barnsley F.C., who have yet to introduce it, even

partially.   Between the Government's vision of "membership" as

a means of control and the League's half-hearted efforts to

provide a sop to assuage the pressure to "do something", the

idea of membership as a means of advantaging fans and, in

particular, of drawing them more closely to their clubs was

lost from sight.
                           - 4 -



Typically, many clubs looked upon the 50% scheme as another

opportunity to exploit commercially their regular customers.

(The Government, too, seem to consider commercial exploitation

a major incentive for clubs to introduce a compulsory

membership scheme).    The "membership fee" ranged from 50p at

Fulham to £15.50 at Chelsea.       Other clubs simply registered

their season-ticket holders as "members" and charged nothing.

The FSA (London Branch) produced a document the following

season describing the implementation of the 50% schemes (Tab

15) .



(ii)    The Luton Town "Home Only” Scheme



Luton's membership scheme is the product of various special

circumstances pertaining to the club, its location and the

political ambitions of its recent Chairman, David Evans.        The

scheme has received considerable support from the local

community but no comprehensive poll of the club's supporters

(either before or since the scheme's introduction) has been

attempted.    However, just under 4,000 Luton fans have signed

the FSA's anti-I.D. Card petition, a figure close to 50% of

the club's average home gate.



Luton's scheme is highly unpopular with supporters of other

clubs who can no longer visit Kenilworth Road.       A survey

conducted by the Sir Norman Chester Football Research Centre

indicated general distaste for the scheme amongst fans.

(Luton Town etc Final Report; June 1987).       The Centre's
                           - 5 -



research (part-funded by Government) also made it quite clear

that the "Home Only" scheme was "hardly relevant" to the

national problem of hooliganism.     (Summary of Research

Findings P.4. Feb.1988).



Unfortunately, the Luton scheme, instead of being presented as

an exceptional attempt to solve a highly specific problem in a

unique location has been offered as a panacea for football's

hooligan problem.   Such a (politically) tendentious assertion,

though popular at a Conservative Party Conference, only served

to exacerbate the Football League's opposition to the scheme

and heighten the anxieties of the vast majority of

supporters of other clubs.



Though Luton's scheme has certainly helped curtail the

hooligan problem, it has yet to fulfil the oft-repeated

promise of drawing back supporters put off by crowd

misbehaviour.   In fact, Luton's attendances have clearly

shrunk, despite some very successful seasons since the

scheme's implementation, and some determined massaging of

statistics to suggest the contrary.     (We suspect Luton's

much-vaunted "arrest figures" may have been subject to a

similar process - "football related offences" can be

interpreted a number of ways).     The general effect of seeking

to represent the Luton scheme as a cure-all has been to cloud

rather than clarify its impact.     For its defenders, the scheme

must be "perfect"; for its attackers, an "anathema".        However,

it has been undoubtedly less than helpful (not to say

pointless) to present the Luton scheme as
                          - 6 -



a realistic option for defeating hooliganism at football

generally when its imposition nationwide is practically

impossible.



(iii) Supporters Clubs/Independent Supporter Organisations



Traditionally, supporters have sought to organise themselves

around their particular clubs and in relation to them.        Some

of these supporters clubs are affiliated to the National

Federation of Football Supporters Clubs (the "Federation")

though many are not.   Of the ninety two League Clubs, just

over half of them have supporters clubs affiliated to the

Federation.



There are four types of supporters clubs;



1.    Independent Clubs



Some football clubs (like Leicester City, for example) have

well-run, independent supporters clubs with whom a very good

working relationship exists.      (In Leicester's case, a portion

of the ground has been set aside for its members.)     This

supporters club is not affiliated to the Federation, however,

three other "Leicester City Supporters Clubs", based in

Loughborough, Rugby and Coleville, also exist, the former of

which is run by Tony Kershaw, the Federation's Chairman, and

is, of course, affiliated.
                             - 7 -



Other independent supporters clubs (such as that at Tottenham

Hotspur F.C.) have no formal link with the club supported at

all.   Both the related and non-related types of independent

clubs usually organise social activities and make travel

arrangements etc for their members.      They also seek to

represent their members with varying degrees of success.



2.     Social/Drinking Clubs



This type of club is essentially a licensed premises,

nominally attached to a particular football club.       They

usually oraganise social activities but do not seek to

represent their "members" in any official capacity.



3.     Club-run Clubs



This type of club is an "official" organisation staffed and

run by the host football club.       Inevitably, such clubs are

intended to function as commercial enterprises with little or

no representative role.     Queens Park Rangers F.C. run such a

supporters club and when, in 1987, an attempt was made to

merge Fulham F.C. with Q.P.R. no protest emerged from the

"supporters club".      Vigorous protests by fans themselves

eventually helped defeat the proposal.
                                - 8 -



      4.    Pressure-qroup Clubs



      This type of club has emerged in the last few years as part of

      the general rise of "alternative" supporter activity.     Such

      clubs (like the Q.P.R. Loyal Supporters Association) have

      little interest in the traditional social/drinking activities

      of supporters clubs but seek to represent effectively the

      views of their members to their appropriate clubs.   (The

      Q.P.R. L.S.A. is, in part, an attempt to counterbalance the

      Club-run club at Q.P.R.). Many of the "pressure-group clubs"

      operate in association with a "fanzine" - a supporter-produced

      magazine which comments on the club's affairs.   Most of these

      "pressure-group clubs" are affiliated to the FSA, as are the

      overwhelming majority of fanzine producers.



      There remain around twenty football clubs with no supporters

      clubs at all.   However, the membership of the FSA includes

      supporters of all ninety two English Football League Clubs,

      over 75% of Scottish League clubs and a small number of

      non-league clubs.




(c)   The Football Spectators Bill



      The FSA is absolutely opposed to the Government's proposals

      for a compulsory, national membership scheme, contained in

      Part I of the Football Spectators' Bill.   Part II of the Bill,

      which makes proposals about preventing those convicted of
                         - 9 -



football related offences from travelling when English

clubs/the English team are playing abroad, receives our

support.



The FSA recognise the Government's concern to seek effective

measures to combat hooliganism at football.     Despite the

anti-hooligan measures imposed over the last decade, the

fractured and often ineffective administrative structure which

attempts to govern the game in England is clearly unable on

its own to deal with the problem.   This is not simply a result

of ineffecient practise for, as indicated earlier, the roots

of the trouble travel far beyond football's territory.

Consequently, there are good reasons why the Government might

wish to help cure the game of its ills.   Unfortunately, its

chosen medicine - the I.D. Card Scheme - is more likely to

kill the patient.



The Government has got it wrong for the same     reason that

football's administration failed in the past.     Instead of

recognising (as we would argue) that a chronic failure to

consult with supporters and co-opt them into the strategy

building process has exacerbated crowd problems, the

Government just carried on where the game left off.     When the

Government's "Working Party" was constituted to develop a

compulsory scheme (in July 1988) it included no

representatives of the supporters who were to be subject to

the scheme!   Despite an official request, Government (and the

football administrators) made no concessions to
                            - 10 -



supporter-representation (Appendix 8) . It was preferred

to keep the fans at arms length; their views would be "taken

into account" etc.



The FSA produced its own document for the Working Party's

consideration (Appendix 8) and full response to the Working

Party's proposals, published in November 1988 (Appendix 10).

In the meantime, the FSA continued to urge the Football League

and the F.A. to begin a dialogue with supporters (Appendix 9).



In the event, no advice from outside the Government appears to

have been heeded at all.    Despite uniform opposition from the

Football administrators, academic researchers, all but two of

the League Clubs, police representatives (the Police

Federation) and supporters (FSA and the Federation), the

Football Spectators Bill was draughted as planned.     Not only

was it assembled without any real consultation at all, the

Bill seeks to intensify the same "control-strategy" that has

failed     in the past to make any impact on solving the problem.

The Government's Bill is simply more "stick" for supporters

with no hint of any "carrot" to encourage collective

responsibility.



The stated aim of Part I of the Bill is to separate off

the hooligan from the ordinary supporter by catching the

offender, convicting him (or not!) and removing his I.D.

Card, thereby preventing any further attendances at football

matches.    The proposal is naive in the extreme.   In the real
                          - 11 -



world of Saturday afternoon, the hooligan is rarely caught at

all - and no scheme to exclude hooligan could ever work

while that reamins the case.    Nor will the requirement to

possess an I.D. Card prevent those hooligans who are caught

from going to matches.   The offenders - especially the

confirmed and determined ones - will use other people's cards

to enter. They will have a stock of cards available from

family and friends, or (at worst) simply rely on mugging other

supporters for their cards on a match-by-match basis.



The only guaranteed method of excluding a particular person

from attending matches is:-



(i)    To catch the offender, convict him and



(ii)   To require his attendance at a designated centre on

       match days and evenings, or



(iii) To imprison the offender if the offence warrants it.



       Nothing else is sure to work.



Yet the Government seem unable to recognise the plain

commonsense of this argument.      It seems to supporters that the

Government is more interested in giving the apppearance of

vigorous action against hooliganism by ceremoniously

punishing all football fans; hence the pre-occupation with

computer technology for control and exclusion (It looks

draconian enough to satisfy).      But there is little doubt that
                           - 12 -



the real effect of the legislation will be to exclude large

numbers of the casual, "ordinary" fans from attending.       When

one remembers that a severe decline in attendances at football

matches was a prelude to the first outbreaks of modern

hooliganism, one unsuspected risk of the legislation becomes

clearer.   (Football lost almost half its regular audience

between 1948 and 1962 - when "football hooligans" were unknown

- and it has been argued that such a loss of ordinary fans

contributed to the subsequent rise in misbehaviour).



The practicalities of implementing the scheme, with its

much-vaunted computer technology, look highly improbable.       The

range of football matches - and crowds - with which the

technology must deal is huge.   With the best will in the

world, supporters often (but especially in London) cannot

arrive very early for an evening kick-off.   At Highbury last

season, a capacity crowd was drawn to the Gunner's evening

match against Liverpool. Thousands were still outside half an

hour after the published kick-off time.    In such

circumstances, the computer system envisaged would inevitably

aggravate the danger of crushing outside the ground and appear

highly punitive to fans.    The same sophisticated technology

installed at Wigan Athletic ( 4 arrests during the whole of

1987-88 season), cheek by jowl with the most rudimentary

facilities, would appear simply ludicrous.
                            - 13 -



In sum the FSA's objections to the Government's proposed I.D.

Card Scheme are as follows



(1)    It is impractical; vindictive to the generality of

ordinary supporters; largely irrelevant to the hooligan

problem and probably a safety risk.



(ii)   It makes no attempt to benefit supporters by offering

them a real role as "members".



(iii) It makes no attempt to solve the problem of hooliganism,

only to deal with it after it has occurred.     It therefore

relies on the hooligans being caught.



(iv)   The Courts already have the power within the Public

Order Act (1986), to make convicted hooligans report to the

police when games are taking place.     Therefore the only

sensible part of the Bill is superfluous.



(v)    The bill is an infringement of civil liberties.       Why

should supporters have to have their names and addressed held

on a central computer just to prove they are not trouble

makers?     Are lists of names going to be used as a means of

paying for the scheme by selling these lists to advertising

agencies?
                             - 14 -



(vi)   The police have serious reservations about the scheme,

because it gives them no flexibility.      For example, what do

they do if a large number of visiting supporters arrive at a

ground without membership cards?      The Police Federation

magazine described the scheme as "an extraordinary mish-mash

of good intentions and half-baked nostrums"; said it would

not work, and that its results could be disastrous.



(vii) It is estimated that gates will fall by at least 25%.

This will mean a loss of income to football of over £15

million. Many small clubs may go bankrupt.



(viii)Gates may fall    because:-



       (i)    Casual supporters will not bother to purchase

       a membership card just in case they might decide to

       attend a game sometime in the future.



       (ii) Large families    who all go to a game together may

       well not be able to    afford 4 or 5 cards.



       (iii)Large numbers of spectators only decide to attend

       a match on the morning of the game.



(ix)   Some Fourth Division clubs are so    concerned by the

potential loss of revenue     that they are considering

withdrawing from the League and applying to the Vauxhall

Conference.
                            - 15 -



(x)      The Government's claim that Luton's scheme has not

affected attendances is untrue.      In 1984/85 (the last year

before they introduced their membership scheme) their average

League gate was 11,938.     In 1987/88 it was 8,038.   A fall of

33%.



(xi)     The impact of Luton's scheme on hooliganism is

irrelevant to the Bill.     Luton have banned away fans,

therefore the potential for trouble does not theoretically

exist.     The I.D. Card scheme will still allow away supporters

to attend games.



(xii) Two clubs other than Luton have tried membership

schemes.     Plymouth installed a computerised entry system at

their ground of a type that it is envisaged will be

universally introduced.     It proved so impractical and problem

ridden that it was scrapped.     Colchester introduced a 100%

membership scheme and their gates fell by 50%.      Since the

scheme was scrapped the lost supporters have not returned.



(xiii)The figures for arrests at football matches are

misrepresentative.     The government has refused to confirm the

offences for which the arrests were made.      Many are believed

to be completely unrelated to football hooliganism e.g. touts,

pick pockets, cannabis smokers and car thieves.
                           - 16 -



(xiv)    The tabloid press have for many years, grossly

exaggerated trouble at football matches for dramatic effect.

Their reports of violence at the 1988 European Championships

bore no resemblance to the U.E.F.A. report which largely

exonerated the English supporters.



(xv)     The likely drop in attendance at football matches of

casual (and other more regular) supporters may well exacerbate

problems of crowd misbehaviour.



(xvi)    Finally, under the proposed scheme a club can operate

(through the F.M.A.) discretionary bans on supporters without

any criminal offence having been committed. This places a

powerful weapon in the hands of officials and Directors of

football clus to stifle the legitimate voicing of complaints

by supporters about their clubs.     In one celebrated case

recently (at Southend United F.C.), six supporters

organised to protest at plans to move the club.     They were

subsequently banned from attending matches by the club's

board.    All of the protestors were mature, long-time

supporters of the club - two of them were Old Age Pensioners!

- yet they were summarily excluded nontheless.     The power of

discretionary banning is a serious threat to the proper

organisation and representation of football supporters.
