                     hcc     Miss B a n n i s t e r
                             Mr>M6wer           /
                            ✓Mr Goddard ''                    H   ome   O   ffice




                    1
                             Mr Addison
                                                             QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                             Mr Mould ■
                             Mr L i d i n g t o n            LONDON SWIH PAT



                                                      %'i,     September 1989




                \




In Lord Ferrers' absence from the office he has asked me to
thank you for your letter of 29 August to the Home Secretary
with this one from_______________ as an example of the feeling
in Sheffield following the findings of the Interim Report of
the Hillsborough Inquiry.
As you say, any suggestion that the outcome of the Inquiry has
glossed over the causes of the terrible events of that day is
quite wrong. The Inquiry did not set out to apportion blame
for what happened but to find out the causes and make
recommendations to prevent such an accident from happening
again. Although the police were criticised the Interim Report
highlights several other contributory factors which led to the
accident, for example the absence of an authorised maximum
capacity for the pens, the layout of the crush barriers and
inadequate signs and ticketing. Criticism was not therefore
confined solely to the police.

The Report also concluded that a substantial minority of fans
who had had too much to drink aggravated the problems outside
the ground but that the evidence did not suggest that there
was a very significant number of ticketless fans. The
problems of pre-match drinking and fans without tickets will
be considered in the second stage of the Inquiry which is now
addressing the more general, long term issues of safety at
sports events.
The immediate costs of the Hillsborough Inquiry will be met in
full by the Government. With regard to the costs of the
investigations undertaken by the West Midlands police,
although their results were made available to Lord Justice
Taylor they were originally started at the initiative of the


                                                      /Chief Constable...

Irvine Patnick Esq OBE MP
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire as they concerned the
policing of his area. In addition to the investigation of
policing and related events on the day, the investigations by
West Midlands police are necessary for the presentation of
evidence to the coroner's inquests, complaints and discipline
matters and, more recently, from allegations of criminal
liability.
The Government by way of police specific grant at 51% plus
block grant already pays a sizeable proportion of the costs of
policing in South Yorkshire. However, in view of the
exceptional and unforeseen circumstances of the Hillsborough
tragedy, the Government has offered the South Yorkshire Police
Authority an additional special payment from central funds to
assist them with the additional costs they now face in respect
of the work carried out on their behalf by the West Midlands
police.
Finally, the disaster fund, to which the Government
contributed, was set up to receive donations from the public
wishing to express their sympathy for the family and friends
of victims of a national disaster.




                      BARBARA NICHOLSON
                 Assistant Private Secretary
4
