                                                          Mr Walters
              FI Division                                 Mr Yates
              Extn 3743                                   Mr Chilcot
              [date]                     A*               HMCIC
                                                          Mr Woodcock
                                                          Mr Brownlow
                                                          Mr Boys Smith
                                                          Mr Malone-Lee
                                                          Ms Edvards, LAB
                                                          Mr Sandiford
                                                          Mr Nagler
                                                          Mr Whalley
                                                          Ms Ransford

        Ms Adams


        HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATIONS BY WEST MIDLANDS* POLICE -
        LORD FERRERS* MEETING WITH THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
        ON 20 JUNE


        As requested in Miss Nicholson's note of 24 May, briefing is
        attached including a background note, line to take and speaking
        notes on individual points which may be raised at the meeting.


UflM-   Ms Ransford and I will attend the meeting. It would be helpful
        if someone from Finance Division 2 would attend the meeting.




                                          M J ADDISON
MEETING WITH SOUTH YORKSHIRE ABOUT HILLSBOROUGH INVESTIGATION:
BACKGROUND NOTE

Background and Home Office position


Mr Nagler's submission of 8 June to the Home Secretary (copy at
Appendix 1) recommended that the costs of the Hillsborough
investigation should fall initially on South Yorkshire police and
that South Yorkshire should be offered a special payment, to help
meet the costs, on the basis of a formula used in the miners'
strike.


2.   The Home Secretary has written (copy at Appendix 2) to the
Chief Secretary seeking approval for this course [and the Chief
Secretary has agreed]. Our aim will therefore be to get South
Yorkshire to agree to meet the costs on the basis that the Home
Office will reimburse a major share of the costs via the special
payment.


Basis of special payment


3.   We would be offering a special payment because:


     a.   The expenditure was unexpected and seems likely to be
          on a scale which cannot be met from South Yorkshire's
          resources without threatening the efficiency of the
          force.


     b.   It has been agreed that the results of the police
          investigations would be placed at the service of Lord
          Justice Taylor's enquiry and, as a result, the
          investigations have in certain respects gone beyond
          what would be necessary for South Yorkshire's own
          purposes.


4.   The decision as to whether to make a special payment and the
amount of any such payment depends on the circumstances of the
individual case.   Any such payment is additional to the support
 which the Government already provides through police grant (at
 51%) and block grant.

  5.   The offer in this case would be based on the same formula as
                                    If
  was used in the miners' dispute.     thus contributes a
  substantial proportion of the costs once these exceed the product
x of a 1 p rate (£1.3 million)by providing special grant at 3S^in
* addition to police grant at 51%, giving total support at 90%; i% fl*-f
  also places an absolute ceiling on the police authority
  contribution. Once their contribution reaches the product of a
  3/4 p rate then we pay 100% of the costs. They therefore will
   °t under any circumstances contribute more than/£975,000 to the



 6.   The latest estimate of costs from West Midlands police is
 that the total investigation costs are likely to reach £4-5
 million, in which case everything alaettt £975,000 of that would be
 borne by the Home Office.  (Block grant, which has been set at a
 fixed sum for the current financial year, will not be affected
 either way.)

 South Yorkshire's position


 7.   South Yorkshire are likely to argue that the Home Office
 should reimburse 100% of their costs and that we should
 accordingly reimburse West Midlands directly. They are likely to
 accept that their Chief Constable, Mr Peter Wright, initiated the
 investigation.


 8.   They may however suggest that because the investigation has
 been put at the service of Lord Justice Taylor, it has in effect
 been taken over by the Taylor enquiry.


  9.   We would accept that the investigation has been extended
  into certain areas at the instigation of Lord Justice Taylor's
*.enquiry. The (special payment recognises this, as well as the
  financial burden which meeting the full costs would entail. But
 a major investigation would have been needed by South Yorkshire
 in any event, to look into policing on the day. Involvement of
an outside force, which Mr Wright quite properly thought
desirable from the outset, would always have meant that the Chief
Constable would not be involved in its day to day direction.

West Midlands1 position


10. As Lord Ferrers knows, West Midlands has threatened to bring
l©gal action against the Home Office in order to recover the
costs. West Midlands say that Mr Dear was asked to conduct the
investigation solely and entirely for Lord Justice Taylor's
benefit. That is not however borne out by HMCIC's recollection
of events (attached at Appendix 2). As HMCIC's note indicates,
the press statement issued by Mr Wright on 16 April made it clear
that Mr Wright himself had requested an outside investigation.

11. We hope that the position can be resolved by our offer of a
special payment to South Yorkshire. If South Yorkshire will
accept that it should initially meet the bills, we can quickly
set in hand arrangements for the special payment.


12. A general line to take and speaking notes on possible
supplementary points are attached.
MEETING WITH SOUTH YORKSHIRE ABOUT POLICE INVESTIGATION INTO
HILLSBOROUGH: LINE TO TAKE AND SPEAKING NOTES

LINE TO TAKE


The investigation was initiated by South Yorkshire and is dealing
with matters which are primarily the concern of the South
Yorkshire police. It is therefore right in principle that the
costs should fall initially on South Yorkshire.


[Because of the scale and scope of the investigation, we are
satisfied that the likely costs could not be absorbed within
South Yorkshire Police Authority's budget without serious
detriment to the efficiency of the force. We are therefore
prepared to offer South Yorkshire Police Authority a special
payment following the formula used in the miners' strike. This
means fehat -for costs—above tha productof a I p rate, we would"
pay     — Moroovefl South Yorkshire's total contribution to costs
would be no more than the product of a 3/4 p rate (aad



EXACTLY HOW DOES MINERS' STRIKE FORMULA WORK?


The police authority would receive police grant on normal terms
(51%) until the total costs reach the product of a 1 p rate (£1.3
million). The Home Office would then contribute 90% (51% police
grant; 39% special grant). There would be a ceiling on the
maximum contribution by the police authority of the product of a
3/4 p rate (££975,000). Once the authority has contributed that
amount, the Home Office will meet all further costs.


THE INVESTIGATION IS FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE HOME OFFICE NOT SOUTH
YORKSHIRE
  IS CK-vl
It^was the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire who took the
initiative in requesting that an outside force should conduct the
investigation. HM Chief Inspector of Constabulary then
approached Mr Dear on South Yorkshire's behalf.
 THE INVESTIGATION WAS INITIALLY FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE BUT IS NOW
 PREDOMINANTLY FOR LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

  I accept that, as a result of the decision to make the results of
 the investigation directly available to Lord Justice Taylor
  (which was obviously a sensible arrangement) some aspects of it
 are now being conducted directly for the Taylor enquiry. The
* investigation is serving a number of purposes but it is primarily
 concerned with the policing of events on the day which is
 predominantly the concern of South Yorkshire. Under the terms
 of the proposed special payment Government will pay a major share
 of the costs, which would cover any element attributable to the
 Taylor enquiry.


 WHAT SHOULD BE THE BASIS OF REPAYMENT TO WEST MIDLANDS?


 This would be for South Yorkshire to discuss with West Midlands
 initially. Our view is that West Midlands should get additional
 costs (not basic salaries but overtime, expenses for travel and
 accommodation etc). We have also said that consequential costs
 (ie overtime worked in West Midlands to cover for the absent
 officers) should be provided for.


 DOES MUTUAL AID APPLY?


The help given by West Midlands to South Yorkshire is not mutual
aid under section 14 of the Police Act 1964. It is thus not
covered by the statutory provision on mutual aid. Nevertheless
the terms of the recent circular on mutual aid (number 38 of
1989) could be applied as a basis for reimbursement, if both
police authorities agreed that it would be sensible.


WILL THE MUTUAL AID CIRCULAR GIVE WEST MIDLANDS ENOUGH TO COVER
ITS COSTS?


The circular provides reimbursement on an average costs basis
(including estimates of likely average amounts of direct and
consequential overtime). This was agreed with the local
authority associations and ACPO as the best way of meeting the
costs involved in large-scale aid. This may mean that West
Midlands does not get every penny it thinks it has spent but it
does save the authority from having to keep detailed records'of
costs which are difficult to document (eg consequential
overtime).
