                                      ^   ^       <Y •    &   t°\y
From         J L Goddard                          CC HMCIC            )w/o
             F8 Division                                 Mr Boys Smith)ends
             Ext 3314                                    Mr Turney    )
                                                         Mr Addison
             9 July 1990                                 Miss A Edwards
                                                         Mrs Catto
                                                         Mr Cane

            (I                                           Miss Goose
                                                         Mr Cogbill
                                                         Mr Bolton




Miss Nicholson                                ^


LORD FERRERS' MEETING WITH MR ANDERTON: TUESDAY 10 JULY


I attach briefing for Lord Ferrers' use at his meeting with Mr
Anderton tomorrow, at 11 am to discuss the policing issues
arising from the final Taylor report.             Officials will attend a
pre-briefing meeting at 10.30 am.


2.     The meeting was suggested by Lord Ferrers so that he
could have a fi^st hand report on the progress which ACPO have
made in implementing the recommendations in Lord Justice
Taylor's final report.     Mr Anderton, as the relevant ACPO
representative, has already provided a written progress report
which is attached at the back of these papers.                We suggest
that the meeting follows the order of his report.                    Briefing
notes are attached in that order.


       A.    Offences and penalties
       B     CCTV and public safety
       C.    Review of police charges for policing matches
       D.    Training of police officers stewards
       E.    Review of arrest procedures
       F.    Written statements of intent
       G.    Ground Commander Training
       H.    All ticket matches
     I.     Football Supporters Club
     J.     Police reserve
     K.     Green Guide


3.   Also attached are notes covering matters raised by the
final Taylor report but not dealt with in ACPO's written
report.


     L.     Communications
     M.     Coordination of emergency services


4.   At some stage during the meeting Lord Ferrers may care to
mention the worth of the presence of Mr Malcolm George (ACC
Greater Manchester) at the World Cup and thank Mr Anderton for
sparing him for so long away from home.      (Lord Ferrers will
recall meeting Mr George, and other English police officers,
in Cagliari.)


General comments


5.   Lord Ferrers may wish to make some general comments,
perhaps after the discussion of the detailed topics at A-M
above.     He might say:-


     (i)    ACPO made a positive and prompt response to Taylor's
             interim report.   It appears that there has been an
             equally encouraging response to the final report.


     (ii) Much of the work in hand will bear fruit over a
             longer period - the new training required is an
            obvious example:   there needs to be a sustained
             impetus behind the developments now in hand.


     (Ill) Much of the work ACPO have in hand requires close
             liaison and understanding with other agencies:
             local authorities (safety certificate issues,
            charging for policing services); clubs (possible
             training of stewards, written statements of intent,
    CCTV);   and other emergency services.   Important
    that the mood of co-operation generated by the
    common response to the Hillsborough stadium disaster
    is sustained and developed.


(iv) Grateful for most constructive relationship between
    ACPO and Home Office in the response to Taylor's
    reports.




                              J L GODDARD
22-7.JS                                                        A


OFFENCES AND PENALTIES




Line to take



Grateful for ACPO's response to the Home Office about Lord
Justice Taylor's recommendations for offences and penalties.
These will be most helpful to us in reaching conclusions on
whether to legislate in the way proposed.   We hope to reach
conclusions shortly.


Background


Lord Justice Taylor recommended that there should be four new
criminal offences; ticket touting on the day of a football
match; and, at designated grounds offences of throwing a
missile, chanting obscene or racialist abuse, and going onto
the pitch without reasonable excuse.   In their letter of 14
June ACPO came .out in favour of all these offences.


Taylor also recommended greater use of attendance centres for
people convicted of football-related offences and greater use
of electronic tagging.   ACPO have said that they support both
these recommendations but have expressed reservations about
their efficacy.


Later this week officials will put forward a submission to
Ministers making recommendations on what the Government's
response to the Taylor recommendations should be.
     ) CIRCUIT TELEVISION (CCTV)
     to take

     Commend ACPO on their initiative in producing this guide.

     Acknowledge that it should result in an improvement in the
   idards of CCTV coverage.

     Stress the    importance of paragraph 2 of the guidance
  .sessing   the    risk   and  establishing the  operational
  juirement).

      Remind ACPO that the provision of CCTV equipment is only one
 : gfep demands on the funds of the Football Trust which are still
 iirSrcd despite the funds made available by the reduction in
 ools Betting Tax. We would not wish to see money wasted on CCTV
iquipment for sparsely attended football grounds if it is not
absolutely necessary.

5.   We shall be taking steps ourselves to circulate the guidance
booklet to local authorities responsible for safety certificates
and to the local authorities associations.




Background Note

Mr Anderton's letter provides a comprehensive description of the
work which has gone into the production of the booklet which has
now been published by the Police Scientific Development Branch
of the Home Office -on the procurement of closed circuit
television for public'safety at football grounds. A copy of the
document is annexed for the Minister's information.

Recommendation 35 of the Taylor final report was that closed
circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd
densities outside the ground within concourse areas and in pens
and other standing areas to be monitored before throughout and
the end of a match. Recommendation 51 included that there should
be available in the police control room the results of all closed
circuit television monitoring outside and inside the ground.

It will not be necessary to discuss the content of the document
which is well produced but it may be prudent to express concern
if police forces were to require all football clubs to install
CCTV regardless of need. The object of giving more money to the
Football Trust was to permit clubs to increase the level of
comfort and amenity for spectators. We would not wish to see a
disproportionate amount of those funds diverted to the provision
of CCTV, particularly in some of the sparsely attended grounds
outside the football league, if it is not absolutely necessary.
    REVIEW OF POLICE CHARGES TO CLUBS FOR COSTS OP POLICING MATCHES


Line to take


       Welcome action by ACPO to examine charging structures with
       a view to recommending a new, largely uniform approach


-      Home Office consulting ACPO       and others   on a draft Home
       Office Circular on charging.


-      Look forward to receiving ACPO's comments.


Background


      Mr Anderton,   Chief   Constable   of   Greater Manchester and
       Chairman of ACPO General Purposes Committee Sub Committee
       on Hooliganism at Sporting Events wrote to FI Division on
       14 June 1990 setting out proposals       for uniform scale of
       charges (subject to local discretion as recommended by the
      Taylor Report).


      This arriyed- as Home Office about to consult Staff and Local
      Authority Associations plus     Football   Authorities   on   a
      draft Home   Office Circular    (HOC)   on charging principles
       (copy attached).


       Consultations on HOC are going ahead.


      ACPO invited to include in their comments confirmation that
      their recommended charging structure would recuperate 100
      per cent of the cost in appropriate cases and to say what
      arrangements they propose for consulting Local Authority
      Associations/Police Authorities on their proposals.
P0L/8S 404/2/9




The Clerk to the Police Authority

The Chief Constable




Dear Sir

HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO             /1990

CHARGES FOR POLICING FOOTBALL MATCHES


1.      Lord   Justice     Taylor's       report    on    his    inquiry   into    the

Hillsborough stadium disaster recommended                       (Recommendation 53)

that:

        "Police Authorities should review the charges they make to

        clubs for the costs of policing inside grounds so as to

        ensure t h a t ’realistic charges are made.                The Home Office

        should    take' steps       to    ensure    consistency        of practice,

        subject to local discretion and the need to have regard to

        local circumstances."



2.      The    reasoning    behind       this   recommendation         was given    in

paragraph 210 of the report:



        "The temptation to the clubs to leave it all to the police

        is stronger      if they are not           required to make realistic

        payment    for     police    services.           No   charge    is made    for

        officers outside the ground since maintaining law and order
     in the streets is a normal public function of the police.

     At the present time, the practice as to recovering costs of

     policing inside the grounds from clubs varies greatly from

     place to place,       different formulae being used.             In some

     areas,    the charge made is the actual cost of the officers

     attending    in the    ground.       At   others,    it   is made   on a

     sliding scale, dependent on whether the match is category

     A (high risk), B or C.         At others, it is dependent on the

     size of the crowd attending.              At some,   it appears to be

     entirely arbitrary and at one ground it is said to be nil.

     In av     view   a mors    consistent     and businesslike       approach

     should be made to such charges.            If clubs were to find it

     more     economical   to   recruit    efficient      stewards    than   to

     delegate duties to the police, there could be a significant

     reduction     in   the number    of police     deployed     at   football

     grounds, to the benefit of the community at large."



The statutory* position

3.   Section 15(1)      of the Police Act 1964 provides that "the

chief officer of police of any police force may provide, at the

request of any person, special police services at any premises

or in any locality in the police area for which the force is

maintained,    subject to the payment to the police authority of

charges on such scales as may be determined by that authority".



4.   The expression "special police services" is not defined in

section 15 and must be given its natural meaning.               This is that

special services are services which would not, in the absence of
arrangements under section 15, be provided in pursuance of the

general duties of the police to preserve law and order.



5.      Safety certificates are required for stadia designated by

the Secretary of State under section 1(1) of the Safety of Sports

Grounds Act    1975.       They are issued by local       authorities and

contain such rules and conditions as the local authority consider

necessary or expedient t o ’secure reasonable safety at the ground.

Where     certificates     require   the   holder   to   arrange   for   the

attendance of an adequate number of police officers within the

ground,    the extent of the provision of police services must,

under section 2 of the 1975 Act as amended, be reserved for the

determination of the chief officer of police- of the force in

question.



The view of central Government

6.      It has been .the view of successive Governments since 1968

that the costs of special services should be paid in full by

those using the service and that no part of these costs should

be allowed to add to the general level of police expenditure and

thus to the burdens of taxpayers or ratepayers.            Charges should

be reviewed and adjusted as necessary - at least annually.               The

aim in principle should be to recover the full cost of those

police    officers   who    are deployed    at   football matches    solely

within the ground.



Charging and deployment policies

7.      If the full cost is to be recovered, there must be a direct
link between deployment and charges: the mere officers the force

finds it necessary to deploy solely for duty within the ground,

the more the club should have to pay.                Under present charging

policies this is not always the case.



8.     One reason for this may be that a force charges only for the

number of officers mentioned in an agreement made with the club.

However, if the chief officer of police considers it necessary,

because of the nature of the match or the reputation of the

visiting supporters, to deploy inside the ground more officers

than such an agreement provides for, no extra charge is made.

This   practice     should   be    reviewed    and   any    agreements   should

specifically provide for special circumstances calling for the

deployment of more officers than usual.



9.     Other    forces determine      charges    on the basis      of a fixed

formula.       Where the same formula is used for both charging and

deployment,      the   .economic   cost   is   recovered.       But where   the

charging formula bears no relation to deployment (e.g. because

deployment is based on the chief officer's assessment of the

need whereas charges are based on 2 constables - with supervising

officers r>ro rata - per 1000 of actual attendance) , charges are

likely to fall some way short of recovering the full economic

costs.



Local considerations

10.    As Lord Justice Taylor acknowledged,                local circumstances

cannot be ignored and charging policies must leave scope for

local discretion.        In particular -
       a.      The nature and location of the ground and the standard

               of    physical     aids    to     crowd        control     are    major

               considerations in determining the number of officers

               to be deployed inside the ground.              Facilities are>often

               poorest at the grounds of clubs who are least able to

               pay the full economic cost of policing.



       b.      The financial plight of many clubs cannot be lightly

               dismissed.       Asking clubs to pay unrealistically high

               charges    for    policing      could    lead    to    problems     with

               recovering dept and even to bankruptcy.



11.    There are, however, steps which the poorer clubs could take

to help themselves.             in particular, more,          and better trained,

stewards would help to reduce the policing requirement.                         Manning

gates,      directing    spectators       to    the     correct      areas,     keeping

gangways clear aijd monitoring the density of packing in pens and

enclosures are all mentioned by Lord Justice Taylor as examples

of    duties    which    could be    carried      out    by    suitable,      properly

trained stewards.



Recommendation

12.    Police       authorities     and   chief       officers       of   police    are

therefore advised that:

       a.      The aim in principle should be to recover the full

               costs of all police officers deployed to duties solely

               within the ground at football matches.
      b.     Charging policies should be reviewed to ensure that

             there is a direct link between deployment and charges.



      c.   In cases      where   it would    clearly be   unrealistic   to

             require a    club to meet      the   full costs   of policing

             inside the ground, local discretion may be exercised

             to reduce   the scale of charges.



      d.   It should,     however, be made.clear in such cases that

             the club will be expected to take active steps (eg the

             provision of more effective stewarding arrangements)

             to reduce the levels of policing needed inside the

             ground.



13.   An additional      copy of this circular is enclosed for the

Treasurer.

               *



                                                  Yours faithfully




                                                  M J ADDISON
                                                                                                  D
TRAINING OF POLICE OFFICERS/STEWARDS


Line to take


Our s t a r t i n g p oint   here    is the r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s    of the
T a y l o r R ep or t that    c lubs should be e n c o u r a g e d          to p r ov i de
more and b e t t e r stewa rd in g.        It is v i t a l that         the b a la n c e     of
responsibility between              clubs arid the p o li c e         s h ou ld be
initially      set out in the         s t a t em en t   of intent.           Those •
responsible       for e n s u r i n g crowd s a fe t y - w h e t h e r p o li c e or
s t e w a r d s - s hould    receive adequate           t raining.




Background


1.     Recommendations 16 and 42 of the Final Report of Lord
Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the Hillsborough stadium
disaster call for a significant change in the recruitment,
training and eventual quality of stewarding.                                There would be
obvious advantages to the police in reducing police presence
and to the clubs in reducing costs.                       But it will be to
nobody's benefit to continue to deploy the existing,
inadequate volunteers and feeble club managements can not be
relied upon to Recruit and organise this type of skilled
workforce.


2.     We know that ACPO General Purposes Committee has asked
the Public Order Forward Planning Unit to consider the scope
for making greater use of stewards.                       From the training angle,
much will depend on the view reached by the Forward Planning
Unit and by ACPO; we will not be able to define training needs
until we know what the functions of police and stewards at
football matches will be.


3.     For stewards. training will primarily be the
responsibility of the clubs or the agents contracted to
provide stewarding services.                   However, it would be helpful to
obtain an agreement in principle from ACPO that the police
service would, wherever practicable, offer help to those
providing training to ensure that the service's wealth of
experience is passed on.


4.   Training for police officers at matches will have to
include elements of public order, crowd safety and first aid
amongst other topics.   Some of this, for example first aid, is
already covered in initial recruit training and in other
courses not tied specifically to football.   An ACPO working
party is developing a course for ground commanders, and is
also developing training packages for other ranks - a training
package for distribution by the Forward Planning Unit,
including videos, is being assembled.
REVIEW OF ARREST PROCEDURES


Line to Take


Welcome ACPO's study of the proposal.   Objectives here are (i)
to make arrests where necessary; and (ii) to do so in a way
which takes the arresting officer away from his post for the
minimum period.


Background Note


2.   The Taylor Committee recommended that the police should
consider streamlining arrest procedures at grounds.     It noted
a tendency to eject offenders without arrest on the grounds
that taking the offender to a police room and going through
the arrest procedures reduces the police team for a
significant period.    The present system has another
disadvantage in terms of police manpower:    arrests create work
for the custody officer at the police station.    In principle,
therefore, we are in favour of a proposal that would keep the
police active in full numbers policing at the football ground.
                  *



3.   The Taylor proposal requires careful handling if it is
not to lead to the football equivalent of the stop and search
power on the streets which enables the police to detain
suspected offenders without the need to arrest them.     If they
are free of suspicion, they may go without further ado.     The
aim of the PACE provisions is to prevent the unnecessary use
of powers of arrest.    In the case of football grounds, the
point would be more to prevent the waste of police time but it
is just as justifiable on those grounds.
WRITTEN STATEMENT OF INTENT


Line to take


Pleased to note that the police and clubs have had no
difficulty in co-operating on this matter now that the format
and legal status of the 'statement of intent1 has been
resolved.


Background note


Lord Justice Taylor recognised that there were many aspects of
crowd control which could be carried out by the police or by
stewax— s, on behalf of the club.   The precise division of
functions is a matter for local decision, based on individual
circumstances, and will be in the last resort for the Police
Commander to determine.    Whatever the decision, it is of
paramount importance that all concerned should fully
understand their role to avoid any misunderstanding over the
allocation of functions.    Lord Justice Taylor recommended in
his interim report that the respective functions of the police
and club for crowd safety and control should be set out in a
written document'.   Although the spirit of the recommendation
was clearly appreciated by all, there was initially some
anxiety that what was required was a binding legal contract.
Home Office legal advice was that a simple 'statement of
intent1 would be appropriate, subject to alteration without
breach of contract should circumstances so require.     After
discussing the matter with Mr Anderton, Lord Justice Taylor
confirmed in his final report that he considered that such a
document would adequately meet his purposes.    We are unaware
of any remaining difficulties.
GROUND COMMANDER TRAINING
OTHER TRAINING FOR SENIOR POLICE OFFICERS


Line to take


With the support of both the Home Office and ACPO, a Ground
Commander Training Course, as put forward in paragraph 215 and
recommendation 52 of the Taylor Report, is now well advanced.
A working party convened by ACPO (and chaired by Mr Culley,
ACC Nottinghamshire), has drawn up a proposal for a 3-phase
Football Commanders Course, and pilot courses for match
commanders are being run in Kent and Greater Manchester
Police.    The Police Training Council will be interested in the
outcome, and it is to be hoped that a national programme of
training will quickly come on stream.



Background


1.   Paragraph 215 and recommendation 52 of the Taylor Report
calls for a specific training course for senior officers,
including training in the basic strategy of policing football
matches.     ACPO.General Purposes Committee has been taking
forward this recommendation in consultation with the ACPO
Personnel and Training Committee, to ensure that all aspects
of the Taylor Report which bear on matters of police training
are dealt with.     Both committees are therefore represented on
the working party referred to in the opening paragraph.


2.   A proposed 3-phase Football Commanders Course has now
been drawn up and pilot courses are being run by Kent (2 days)
and Greater Manchester (5 days).     These entail a variety of
pre-reading, theory, classroom exercises, practical (i.e. a
visit to a match) and post-course follow-up work.     It has yet
to be decided where the course will be held (whether
regionally, centrally or at two or more designated regional
centres).     The course in its final form may last 3-4 days.
3.   Alongside these initiatives it should also be noted that
the Police Staff College, Bramshill, has included two courses
in its 1990 programme on the "Management of Disaster and Civil
Emergency".   These courses have been set up in response to
recent major disasters, Hillsborough amongst them.      One course
is for officers of ACPO rank, and the other for senior
officers likely to have responsibility for the co-ordination
and management of major incidents, particularly as incident
officer, senior investigating officer, incident control post
co-ordinator, or major incident control room co-ordinator.
Both courses were held in June 1990.   In addition, it is hoped
to hold a number of conferences at the College during 1990,
one of which will have as its theme the   operational
management of football matches.
ALL TICKET MATCHES




Line to take


Pleased to note that ACPO had already taken Taylor's important
recommendations on this matter on board.


Background note


'All ticket1 designation can be a useful means of achieving at
matches with a potential for disorder.     However, difficulties
have arisen in the past when certain matches have been
designated 'all ticket1 by clubs and on the day there being
spare capacity in the ground, fans arriving without tickets
have been permitted to purchase them on the day.     This is not
an unnatural reaction, for commercial reasons by the club, and
to avoid the possibility of disorder outside the ground
following a 'lockout' by the police.     However the practice has
inherent dangers, creating a level of expectation on the part
of travelling fans that they will always be admitted whether
or not they have'purchased a ticket in advance.     Lord Justice
Taylor recognised the danger and recommended that clubs
confine the practise of 'all-ticket1 designation to those
matches at which a capacity or near-capacity crowd is expected
(Rec.40) and that police planning should provide that
ticketless fans should not be allowed in the ground except in
an emergency.     Mr Anderton had already written to chief
officers to urge action on precisely these points.
FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS' CLUBS


Line to take

Pleased to note that ACPO have opened up avenues of discussion
with the Football Supporters' Association and the National
Federation of Football Supporters' Clubs.




Background Mote

Lord Ferrers will recall that when he met representatives of the
Football Supporters' Association and the National Federation of
Football Supporters' Clubs, some of the points that were raised
with him concerned the police. They included unjustified police
action to deal with enthusiastic behaviour by fans which did not
amount to misbehaviour or hooliganism; reluctance by local police
to agree to the removal of perimeter fences where there was no
realistic risk of crowd invasion of the pitch (eg in front of all
seated areas occupied by season ticket holders); and the danger
that high profile policing itself caused an anti-police feeling
amongst spectators which was more likely to cause trouble than
to avoid it.

It seems very desirable to encourage ACPO to provide an avenue
for these organisations to be able to express their worries and
concerns to the police direct. They may not see eye to eye with
ACPO on a number of issues but in our experience they are as
anxious as we ,&re to see improvements in crowd behaviour and
improvements in conditions at football grounds.
POLICE RESERVE


Line to take


Pleased to note that the police have taken this on board.
Hope that the question of charging can be resolved sensibly
and uniformly.


Background note


Lord Justice Taylor recommended that the Operational Order for
each match should provide for sufficient reserves to enable
the rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point
inside or outside the ground to deal with any unforeseen
eventuality.     Mr Anderton has advised all Chief Constables,
via the ACPO General Purposes Committee, that the provision of
a reserve should be decided by the Police Commander in his
operational planning for each fixture.


This raises the question of police forces charging for reserve
officers.   There must be common practice if clubs are not to
feel that they are the victims of discriminatory action and
there seems to Be .no case for requiring clubs to pay for
reserves used to deal with trouble outside the groujnd.
THE GREEN GUIDE


Line to take

1.   Say that we have now received ACPO's comments on the Green
Guide and that these will be taken into account during the course
of the current review.

2.   Say that the technical working group which has been set up
to review the Green Guide had its first meeting last week
(2 July) which was attended by Commander Speed.

3.   We are very grateful to ACPo for their co-operation.




Background Note

The ACPO note indicates that the Home Office are currently
revising the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide)
and that the views of ACPO have been sought.    ACPO's comments
have in fact now been received.     The technical working group
which the Home Office has set up to review the Green Guide has
already had its first meeting.         Commander Speed of the
Metropolitan Police attended to represent ACPO and we are
grateful to ACPO for their co-operation.
Rec 55: There should always be a command channel reserved solely
for the Police Commander to communicate with his senior officers
round the ground.


LINE TO TAKE

Additional Channels

1.      The Home Office Radio Frequency and Communications Planning
        Unit made available on 1 January 1990 eight new channels for
        use at pre-planned events.

2.      The channels are not geographically assigned by the Home
        Office and must be co-ordinated by users to minimize
        interference between operations. They may be used for
        command purposes at football matches.

Noise

3.      At the request of ACPO the Home Office Police Requirements
        Support Unit has set up a working party to improve the use of
        radios in a noisy environment.

4.      The working party will consider

        a)   what equipment is available to attach to existing radios

and     b)   the development of special equipment.
t

                                                                      M

    CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES


    Background note


    The Final Report made 5 recommendations (Nos 59-63, page 81)
    on the co-ordination of emergency services.   These concerned:-



         (a)   regular liaison between senior nominated officers of
               police, fire and ambulance services;


         (b)   advance circulation of full details of events to all
               3 services, including anticipated or potential
               difficulties, and availability of such details in
               emergency service control rooms;


         (c)   lines of communication from police control room to
               local HQ's to be maintained at all times;


         (d)   contingency plans for arrival of emergency service
               vehicles to be reviewed; and
                      t



         (e)   briefing on contingency arrangements for police
               officers positioned at ground entrances.


    Enquiries made of the fire authorities and local authorities
    last September following the Interim Report indicated that the
    emergency services had already implemented these
    recommendations, or that plans to do so were well advanced.


    Line to take


    Understand that action on these recommendations was quickly
    taken following the Interim Report.   Ask Mr Anderton whether
    he can confirm that the recommended arrangements have become
    standard practice and whether he regards them as satisfactory.
