                                        cc    Mr Whalley
Louise Whittaker
F9 Division
Room 6 2 9 _____




BRIEFING FOR THE HOME SECRETARY'S MEETING WITH REGIONAL EDITORS


When we spoke yesterday about your request for briefing, I
explained that we would be unable to offer a view on the current
morale of the South Yorkshire Police force, but would be happy to
let you have a short contribution on the present position of the
Public Inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor.    I hope the following
is helpful.


2.   As the Home Secretary will be aware, following the disaster
at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 when 95 people died, his
predecessor announced the appointment of an independent Inquiry
headed by Lord Justice Taylor to inquire into the events at
Sheffield Wednesday football ground and to make recommendations
about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.
Two Assessors, Mr Brian Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of
Lancashire, and Professor Leonard Maunder OBE, Professor of
Mechanical Engineering at the University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne
were appointed to assist the Inquiry.


3.   A large number of witnesses gave evidence at the oral
hearings, which took place at Sheffield Town Hall between 15 May
and 29 June, and the Inquiry's Interim Report was presented to
the Home Secretary and published on 4 August. It dealt primarily
with the events of 15 April but made a number of general
recommendations about safety aj? sports grounds pending
publication of the final report.


4.   That report is expected to be completed in January and will
deal with the wider issues of crowd control and crowd safety at
sports events. A large amount of written evidence has been
received, in addition to which the Inquiry is meeting
organisations involved in the supervision and administration of
sports events, including the police and other emergency services,
the FA and Football League, supporters' organisations and
relevant Government Departments. Publicity has been given this
week to a recent meeting with the Parliamentary All Party
Football Committee at which the topic of membership schemes was
raised. In his Interim Report in August, Lord Justice Taylor
confirmed that issues such as identity cards and membership
schemes would be addressed in the Final Report.


5.   In the course of the Inquiry, visits have been made to a
number of stadia and sporting events both in this country and
abroad.




                                        JONATHAN SWEET
                                        Hillsborough Inquiry
Ext 2370

21 November 1989
                                  \A i 'i U( wiHi   ^ *>k ^ fa (ort



From: J Collins                         cc Miss Snow
      F9 Division                          Mr Chilcot
      Ext 4024                             HMCIC
      2^  November 1989                    Mr Boys Smith}
                                           Mr Mower     }
                                           Mr Addison   }w/o
                                           Mr Cane      }enc
                                           Mrs Reisz
                                           Mrs Catto
                                           Mr Le Vay
                                           Mr Heal
                                           Mr Whalley^
                                           Mr Davidoff
                                           Mr Godfrey
(UxM ifMu/fYOy
HOME SECRETARY'S ENGAGEMENTS: FRIDAY 24 NOVEMBER


1. As requested I attach briefing from the Police Department for
the Home Secretary's visit to West Yorkshire Police on 24
November and his meeting with editors of the regional newspapers
in Leeds.

    A. Police and civilian manpower
    B. Crime statistics

    C. HMI's preliminary inspection report
    D. Crime Prevention

    E. Value for Money Initiatives
    F. Police and air support

    G. Community affairs

    H. Force training school

    I . Tape recording

   J . Hillsborough Enquiry

   K. Information from HM Inspectorate on South Yorkshire Police
      morale

 2. The Home Secretary may wish to know that the West Yorkshire
    Police Force are providing a police team headed by Donald
    Shaw investigating the West Midlands Serious Crime Squad.




                                                    J Collins'
-    ^
     0

<N




         /
