                           DISASTERS AND THE LAW
           Note of meeting held at 28 Old Queen Street
                       on 13 December 1990 at 3 pm


Present:     Mr   Oates      )    LCD
             Mr   White      )
             Mr   Farmer     )             c 8 JAN 91i
             Mr   Pavey      )
             Mr Wooler    )       LSLO
             Mr Parkinson)
             Mr Newall           CPS
             Mr Hogg             TSol
             Mrs Price     ) HO
             Miss Harrison)
            Mrs Dixon )          DTp
            Mr Nicholls)
            Mr Foister           HSE
            Mr Henderson         SO


     (Apologies from Mr Vannet, Crown Office)




1.    Mr Oates said that, as explained in his letter of 19
November to Mr Wooler, the purpose of the meeting" was-to consider
how to take forward the Department’s commitment to Invite the
Lord   Chancellor    to  initiate    a   round   of    Ministerial
correspondence. Although there was an itemised agenda it would
be difficult not to cover all the items in a single discussion.
He suggested that it would be helpful to look at procedures in
the absence of reference to any particular disaster.        It was
intended that this exercise should be separate from the enquiry
being conducted by the Home Office into the duplication between
public inquiries and coroners’ inquests.    General comments were
invited.
2   .Mr Newall said that the DPP was content that an
investigation of the facts to establish how the disaster
occurred, how it could have been avoided and how to improve
safety for the future should normally take precedence over any
investigation of possible criminal liability.              Criminal
proceedings would be delayed, but this was inevitable if the
wider public interest was to be served. However, where there was
an obvious case of extreme criminality, it was right that
consideration of criminal charges should be given priority. Mr
Wooler noted that the pressures to prosecute-were of ten. enormous .

3.   Mr White said that expectations had changed in that the
^^blic were increasingly seeking someone to blame, not only in
the context of criminal proceedings, but also on the civilside.
Mr Newall said that public inquiries contributed to this.

4.   Mr Foister said that the "technical inquiry" avoided many
of the problems of the "grand public inquiry", although Ministers
seemed to prefer the latter. / He believed that the former met all
the public interest requirements,' although they might not appear
to do so because they were low key and were not reported like
public inquiries.     .

5.   Mr Hogg said that a technical inquiry was not suitable when
the conduct of the Department responsible for setting it up was
being called into question as part of the subject matter of the
inquiry.    Public inquiries could go much wider in obtaining
evidence, but neither form of inquiry was appropriate for every
type of disaster.   The more public inquiries there were, the
more likely they were to be called for.

6.      The following possible advantages and disadvantages of a
grand public inquiry were identified:

                 Advantages

        (i)      Satisfies public desire for a full and complete
                 investigation;
(ii)      Enables anyone who believes he has useful evidence
           to give it (DTp suggested that evidence was
          usually offered by too many);

(iii)     Everything is considered in great depth by all
          concerned, both publicly and privately;

(iv)      Takes pressure off the Minister;

(v )      There was much know-how around, on how to operate
          them;


(vi)      Seen to go wider than technical inquiries.



          Disadvantages

(i)      Expense;

(ii)     Time taken;


(iii)    Interface with the     criminal    side   which    now
          produced a tension;

(iv)     Less easy to control than a technical inquiry
          (arguably this was an advantage);

(v )     Relationship with,     coroners’    Inquests      which
         produced a tension;

(vi)     More difficult to get at technical factors which
         caused the disaster free from considerations of
         blame and compensation.



In discussion the following further points were made:

(i)      Could technical inquiries be enhanced to satisfy
         the first advantage of public inquiries (para 6(i)
        above)?    There was no widespread feeling of
        dissatisfaction with technical inquiries (eg
        Kegworth).   Prior to the Fennell Inquiry (Kings
        Cross), there had been hundreds of technical
        inquiries    carried   out   by   the   Railways
        Inspectorate, without criticism.    Pressure for
        public   inquiries had intensified,     possibly
        attributable to a belief that disasters were
        caused by cutbacks in expenditure on safety.


(ii)    Public expectations of compensation had increased.
        The legal profession was now better organised to
        service disaster cases. Lawyers acting for groups
        of plaintiffs believed that it was possible to
        achieve more out of a public inquiry than a
        technical inquiry.

(iii)   The Chairmen of public inquiries sometimes lacked
        the necessary expertise in the field of inquiry,
        although it was pointed out that they have access
        to   technical   expertise   (eg   sitting   with
        assessors).

(iv)    A technical inquiry could cover the same wide
        grounds as a public inquiry, be held in public and
        have an independent chairman.       However, they
        seemed less likely to satisfy the public. More
        might be done to sell the advantages of technical
        inquiries (eg pointing to the fact that the
        Railways Inspectorate was now part of HSE).

        A fundamental problem following a disaster is that
        a decision on what course to take is often made
        within an hour of the occurrence. Ministers were
        keen to jump instantly. In general there was no
        standard pack of options to go to Ministers on
        action to take following a disaster, although HSE
        did have several standard disaster briefings.
     (vi)           In Scotland, the Minister is always advised not
                    to make a hasty decision since the Lord Advocate
                    has a statutory discretion to direct a fatal
                    accident inquiry. This does not obviate the need
                    for a full public inquiry, but may lessen the
                    demand.

8.   Mrs    Price    said   that   the Home Office   Working   Group   on
Disasters and Inquests had narrow terms of reference and was
looking at the duplication between public inquiries and inquests
and how this might be avoided. It would not be looking at the
possibility of extending coroners’ powers to take on the
lections of public Inquiries.

9.   The question of costs was raised by Mr Hogg.       The main
expenses of a public inquiry were lawyers’ fees, together with
the cost of hiring the hall.          These costs fell to the
responsible Department. The HSE meet the travel and subsistence
costs of witnesses attending to give evidence in technical
inquiries. It was suggested that the criticisms of expense and
full scale representation made of public Inquiries could be
alleviated by two-stage inquiries (the first stage being held in
public and the second stage confined to written representations)
and firmer handling, as had happened in some Instances. It was
suggested that there might be scope for. general advice to be
given to a judge/senior silk on appointment to an inquiry and
that this might be mentioned in the Lord Chancellor’s letter.

Action


10. It was agreed that LCD would prepare a draft letter from the
Lord Chancellor.     It would aim to set out the options of
technical and public inquiries, the differences between them,
together with the advantages and disadvantages of each.       The
letter would point out that technical inquiries can go a long way
to meeting the public needs.        It would be circulated to
Departments for comment and, where necessary, fleshing out.
Cabinet Office had suggested that the final version should be
circulated on the HS Committee network, though it was noted that
other Ministers (eg the Foreign Secretary) might also need to be
recipients. The Lord Chancellor would write only for England and
Wales, keeping the Lord Advocate informed. No commitment on the
timing of the letter was given, although it was hoped that a
first draft could be ready for circulation in January or
February.

11.   In the meantime, HSE agreed to circulate copies of their
standard briefings on disasters (para 7 (v) above).

12. The meeting concluded at 4.55 pm.




Lord Chancellor’s Department
International and Common Law Division
26-28 Old Queen Street
210 3532
    January 1991                                       J Pavey




Circulation:   Those present
               Mr Vannet (Crown Office)




                                           t
