Mr J Wardrope
Consultant in A & E Medicine
Northern General Hospital
Herries Road
SHEFFIELD S5 7AU




                             November 1997


I am afraid I must trouble you for copies of some more medical records in respect of the
Hillsborough football disaster. You have already, of course, very kindly supplied us with
copies of the records of Phillip HAMMOND and Lee NICOL.

First, we understand that the Northern General treated Mr Eddie SPEARITT, who survived
the disaster. He has told us that he regained consciousness in the hospital at around 1700
hours on the day. Could we see a copy of his records, please? (in strict confidence, of
course).

Second, would it be possible for you to let us have copies of the records of all those patients
(except for Phillip Hammond and Lee Nicol) who were taken to the Northern General but
died?

As you know (and as we have recently explained to your hospital’s solicitors following an
approach from the Family Support Group) Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has no power to compel
the release of hospital records for the purpose of his scrutiny. He would nevertheless find
this material very helpful at this stage. He very much appreciates your assistance.

An early reply would be appreciated if at all possible. As you may have heard, Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has recently written to the Family Support Group and others involved to say that
he intends to let the Home Secretary have his report by the end of the year.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




A:\WARDROPE.193
MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512

Date:       14 January 1998

To:        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




I attach

                  a letter (9 January) from Mr Alderman at the Police Authority about the
                  assessment of liability at the time the settlement with Sheffield Wednesday etc
                  was reached. The wording is a little awkward but I understand him to be
                  saying that the insurers reckoned at the time that the total bill would be £14
                  million, of which the police would have to pay £9.5 million.

                  The payment of £4 million by Sheffield Wednesday etc was in line with this.
                  Mr Alderman’s information does not support the Superintendent Hepworth
                  thesis that the other parties caved in and agreed to meet more than half of the
                  estimated bill when they heard Mr Burne’s evidence about the ground capacity
                  and the barriers.

                  I also spoke to Mr Alderman about the confidentiality angle arising from his
                  earlier letter (attached) as you asked. He said that the agreement that
                  Sheffield Wednesday and the City Council would pay the Police Authority
                  £4 million was and remains confidential - the agreement was reached on the
                  understanding that the sum would remain undisclosed.

                  The fact that the police authority have so far paid £13.25 million and have set
                  aside £4.5 million for future payments is not confidential in that sense. But
                  the authority have taken the view up to now that they do not want these figures
                  to be disclosed publicly because that might prejudice their position with
                  respect to future claims.

                  If you wanted to report these figures to the Home Secretary, and he wished to
                  publicise them, the Police Authority could not as I understand it stop that.
                  But the Authority have given us this information in good faith and I do not


A:\S-S\049.DOC
think it would be right to publish it without notice. I left it with Mr
Alderman that you have not yet decided whether to put these figures in your
report or not - and that, if you did wish to include them, I would contact him
again and he would get a rapid view from the Police Authority of whether they
were content with that.


a letter from Mr Wardrope about Eddie Spearitt (I showed you this on
Monday afternoon, but I’m not sure whether you looked at the attachment
about Paul Brady).


a letter from PC Max Groome about the changes to his evidence. He says 7
was called down to ... Snig H ill.... to see Detective Chief Inspector Foster ....
I must have spent at least an hour arguing with ... Foster over the content o f
my ‘recollections’.... (he) told me in no uncertain terms that if certain
alterations were not made, or (?deletions ?distortions) fo r that matter, then
my statement would not be forwarded to the West Midlands Police enquiry
and would therefore not be used in conjunction with the Coroner’s Inquest...
So very reluctantly I agreed.... in order that my statement would not be
 ‘spirited away ’ or otherwise disposed o f... I could not make comment on
 ‘Command Decisions ’ and I could not make observations o f ‘opinion ’ such as
the decision to replace... Mole with Duckenfield’.

I have written to Mr Groome asking him to interpret the one word I cannot
read.


Chapters 5 and 6 of your report, as revised - Chapter 6 includes your new
section on the crush barriers/ground capacity issue. Alterations you may
wish to look at are marked in bold italic.


Chapters 1,2, 3 and 4 as they now stand. I have made all the changes you
suggest and removed all the bold italic mark-ups except for those in the
second part of Chapter 4 (South Yorkshire statements) which we need to have
another look at anyway and the one in Chapter 2 (para 68) marking where we
might say something about the videos Counsel saw.

Aside from that I think the only other outstanding issue in these parts of the
report is that you might want to compare what you say on Tony Edwards at
paras 37 and 97 of Chapter 3. These repeat each other to some extent and it is
not clear that the para 37 sequence does make clear why you didn’t want to see
him as para 97 suggests. (As you know my (predictable!) view is that it
would be better not to say this).


a file (HO 397/18) which includes the Health and Safety Executive’s report
on the state of the ground, covering everything except the strength of the
                 crush barriers. The report is dated 13 June 1989. As I said, HSE submitted a
                 second report to Lord Taylor on the strength of the barriers later on, but I have
                 not yet found this. There are papers on the files showing that HSE were still
                 working on it in July 1989. The 13 June report says that barrier 124A was
                 badly corroded in parts - in fact, corroded right though in one place.


                 a summary of HSE’s work, dated 8 June 1989, which you may find useful.


                 for curiosity value only, the match programme, which I have rediscovered
                 during my file search (flagged on HO 397/94).




C F BONE




A:\S-S\049.DOC
LIST OF THINGS OUTSTANDING, 10 DECEMBER



1.    Letter from Parry-Evans of the St John Ambulance Brigade about
identifying the St John person who helped with Kevin Williams

2.    Letter from Dr David J Williams (checking Dr Bull’s evidence)

3.    ‘New evidence’ from Trevor Hicks

4.    Reply from HHJ Steele)
                            ) both sent only today
5.    Reply from Mr Hytner )

6.    Confirmation on various points from Tim King QC

7.    Dr Popper’s reply to our letter of 8 December

8.     DCS Foster re Layton &            (Bruder/Williams case) and
       recollections.

9.    Meeting with

10.    Meeting with Mr Wain?

11.    Medical records from Mr Wardrope

12.    Reply from Andrew Collins QC (recollections)

13.    Debra Martin, about her signed statement

14.    David Frost, about his signed statement

15.    Copy the apology part of the report to Mr Wells for comment

16.    ‘Maxwell’ letters (to Martin, Frost, Peter Metcalfe?)




A:\S-S\040.DC)C
MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512


Date:       11 December 1997

To:        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




I attach

                  a note from Julian Knowles about video evidence. This is one of the
                  submissions which Ann Adlington promised me this morning. She told me
                  this afternoon that we can expect two more - one, imminent, on how the
                  Coroner tried to rewrite Taylor and another (which she hadn’t mentioned to
                  me this morning) from a ‘trauma specialist’ bearing apparently on the 3.15
                  cut-off at the Inquest. She said she had been chasing the trauma specialist
                  since the summer, but he had been tied up in the recent murder trial involving
                  the RAF officer and the Bosnian interpreter, so could not oblige;

                  a letter from Dr Wardrope which indicates that we may have to wait a little
                  while for the medical records we asked for (but I will chase);

                  the top copy of the letter from Doug Fraser, the Steering Committee solicitor
                  - you have already seen this text of course but you might prefer to work from
                  this good copy rather than what we had before.




C F BONE




A:\S-S\042.DOC
          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171273 2512 Fax 2007


Diane Hallatt                                               Your reference:   SHF 109-DIH97010/LD
Wansbroughs Willey Hargrave
Solicitors                                                  Our reference:
241 GlossopRoad
SHEFFIELD S10 2GZ                                          Date:              December 1997




Thank you for your letter of 2 December. I am writing briefly to acknowledge it and to say
that we have, since we wrote to you last, asked Dr Wardrope for information about some
other patients who were taken to the Northern General Hospital as a result of the football
disaster.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




A:\NGENHOSP.199
