INQUIRY IN TO THE HILLSBOROUGH             The Rt Ho n Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           SO Q u e e n A nne s Gate
                                           London S\\ 111 9AT
                                           01-2~3 2:v ~v 5602/ 25_( 1


Geraint John Esq
Head of Technical Unit for Sport
The Sports Council
16 Upper Woburn Place
LONDON
WC1H OQP
                                           I )ate
                                              11 January 1990




Dear Mr John

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


I am writing to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 12 January
to Professor L Maunder in which you raise several matters.  I
know that Professor Maunder has written personally to you about
the invitation to address a seminar on 15 March.

You mention your conversations with both Professor Maunder and me
about awareness of "The Handbook of Sports and Recreational
Building Design" and I am grateful to you for the additional
information contained in your letter.  I had, as you know,
already established that the Institution of Structural Engineers
(and in particular its ad hoc committee on appraisal of sports
grounds) was aware of the existence of this publication, but
appreciate your confirmation of the position.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        JONATHAN C SWEET
                                        Hillsborough Inquiry
                                                    r”                    N
                                                    1505 SPORTS)
The Sports council                                   tlfc o u n c iL
                                                    16 Upper Woburn Place
                                                    London WC1H OQP
                                                    Tel: 0 1 -3 8 8 1 2 7 7
                                                    F a x:0 1-3 835 74 0
                                                    Telex: 2 7 8 3 0 SPORTC G
                                                    Chairman: PeterG. Yarranton
                                                    Vice Chairman:
                                                    Professor J Allan Patmore B.Litt MA
12 January 1990                                     Director General: David Pickup



Prof. Maunder
The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Enquiry
c/- Room 448
The Home Office
50 Queen Annes Gate
London  SW1H 9AT



Dear Prof. Maunder

The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Enquiry

It was very pleasant to speak to you by telephone this week.
I confirm our interest in considering you for the seminar which
we are proposing to hold jointly w ith the RIBA and at the RIBA
on the subject of "Stadia after Hillsborough".

The present date we have in mind is March 15, but there is some
thought that this may change.

I want to take up the point which we discussed and which had
also been raised with me by Mr Sweet. You were both telling me
about the lack of awareness of our 4 volume publication
"The Handbook of Sports and Recreational Building Design". I
would like to give you the following c o m m e n t s :

a)  This book was published in 1981, has had excellent sales
figures and is generally regarded as an essential reference in
the field of facilities for sport.

b)  All our bibliographies and references constantly give the
name of this book and it is available of course at the RIBA.

c)  Any desk study of relevant information would surely have
turned up this book. Any consultation with the Information
Centre at the Sports Council in London or its regional offices
would have produced the same r e s u l t .

d)  It is not correct to say that the Chairman of the Committee
on the Appraisal of Sports Grounds of the Institution of
Structural Engineers was not aware of this book. It is in fact
referred to in the draft of the publication by the ISE and




                                                            -foiailtH
                             -2-



and indeed diagrams have been reproduced from this book in the
draft. I have been discussing w ith the ISE the permission to
reproduce such material.

I look forward to hearing from you. If you need to know more
about the seminar pro g r a m I will be happy to advise you.




GERAINT JOHN
Chief Architect and Head o
Technical Unit for Sport




cc Mr J Sweet
    t*


*




         12 January 1990


         Prof. Maunder
         The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Enquiry
         c/~ Room 448
         The Horae Office
         50 Queen Annes Gate
         London SW1H 9AT



         Dear Prof, Maunder

         The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Enquiry

         It was very pleasant to speak to you by telephone this week.
         I confirm our interest in considering you for the seminar which
         we are proposing to hold joxatly wit h the RIBA and at the RIBA
         on the subject of "Stadia after H i l l s b o r o u g h " .

         The present date we have in mind is March 15, but there is some
         thought that this may c h a n g e .

         I want to take up the point which we discussed and which had
         also been raised with me by Mr Sweet. You were both telling me
         about the lack of awareness of our 4 volume publication
         "The Handbook of Sports and Recreational Building Design". I
         would like to give you the following comments*

         a) This book was published in 1981, has had excellent sales
         figures and is generally regarded as an essential reference in
         the field of facilities for sport.

         b) All our bibliographies and references constantly give the
         name of this book and it is available of course at the RIBA,

         c) Any desk study of relevant information would surely have
         turned up this book. Any consultation with the Information
         Centre at the Sports Council in London or its regional offices
         would have produced the same result.

         d) It is not correct to say that the Chairman of the Committee
         on the Appraisal of Sports Grounds of the Institution of
         Structural Engineers was not aware of this book. It is in fact
         referred to in the draft of the publication by the ISE and


                                                            ../2
and indeed diagrams have bean reproduced from this book in the
draft. I have been discussing with tha ise the permission to
reproduce such material.

I look forward to hearing from you. If you naad to know more
about the seminar program I will be happy to advise you.




GERAINT JOHN
Chief Architect and Head of
Technical Unit for Sport




cc Mr J Sweet
