                            "2r                                          .v ''

                                                                                                             1 9 SEP 1988 I h ^
                                                                                 WEST
Chief Constable
                                                                                 YORKSHIRE                                      /^
  Peter J. Nobes, Q .P .M ., LL.B.

Deputy Chief Constable
                                                                                 POLICE                                        !
 Paul C. W hitehouse, M .A.

Assistant Chief Constables
  John W. Botterill
  Thom as M. Cook, B .A .
  Denis M. O'T oole                                     POLICE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
  D onald Shaw, Q .P .M ., LL.B.                        P.O. BO X 9 , W AKEFIELD, WEST YORKSHIRE                   WF1 3QP
  Colin F. Bailey, LL.B.
                                                        Telephone: Wakefield (0924)    29 2 0 02
Director of Adm inistration
  J. Michael R oberts, I .P .F .A .                     Fax.: (0924) 292182      Telex: 517704 (WYPOL)


              Your ref:               FEB/89 35/48/88
              Our ref:                CC/Y0


              13 September 1989                                                         £   ^   'f s/\   f     v         "-y




              A H Turney Esq
              Fire and Emergency Planning Department
              Home Office
              Queen Anne’s Gate
              LONDON
              SW1H 9AT


               For the attention of Mr A Brown




               HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER REPORT - RECOMMENDATION 4
               HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 68/89

               I; wonder if any thought has been given to the status of the written
               agreement between the Football Club (which will be a Company with a
               legal entity) and the Police (which is not a legal entity so
               responsibility will fall on the individual concerned ie the Chief
               Officer) setting out their respective responsibilities for crowd
               safety, etc. Is it, for example, intended that the agreement should
               amount to an ’understanding’ or is it intended to constitute a
               contract with attendant liabilities.

              I raise the issue because of the vulnerability of the police officer,
              presumably the Chief Constable, who will enter into the agreement with
              the Club. If the agreement creates legal relations and consideration
              is found to pass, then personal liability will exist should the terms
              of the contract be breached.

              Section 48, Police Act 1964, as you know, only gives protection
              to the Chief Police Officer for ’torts’ committed by constables
              under his control, during the execution of their duty. Section^48(4)
              gives the Police Authority discretion to pay damages, etc awarded
              against any member of the Force (which will include the Chief Constable)
    2




    but again only in respect of tort. As far as X am aware no
    legislative provision exists to protect a Chief Officer in respect
    of liaibility flowing from a contract, to which he is a party, in
    connection with operational matters affecting his force.

        It would be helpful if you could let me know whether or not you feel
        the agreement is intended to constitute a formal contract and if
        so what provisions are to be made to protect the Chief Officer, as
        an individual, from the financial consequences of a breach which,

•       of course, could occur outside his control.
