                                            iKi
hs.8.24/fsb.peb


                                       cc   Mr Clayton
                                            Mr Osborne

Note for the file



FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL: 1. STAFFING AND COSTS OF THE FOOTBALL
LICENSING AUTHORITY; 2. APPEALS AGAINST SAFETY CERTIFICATES

I met Mr Kinghan DoE on Tuesday 22 August to discuss his letter
of 15 August about the estimated costs of the Football Licensing
Authority.  We ran through the costings in his letter and agreed
that at this stage there was little that could be done to refine
them.  A number of points were made in discussion, including the
following:

    (a) The choice of a chairman from the public service or the
    law seemed appropriate in view of the multi-discipline
    nature of the Board and its staff; public service included
    the possibility of a figure from the local authority world;
    (b)   The Football Licensing Authority did not need to be
    located in London; Merseyside and Manchester were possible
    alternatives and either location would permit the use of DoE
    staff on secondment;

    (c)   The grading of the post of Chief Executive (Grade 6)
    might seem high in relation to the size of the organisation
    but it could scarcely be lower than Grade 7; initially
    Grade 6 seemed the level to aim for;

    (d)  A possible alternative structure was that used by the
    Police Complaints Authority with the chairman acting also as
    Chief Executive and working full time;           there were
    disadvantages to such an arrangement and it was not to be
    encouraged;

    (e)   Ex-police officers or ex-fire brigade officers would
    suffer abatement of pension or salary when employed full
    time (as inspectors). The posts might be more attractive on
    a part time basis; soundings might be taken within the Fire
    Service and the police to see whether there were any
    opinions on this subject;

    (f)    It seemed desirable to attract publicity to the
    proposed inspector posts as soon as it was clear that these
    proposals were likely to go ahead; recruitment need not
    await statutory authority but clearly no action could be
    taken in advance of the Part 2 report on Hillsborough and
    Ministers' reaction to it;
     (g)   DoE Ministers nevertheless expected that the safety
     supervision functions of the Football Licensing Authority
     would go ahead unless Lord Justice Taylor specifically
     recommended against the FLA having these powers.
Appeals
Mr Kinghan responded to my letter on appeals. He agreed that the
obligation for the local authority to consult interested parties
on proposed amendments to safety certificates under the Safety of
Sportsgrounds Act 1975 if the proposed amendment related to terms
and conditions which the authority was required to insert by the
Football Licensing Authority was unnecessary and should be
removed by the Bill.   He was less inclined however to accept my
proposals relating to appeals to the courts against terms and
conditions of safety certificates inserted on the requirement of
the FLA.   He thought that Ministers would wish to maintain the
principle that the FLA should have the last word on the subject
rather than the court. This was wholly in line with current DoE
policy which was to disengage the courts, so far as practicable,
from matters of this kind.    I pointed out the anomaly that the
present appeal provisions dated only from the 1987 Act and that
the Home Office policy had been to disengage the Department from
the appeals procedure.    I pointed out that there was also the
possible objection to the Football Licensing Authority having
powers to impose conditions relating to matters which had already
been determined on appeal to the courts, possibly to the Crown
Court.     General safety certificates,      moreover,  apply to
designated sportsgrounds used for a variety of purposes.      The
Football Licensing Authority's responsibilities would not be so
wide and there might be anomalies if conditions imposed by the
FLA having football matches in mind were not appropriate for the
use of the ground for other sports.

Mr Kinghan saw no objection to the Home Office approaching
Parliamentary Counsel direct on these issues.        The Counsel
concerned is Mr Stephen Mason.    We agreed however that in the
first instance Mrs Weinberger, one of DoE's legal advisers, would
seek to discuss the issue with Mr Clayton of Legal Advisers
Branch on his return from leave.




                                        P E BOLTON
                                        62 Division

24 August 1989
