                                                                                     HOME OFFICE
                                                                           Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                                                   Direct line: 01-273— \ \ " i *T
                                                                                Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference:
Your reference:
                                                                             4   -   /V jp 'vX        l^o.




                         P 'c Q r




                                          0 O » n /m U -
                                                                                                       QUO
                                                                                                             t )1

        V s jt W   k ^       " ^      ^    3           ^               ^                               S ^ i s J L r v




        'p^o-O             'O c           o w                                        Uc^»usUr


       ^ U c^ o v -/^                             'j-cMr.    £)'-^r          [       6cvu.jcx^                 u »»duj^


    ifV s ij)              Ia *-5\t            V O C vM r    \r ---------f-ne-luz-      CO--J


          ■vV v^v^         ^o-\^               touJLs^      L a ---------frw t          I^   vjOi-j   V
                                                                                                      J"      Vj VJW


     "Wo                  L^LA.            C^V^tCvVy^            fcd         go                        Ki-V-C.




                                                                                 y
                                                                                  tcs>i^7




                                                                                              G b 5
                                      lo O30                                   " 3 r-P;- 1S3C

                                                            Hillsborough Working Party,
                                                            Chief Executives Office,
                                                            Room 5,

LIVERPOOL                                                   Municipal Buildings ,
                                                            Dale Street,
                                                            LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                                            Telephone: 0 5 1 - 2 2 5 2334/3
                                                            Fax: 236 2047
                                                            DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                            Y our ref
 The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor
 50 Queen Anne's Gate,                                      Our ref      HWP/HC/VJ
 LONDON.                                                                 33*K Majch. 1990
 SW1H 9AT                                                                 p q jv l                W ' 'V




 Dear Sir

 I enclose a copy of the Working Party's final Report entitled
 'Lord Justice Taylor and After*'.- "This document sets out our
 response to your Final Report and attempts to chart a path for
 the future development of football.
 Our report raises issues of great importance, in particular the
 question of fences. We believe 2.2 metre high fencing fatally
 compromises safety and we are urging a major rethink on the
 desirability of such high fencing. Our recent survey of English
 First and Second Division and Scottish Premier League Clubs
 showed that at only a minority of grounds was pitch perimeter
 fencing introduced following specific incidents of pitch incursions.

 We have continually raised the issue of finance and it was pleasing
 to see Government recognition of this problem in the Budget, though
 a 2% transfer of the pools tax towards ground improvements is not
 enough.

 I hope you will find time to read our report and I would be
 grateful to receive any comments you may wish to make.

 Yours faithfully,




 Chair,
 Hillsborough Disaster Working Party.




                                                                      NUCLEAR FREE
                                                                      LOCAL AUTHORITY g S M j l
                                                                                        m m
When calling or telephoning please ask fo r   Mr. A. Pink
                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR AND AFTER




                          FEBRUARY 1990




                              -0O0-




Officer Contact:    Mr. T. Smith,
                    Research Officer,
                    Hillsborough Working Party

                    Tel. No. 051-225 2333




XR5AAV
                                 I N D E X


«

    The Taylor Report ..   ..                                  pp 1 - 4




    The Response of the Hillsborough Working Party     .. pp     5 - 15



    Appendix 1.   The Medics at Hillsborough Working
                  Party's Report




                                   -oOo-




    XR5AAV
1.     Lord Justice Taylor's comprehensive and far reaching
Final Report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster includes
the most damning criticism to-date into the management and
conditions prevailing within the national game.
       Following from the 43 recommendations of the Interim
Report, the Final Report introduces 33 new recommendations
which reflect the Report's concern with football's future.
Published on Monday, 29th January, 1990 the Final Report
examines, in great detail, the underlying causes of the
Hillsborough disaster and critically comments on the malaise
that afflicts the football industry.
       Although the Final Report is a thorough-going and
robust document, offering stinging criticisms of every level
of the game, including the rationale behind the compulsory
national membership scheme, it seeks to strike a balance
between issues of control and discipline with those of
spectator and ground safety. In so doing, the Report offers
an agenda which whilst seeking to contextualise Hillsborough
(and the "it couldn't have happened here” attitude)
effectively fosters the flawed logic of 'hooligan hysteria'
which has enveloped the game, public perceptions and
Government thinking in the post Heysel period. Although a
commendable Report under the circumstances, Lord Justice
Taylor has squandered an opportunity to shake the game to
its very foundations. In consequence, this Working Party
fears the Taylor Report will not be the last into the state
of the national game.
       What follows is a non-exhaustive outline of the major
points raised in the Final Report:


2.1 NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME:
       In presenting the Government's case for a universal
compulsory national membership scheme and the arguments
raised by the critics of the scheme, the Report examines, in
some detail, three of seven concerns addressed against the
scheme; the danger of congestion and disorder; will the
scheme defeat hooligans?; and police resources.
       Stressing "strong doubts about the practicality of
policing the scheme” (para 423) the Report questions the
capability of the turnstile technology to operate in all
conditions and be resistant to sabotage attempts.           Most
significantly, Lord Justice Taylor d i r e c t l y ^challenges the
whole rationale of the proposals contained in Part 1 of the
Football Spectators' Act pertinent to the I.D. Scheme.
Paragraph 419 is unequivocal on this point:-
                                -1-


XR5AAV
         "I (therefore) have grave doubts whether the
         scheme will achieve its object of eliminating
         hooligans from inside the ground.   I have
         even stronger doubts as to whether it will
         achieve its further object of ending football
         hooliganism outside grounds.   Indeed, I do not
         think it will, I fear that, in the short term at
         least, it may actually increase trouble outside
         grounds."

2.2.   ALL SEATED STADIUMS:

        The Report recommends a two-tier phased introduction
of all seated stadia covering all relevant grounds
designated under the Safety at Sports Grounds Act, 1975.
"’his proposal calls on all English First and Second Division
.md Scottish Premier League grounds to be all-seated by the
start of the 1994-95 season with the remaining English and
Scottish clubs being required to comply by the start of the
1999/2000 season.     Standing accommodation will be reduced
by 20% and 10% respectively to be effective from August
1990.

2.3. FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY (FLA)
       The Report supports the provisions and powers of the
FLA as detailed in clause 13 of the Football Spectators' Act
1989.   Lord Justice Taylor pays particular attention to the
need for a national inspection and review body empowered to
review and monitor the discharge of functions by local
authorities in relation to their Ground Safety Certificate
responsibilities under the provisions of the Safety at
Sports Grounds Act and the Fire Safety and Safety of Places
of Sport Act 1987. Ostensibly the purpose of recommendation
6 (a and b) is to ensure standards of ground safety become
uniform in the wake of the 'poor performance' of Sheffield
Council in relation to the Hillsborough Ground Safety
Certificate.

2.4    SAFETY CERTIFICATES:
       Lord Justice Taylor repeats the recommendations of
his Interim Report regarding the obligations of local
authorities under the 1975 and 1987 legislation including:
the annual review and renewal of safety certificates; the
provision of an accountable administrative structure and
regular inspections of stadia. Provision for 'discretionary
flexibility' and/or absolute compliance should be written into
certificates whenever any part of the Green Guide is
incorporated.   The Report amends Interim Recommendation 17 on
Ground Safety Advisory Groups and calls for the removal of
spectator and club representation and participation to be
replaced by a consultative process.
                               -2-

XR5AAV
2.5   STATUS OF THE GREEN GUIDE:
       On tho status of the Green Guide, Lord Justice Taylor
recognises the risk relating to "slackness developing in the
absence of any mandatory provisions." (para. 147).   The Report
rejects the possibility of making the Green Guide's terms and
provisions mandatory.   It is feared that a statutory Green
Guide could be too rigid and in relation to some peripheral
matters this would be impractical.   Instead, the Report
recommends specific amendments and additions to the Green Guide
aa well as making some of the Guide's provisions obligatory in
each Ground Safety Certificate. As a matter of urgency, the
Report calls[on the Home Secretary to set up a body to revise
the Green Guide in accordance with the relevant recommendations.

2.6   FENCES AND GATES:
       The Report does not support the complete removal of
pitch perimeter fences.    Lord Justice Taylor is, however,^
highly critical of the 'cage like fences' which reminded him
of prison. Fsuch structures lead him to comment that many
pitch perimeter fences are "inconsistent with a sports
ground beingTfor pleasure and recreation" (para 185).
Pitch
perimeter evacuation is strongly stressed and where grounds/
sections are fenced gates of a minimum 1.1 metres in width
are recommended as is the removal of all spikes including
those topping radial fences. A uniform height of fence is
recommended <at a 2.2 metre maximum in line with EUFA standards.

2.7   TERRACES:
       The Report recognises that terraced areas pose distinct
safety problems and accordingly makes a total of 19
recommendations affecting terracing, including their ultimate^
replacement by seating.   The Report covers: maximum^capacities
for terraces; a reduction in the maximum crowds density,
recommended in the Green Guide, from the current 54 people per
10 square metres to 47; maximum notional turnstile rates should
be reduced to 660 persons per hour from 750; a written
(non-contractual) agreement between the police and the club
setting out functions and responsibilities; monitoring of each
crowd area for signs of distress/overcrowding; gangways to be
kept clear and clearly marked and crash barriers to be inspected
annually, their layout reviewed with regular checks for rust.

2.8   NEW CRIMINAL OFFENCES:
       Lord Justice Taylor calls for the introduction of four
new criminal offences covering; incursions onto the playing
area; obscene or racial abuse, throwing missiles and ticket
touting.   The Report supports the provisions on exclusion and

                               -3-

XR5AAV
attendance orders for convicted soccer hooligans which are
detailed in the Football Spectators' Act.   The Report proposes
that electronic tagging be introduced for relevant offenders.


2.9    POLICE PLANNING:

       The ten recommendations under this section reflect the
appalling failure of the police operation at Hillsborough.      In
an effort to improve policing at football matches, the Report
calls for a Chief Constable to nominate a chief officer to
liaise with club management and local authorities on safety
matters.   Such an officer would have the power to consider
postponing-* kick-off in the interests of crowd safety.
Consideration should also be given to p*»-»*ly kick-off and Sunday
matches.   Provision is made for the specific training of senior
officers and the Report calls for greater flexibility in police
operational orders.


2.10   EMERGENCY SERVICES:

       The Report makes five recommendations on this subject
including: inter-agency co-operation and liaison on matters of
crowd safety; lines of communication between each service
should be maintained at all times with all agencies requiring to
be fully briefed on crowd numbers, movement and routes of
passage.   Contingency plans covering the management of
emergency vehicles with police officers posted at entrances to
grounds is recommended.


2.11   FIRST AID AND MEDICAL FACILITIES:
       The Final Report on this subject varies from the relevant
recommendations in the Interim Report. The Full Report
recommends: one first-aider per 1,000 spectators; at least one
first-aid room and appropriate equipment should be specified in
the Safety Certificate; where an expected attendance is above
2,000, a suitably trained medical practitioner should be present
- below this figure a practitioner should be on call and at
least one fully equipped ambulance should be in attendance with
more provided where larger crowds are expected, this being a
requirement of the Safety Certificate.




XR5AAV
RESPONSE OF THE HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY TO THE FINAL
HILLSBOROUGH REPORT:
3.     Much of the comment and many of the issues raised in this
section of the Report were discussed in the Working Party's
submission to Phase II of the Hillsborough Inquiry which was
forwarded to Lord Justice Taylor in November 1989.


4.   COMPULSORY NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME:
       The background, course and contents of the I.D. card
proposals are fully detailed and examined in the Working
Party's Report into the Football Spectators' Act, 1989. This
Working Party fully supports Lord Justice Taylor's challenge to
the efficacy of the Government's legislative proposals but
registers its disturbance at recent official pronouncements on
the subject.
       In consequence of the Report's scathing attack on the
Government's cherished identity scheme, the Government have been
forced to shelve its controversial proposals on I.D. cards.
Such an embarrassing climbdown has resulted directly from Lord
Justice Taylor's dismissal of the proclaimed merits of
compulsory membership as a practicable deterrent against
soccer-related disorder. Embittered by the sheer weight of the
Report's attack, the Government have most recently announced
that research into a 'feasible' compulsory membership scheme
will continue with the Minister for Sport commenting: "The
policy has not been dumped. It has been put on the back-
burner."
       Contrary to press speculation, the Government intend to
re-introduce its I.D. card proposals on the "next significant
outbreak of soccer hooliganism".   As the relevant clauses
contained in Part 1 of the Football Spectators' Act, 1989
remain on the statute, it is likely that the Government will
seek to re-introduce its compulsory membership scheme at the
earliest opportunity.


5.   ALL SEATER STADIUM:
       The Government have pre-empted Lord Justice Taylor's call
for the introduction of all-seater stadia directly in the wake
of the Hillsborough disaster by introducing a new clause 11 to
the Football Spectators' Bill.   This clause, however, referred
only to select stadia.   The Full Report broadens the
Government's proposals in seeking to designate all stadia
covered by the Safety at Sports Grounds Act (1975) with a
specific dual timetable.

                              -5-


XR5AAV
       The switch to all seated stadiums is likely to cost
football some £130 million including the cost of covering all
seated areas (estimated at £100 million).
       Such a draconian step has already drawn much controversy.
The Report contends that all-seating is the way fonrard for
football improving spectator safety and comfort whilst offering
distinct advantages in crowd control.   In challenging the
arguments of the Football Association and supporters'
organisations (including Everton Supporters' Club) - who wish to
retain a proportion of terracing - Lord Justice Taylor deploys a
classic outsider's view: "They like being part of an amorphous
seething crowd and do not wish to have each his own place in a
seat" (para 67). The Report ignores the fact that home fans
usually congregate in the same location, mixing with the same^
people each home game fusing rather than losing their identities
in the crowd.
       In theory, seating is assumed safer than terracing.
However, recent experiences of Everton and Manchester United
fans in Coventry City's 'Sky Blue Stand', and at the problems of
overcrowding to the Anfield Road visitors' section at the recent
Aston Villa game, brings into question the efficacy of
all-seater stadia. Concern must be expressed about the layout
of many seated areas currently in existence at English and
Scottish League grounds and at the adequacy of access and egress
arrangements.
       If the same mistakes at Hillsborough are not to be
repeated - and there have been incidents of 'near-misses'
already this season - then a fundamental change of attitude
needs to accompany the introduction of all-seater stadia.

       This Working Party does not oppose the concept of
all-seater stadia.   What we do challenge is the universal
application of this principle by legislative means.   The
decision to make a ground all-seated should be made by each club
in meaningful consultation with the relevant local authority and
supporters.
       As a consequence of introducing all-seater stadia, prices
will inevitably rise. The Report recognises this and
accordingly challeneges clubs to minimise such increases.^ Price
increases will merely compensate clubs for the reduction in
capacity implicit in the shift from terracing to seating.
Any further increase would risk driving fans away. Furthermore,
the increasing financial pressure confronting clubs could
increase the likelihood of a breakaway Super-League.


6.1   PITCH PERIMETER/RADIAL FENCING:
         It is the contention of this Working Party that the

                               -   6-

XR5AAV
hysteria surrounding 'football hooliganism' in the past two
decades has led to a number of Football League Clubs installing
pitch perimeter fencing without addressing the inherent conflict
between containment and legitimate 'traffic paths' which
tragically at Hillsborough meant the pitch was inviolate to all
spectators.   We contend that the Final Report has fudged the
issue of pitch perimeter fencing by calling for restrictions on
the height and style of fences including the removal of all
spikes.

       Pitch perimeter fences have no place at a recreational
facility used for public entertainment. As Hillsborough proved,
such fences fatally compromise safety however aesthetic to the
eye or unifiorm in construction. We urge- a major rethink
on the desirability of fences given the above consideration and
the numerous means of preventing pitch incursions available to
the authorities without resorting to such draconian structures.
 Furthermore, fences restrict the ability of emergency services
access to casualties on terrace/seated areas.

       Based on the Working Party's fencing survey of all
English First and Second Division and Scottish Premier League
clubs and a number of English and Scottish local authorities, we
discovered that at only a minority of grounds was pitch
perimeter fencing introduced as a result of specific incidents
of pitch incursions.   Most fences were installed at the request
of police and/or local authorities.   Some clubs did introduce
pitch fencing to comply with EUFA guidelines, although EUFA's
provisions do allow for alternative structures such as dry
moats.

       Pitch perimeter fencing is the net product of the
'hooligan hysteria' which has permeated 'official' thinking
since the mid 1970's.   We repeat the fact that no one has died
as a result of a pitch incursion.

6.2    The rise in popularity over the last two decades of
radial segregatory fencing, such as at Hillsborough's West
Terrace, mirrors in many ways the rationale behind pitch
perimeter fencing. On terraces the introduction of such radial
fences has increased a club's 'flexibility' to contain and
segregate opposing sections of support and, in some cases, to
ease 'traffic flow'.   The Working Party recognises that some
of these terraces allocated for visiting supporters are
potentially dangerous due to overcrowding, as they do not
provide sufficient accommodation for visiting supporters.



7.1   THE STATUS AND PROVISIONS OF THE GREEN GUIDE:

       This Working Party is disappointed that the Final
Hillsborough Report has decided against making the terms and

                               -7-

XR5AAV
provisions of the Green Guide mandatory.   Though Lord Justice
Taylor criticises the Guide's 'flexibility' and minimalist
interpretations of its provisions we believe an opportunity has
been lost to make the Guide statutory in its application. With
a mandatory guide the status of its provisions would be
difficult to compromise even at a minimal interpretation.
7.2.   A new and distinct chapter on 'Turnstile Facilities'
should be introduced in the Green Guide. Given the essence of
the Hillsborough tragedy was identifiable in the 'crisis at the
turnstiles', we consider the introduction of a specificsection
covering turnstiles is essential to prevent a repetition of a
crisis caused by the convergence of a large number of people on
a small number of turnstiles. Had more turnstiles been
available at Hillsborough the tragedy may well have been
averted. At every League ground the general inadequate ratio of
turnstiles to supporters is unacceptable and should now be
regarded as intolerable.
7.3    The problem of overcrowding and localised overcrowding to
terraces and seated areas and at ingress and egress points is
not capable of being remedied by a single solution.   We suggest
that clear and comprehensive instructions as to the prevention
and crisis management of overcrowding and crowd (flow)
conjestion be introduced into the amended Green Guide.


8.   GROUND SAFETY ADVISORY GROUPS:
       Lord Justice Taylor's admirable account and criticisms of
spectator facilities and administrative arrogance in the opening
two chapters of the Report is not matched by any concrete
proposals to institutionalise spectator relationships with clubs
and administrators. This failure is a serious one and is
compounded by the Report's decision to reject spectator and
club involvement in Ground Safety Advisory Groups relegating
their status to one of a consultative role. "Higher standards
......   inhuman relationships" cannot be significantly advanced
without meaningful spectator input. Accordingly this Working
Party calls for a reversal of this proposal and calls on this
Authority to continue to support actively fans and club
representation on its Ground Safety Advisory Group.


9.   POLICE PLANNING AND CONTROL:
9.1    The Final Report's concern with improving control and
discipline strategies is argued as being axiomatic to crowd
safety. In defence of effective public order strategies at
soccer grounds Lord Justice Taylor is forced to oppose the
Government's compulsory football membership scheme (see para.
424). Although the Report makes a total of ten recommendations
on police planning, no case is made for effective and meaningful

                               -8-

XR5AAV
police consultation and accountability. We view this as a
serious omission. In consequence, we repeat the relevant
section of our submission to phase II of the Inquiry
("Policing, Accountability and Community Consultation") in full.


9.2: Since 1979, the debate over police accountability and,
in particular, police/community relations has been of major
significance.    This period of controversy is in marked
contrast to the previous fifteen years, since the passing of
the 1964 Police Act, during which time little was published
or researched on the matter.    The inner-city disturbances
in Southall 1979, St. Paul's 1980, and in other major cities
during 1981 changed the level of debate.    Throughout the
late seventies, there had been much discussion of the Devon
and Cornwall model of community policing and its potential
for other areas.

9.3: Two major factors emerged from the period of
controversy, research and publication of the early 1980's.
First, the police made it quite clear, via the Association
of Chief Police Officers (A.C.P.O.) that on 'operational
matters' involving force strategy, practices and priorities
the Chief Constables' decision was absolute.   The 1964
Act's brief to police authorities to provide an 'adequate
and efficient' police force would not extend to operational
policies or practices. This has become the accepted
convention. Second, following Lord Scarman's Report,
community consultation became governed by statute in the
1984 Police and Criminal Evidence Act. Scarman had called
for effective consultation and not 'talking shops'.
Consequently, all force areas have some form of direct
consultation through forums, panels or committees.

      The problem has been that in the organisation and
administration of community consultation the police have
retained absolute discretion on agenda items, information
giving and decision to act on matters raised. In so doing,
Chief Constables have invoked the principle of operational
matters, and thus consultative groups have no effective
powers to influence policies or practices, nor do they have
the right to procedures of accountability concerning agreed
changes in policies or practices. It is against this
background of debate and controversy over the effectiveness
of procedures for police accountability that any proposal
which suggests an extension of community involvement in
policing must be placed.

9.4: The Hillsborough Interim Report, discussed at some length
the relationship between club management and the police in
establishing responsibility for crowd management inside the

                             -9-

XR5AAV
 ground. It is Lord Justice Taylor's position that the primary
 responsibility lies with the police both outside and inside the
 ground which enables the official Interim Report to conclude
 that the main reason for the Hillsborough disaster was the
 failure of the police to control the crowd. In coming to this
 conclusion, the Report established a catalogue of mistakes and
 errors of judgment from the police briefing through to their
 operational response to the first indications of trouble. It
 would appear to be appropriate to establish effective
 procedures for consultation between the police and all other
 interested parties.


 9.5: In tine with Lord Scarman's recommendation that the
 police should establish close links wi^h the community, we
 propose an extension of these links to include regular and
 major sports events.   Existing Advisory groups on Ground
 Safety offer an appropriate forum for such consultation to
 take place. Their membership includes local councillors,
 club officials, fire officers, St. John's Ambulance, the
 ambulance service, the Football Supporters' Association; and
 the Supporters' Clubs. We propose that the police present an
 operational programme, including planned responses to all
 foreseeable circumstances, to the advisory group pre-season.
 The agreed programme should be reviewed at subsequent meetings.


10.   FOOTBALL'S FINANCES:

        The Final Report makes a series of recommendations with
 significant cost implications.   In calling for "a totally new
 approach across the whole field of football" requiring "higher
 standards both in bricks and mortar and in human relationships"
 (para 138), Lord Justice Taylor throws a direct challenge to
 the football industry and the Government. This challenge,
 however, is nowhere elaborated in terms of financial
 recommendations given the glaring anomolies in the fiscal
 policies applied to football.

         This Working Party calls for:-

          (i) a levy on the Pools Promotion Association in line
              with the Horse-Racing Betting Levy and supports that
              recommendation as contained in the Chester Report
              (1968);

         (ii) the introduction by the football authorities of a
              5% levy on all transfer fees above £100,000, the
              proceeds going to ground improvements;

      (iii) fiscal concessions should be granted to expenditure
            ground improvements to encourage stadium redevelop­
            ment;

                               -10-

XR5AAV
       (iv) local authorities should investigate means of
            influencing ground redevelopment or relocation by
            way of purchasing an interest in a local club to
            develop community links and activities.
         (v) the recent proposed investment by the Football Trust
             and Football Grounds Improvement Trust into ground
             safety measures should be met pound for pound by the
             Government.
       (vi) a 5% levy to be placed on gate receipts over and
            above a figure to be determined jointly by the
            Football League and Football Association; and

      (vii) a greater contribution to be made to ground safety
            improvements from broadcasting receipts.


11.   FOOTBALL'S ADMINISTRATION:
       Although the Report is searching in its criticisms of the
games leadership (paragraphs 51-52) at no point are the
weaknesses in the industry's administrative structures
positively addressed. We believe arrogance, incompetence and
inertia adequately summarises the performance of the Football
Association in its duties and responsibilities. We make the
following recommendations:
         (i)    There should be a single body, replacing the
               Football Association and Football League, to
               administer association football in this country;

       (ii)    that body should ensure that crowd safety
               standards are the highest reasonably practicable
               and that organisation should be charged with the
               responsibility of setting detailed safety
               standards and enforcing them in conjunction with
               all relevant local authorities; and

      (iii)    that the F.A. Challenge Cup Committee and the
               Senior Management Team of the F.A. resign
                forthwith.

12.   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND MEDICAL PROVISION AT SPORTS STADIA:

       Whilst this Working Party welcomes the relevant
recommendations of the Final Report, we agree with the Medics at
Hillsborough Working Party's view (MHWP, see appendix 1) on the
importance of good communication between emergency agencies as
well as within them.'   We therefore recommend the adoption of
the following proposal in the MHWP Report.

                                -11-

XR5AAV
         (i)   The club be responsible for the convening of an
               emergency committee involving:

                 -    a Casualty Consultant
                 -    Chief Ambulance Officer
                      County Surgeon of the St. John's
                              Ambulance Brigade
                  -   Chief Fire Officer
                  -   Chief Constable
                  -   City Engineer
               which will have responsibility to advise on:-
                  -   the requirements for 'on site emergency'
                      provisions as carried in the 'Ground
                      Safety Certificate;
                  -   the establishment of a 'major emergency
                      plan' covering the responses of all
                      agencies concerned and the lines of
                      communication and collaboration between
                      those different bodies; and

                  -   the 'major emergencing plan' be
                      incorporated into the Ground Safety
                      Certificate.
      (ii)     The 'on-site emergency plan' should provide the
               basis for a programme of training to involve all
               those employed on the staff of football clubs so
               that each knows what to do in the case of both
               containable emergencies and full-scale disasters.
               Training should also take account of the need for
               certain key staff (e.g. stewards) to be trained
               in basic first-aid.
     (iii)     and that the committee meets regularly enough that
               its members recognise each other.    (A major factor
               in the breakdown of communications at Hillsborough
               was the apparent failure of the emergency services
               to recognise people in control - this was certainly
               the case between the South Yorkshire Police and
               South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service at
               Hillsborough.)
       The Report recommends the use of a Major Accident Vehicle
(similar to those in Scotland) equipped with stretchers, etc.
But Lord Justice Taylor appears to have overlooked that the
South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) had a
major vehicle on 15th April 1989 which only arrived at 3.45 p.m.
This apparent oversight spares SYMAS senior officers the
criticisms some would think they deserved.

                                   -12-

XR5AAV
13.   NEUTRAL VENUE MATCHES:
       As the Hillsborough F.A. Cup tie was held at a neutral
venue, with disastrous consequences, it is somewhat disturbing
that the Report does not consider the specific problems posed by
such matches. This Working Party calls on the Football
Association and Football League to:-

          (i)   hold all future neutral venue fixtures at
                stadiums pre-designated as acceptable venues
                possessing a Special Ground Safety Certificate;

         (ii)   such grounds should be required to have a 75%
                attendance rate to achieve 'designated neutral
                venue' status;
      (iii)     where such stadiums are pre-designated as having
                'neutral venue' status the relevant local
                authority Ground Safety Advisory Group should meet,
                in advance, to assist that authority in exercising
                its functions and obligations under the terms of
                the Special Safety Certificate; and
          (iv) all relevant pre-match arrangements for such
               fixtures should be monitored by the responsible
               football authority.


14.   CUP FINAL TICKET ALLOCATIONS:
       The recent announcement from the Football Association of
a further cut in the Cup Finalists' allocation of tickets for
the 'tie' at Wembley Stadium is an indication that, as far as
Lancaster Gate is concerned, it will be business as usual
despite Hillsborough and its aftermath.
       With the conversion of Wembley Stadium to a fully seated
arena, the capacity for the Cup Final has been cut from 87,000
to 80,000.   The two competing clubs will now share 42,000
tickets, a cut of 2,000 from the 44,000 which would have been
shared had it not been an all-Merseyside Final following the
Hillsborough Disaster.
       For the 1989 Final tie, Liverpool and Everton Football
Clubs shared 70,000 tickets.   This concession, from the F.A.,
was designed as a gesture of goodwill to the City's supporters.

       As a result of this measure, ticket touting was
drastically reduced compared to other seasons, falling by as
much as 83% from the previous year. This Authority's Trading
Standards Department estimated that Liverpool fans paid as much
as £25,000 to touts for tickets for the 1988 Final versus

                                   -13-

XR5AAV
Wimbledon.   After that, Final Trading Standards Officers
produced a dossier naming over 50 football clubs and county
football associations who were alleged to have broken F.A.
rules and had their tickets passed on to touts.
       We would recommend that the F.A. take into account clubs'
average home attendances when allocating tickets but that the
total allocation be no less than the 80% made last season.    A
club with a small average attendance would then get a smaller
proportion of the allocation than a well supported club.


15.   RACISM:
       Lord Justice Taylor recommends that the use of obscene or
racialist abuse should be made a criminal offence.   This is
because the existing provisions under the Public Order Act, 1986
are not sufficient to deal with those indulging in such abuse.
       Under Section 4 of the Act, although racist chanting may
be proved "abusive or insulting" it also has to be shown that it
was used "towards another person with intent to cause that
person to believe that immediate unlawful violence will be used
against him."
       Under Section 5 of the Act, whilst again the chanting may
be proved to have contained "abusive or insulting words", it may
be difficult to show that it was done "within the hearing or
sight of a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or
distress thereby."
       Under Section 18 of the Act "a person who uses
threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour is guilty
of an offence if (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred
or (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
likely to be stirred up thereby."   Again, Lord Justice Taylor
considers it may be difficult to prove that racist abuse at
football matches are intended to stir up racial hatred.
       Racist abuse and chanting at Anfield is more subdued
nowadays because of the dramatic impact of John Barnes.   There
are still very few black people at Liverpool matches and John
Barnes is an "honorary white" in the eyes of many Liverpool
fans.
       At Goodison Park many Everton supporters seem to take
comfort that "Everton are white".
       Young people in particular are at risk from these racist
influences.   It is ridiculous to ignore racist chanting and
pretend it does not happen.   Everyone can hear it and be
affected. Such racism will not go away on its own accord:
it needs to be challeneged and confronted.
                             -14-

XR5AAV
        As racism is prevalent in society, it is not surprising
that it is all too common at football grounds.    What is
surprising though is the lack of effort by clubs to challenge
racism.    The occasional plea from club chairmen for fans not to
join in racist chants is not good enough.    The clubs should
ensure that respected players time and again condemn the racists
in match programmes, television, radio and press interviews, and
state clearly that racists are not wanted at football grounds.
Distinctive signs should be displayed around the grounds making
clear racist abuse will not be tolerated.
       Lord Justice Taylor argues the need to make obscene or
racist abuse a specific offence so that people will know what is
prohibited and "that they do these things at their peril".
(para. 299)-  The Working Party fully supports the proposal to
make obscene or racialist abuse a criminal offence.


16.   MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES:
       Supporters should be encouraged to join clubs in a
Voluntary Membership Scheme in which all members can participate
on an equal basis by being able to vote for supporters'
representatives on the Board of Directors of each club.
       Other benefits of membership should include discounts on
tickets, cheap travel to away matches and concessions on club
merchandise with the use of club facilities to be made more
widely available to members.
       Season ticket holders should be given automatic free
membership.




                             -15-

XR5AAV
                                     THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

REPORT OF THP MEDICS AT HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY (MAHWP)                                                ON THE
FUTURE PROVISION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS

Background

We are a group of doctors,              nurses and a medical student who all became

involved with        the      emergency       response           at    Hillsborough          on    April     15th

1989.      Some of us were at Hillsborough as football supporters and were

standing     either      on    the    terraces         or   in     the   stands       when    the       disaster

occurred.        Others were among those who responded to media requests for

assistance at the ground and turned out to help.




In our opinion the interim report of the disaster inquiry (Cm765) is a

paradox with        respect      to   the     emergency           aspects.          Or. the one hand             the

report round that             'no valid criticism can be made                        i>£ the response by

the St John's Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS (South Yorkshire Metropolitan

Ambulance Service) or by the fire brigade on April 15th....'                                            (para 295

p   53;.    On    the other hand         the      report makes            U reconunendati.ons on                 the

co-ordination       of   emergency          services,        5 reconunendations              on     first    aid,

medical     facilities         and    ambulances            and       importantly       in    our        view,     U

recommendations on communications                      .    (Appendix 1)




It seems clear from the inquiry report that the overall responsibility

for coordinating the services                    responsible for ensuring public                          safety,

including the emergency services,                      rested, and at present rests with the

police     force.     Setting         aside      the       attribution         of    blame        for    specific

failures      on    April       15th,       it     seemed          to    the        working        party     that

constructive recommendations could be made concerning the organisation

and staffing,       training and equipping of on-site emergency services                                          at
r*

     football      matches       and   similar     events          and    the    lines       of           management,
 ►
'    co-ordination and communication between different professional                                              groups

     providing those services.               The MAHWP working party confined itself to a

     consideration         of on-site     emergency        services        and wishes                to    propose    a

     system     designed     to    cope with      normal        medical        emergencies            at     sporting

     events     (ie individual or small numbers of casualties/emergencies).                                          It

     is   our    view     that    at   present    even     that      eventuality            is       not     properly

     catered for and that members of the public,                          as distinct from club and

     board      members    and     players     cannot      depend         on    an    adequate              emergency

     response.      A first step to ensuring an adequate emergency response in

     the event      of a disaster         is   to have        an    effective        system with                clearly

     defined     responsibilities         in place         to      cope   with       more    likely             smaller

     scale problems.




     Ic is our view that it is unrealistic to equip arc staff everv sporting

     stadium with sufficient resources to cope with another Hillsborough and

     ^H.at the main eirphasis should be on i nsurir.^ that another Hillsborough

     cannot happen.         It is to be hoped that the main recommendations of the

     Inquiry and their implementation will ensure that that is the case.




     It   is    however,     important       to   give     consideration             as     to       how     a    local

     domestic     emergency       response     might     be     coordinated with                 a    large       scale

     disaster     response       and what      mechanisms          need   to be       in place             to    ensure

     that all members of the emergency services, both ground-based and those

     who are part of the district disaster plan know exactly what                                           to do and

     what the lines of communication, command and responsibility should be

     in the event of another disaster.




                                                       2
    f*
         It     is    our        opinion        fhat           lack    of     understanding           of        these    matters

    >    contributed             to    the     chaotic          situation       between         3.00pm          and    4.00pm   at

         Hillsborough on April 15th 1989.                              In our opinion that chaotic situation

         was not necessary and has                        led to at least one erroneous                          conclusion in

         the interim report                   - namely that 'to attempt to use a defibrillator on

         the pitch with people milling about                                  would have been highly                    dangerous

         owing to the risk of injury from the electric charge'.                                                 In our opinion

         had    everybody              from    the     emergency             services      who      were    involved        known

^        exactly what they had to do,                            a casualty clearing area would have been

         established             and     secured          on     the    pitch       in    addition         to    that     in    the

         gymnasium.              It      would       then        have        been    possible          to       have     used     a

         defibrillator safely and to have drawn on the skills of more of the 33

         South Yorkshire                paramedics             who were       available         for disasters           than    the

         few who were actually used.




         Similarly          it    is    clear     from         the     evidence      given       to   the   inquiry that          a

         third       casualty          clearing        station          should      have       been   e: tablxshed         behind

         Leppings Lane                goal as part of a preformulated plan,                            that there was no

         such        plan        and     that        no        casualty        clearing         station          was     formally

         established.                 These points         all refer           to a fundamental weakness                   in the

         arrangements for an emergency plan for the ground.




         Recommendations

         1.      Organisation and staffing

                 It    is    our view           that       the interim          report         of   the Taylor          Committee

                 provides a good starting point for ensuring an adequate first aid

                 and    emergency              response          at     football         and     similar        grounds.        Thu




                                                                         3
report recognises the inadequacy of depending on a club doctor who

may not have experience of mass casualty work as the mainstay of

the on-site response.               However,    we feel       that the      recommendations

in the interim report do not go far enough in two respects:

a)   It seems to us that the most appropriate medical input is to

     be   found       in     the     District    General         Hospital     accident          arid

     emergency department and that negotiations                           should take place

     in each district for the consultant casualty surgeon to take

     on   the   responsibility           for    providing         cover     for    appropriate

     public events.           Normally this responsibility would be met by

     making       available          junior     casualty          staff      and        operating

     department        assistants        to    vork   closely       with     the       paramedics

     from the ambulance              service    in operating a rota for                  adequate

     mac^n day cover.              The responsibility for financing this cover

     should be with the football club.

b)   In   order       to    ensure     that    proper    arrangements         are       made     for

     emergency c^ver           it should be the          responsibility of               football

     clubs      and        allied     organisations         to     convene        an    emergency

     committee consisting of:

                            a casualty consultant
                            chief ambulance officer
                            county surgeon of St John's Ambulance
                            Chief Fire Officer
                            Chief Constable
                            Borough Engineer

     who should collectively advise on the arrangements                                  to be    in

     place.       The        responsibilities           for      funding      the       necessary

     arrangements           should     lie     vith   the        football    club       or     other

     organisation arranging the event.
    i
                    The   responsibilities              for       ensuring     an. . adequate     emergency

?.                  response should lie clearly with the members of the committee

                    and the    arrangements         proposed         should be        enforceable      by     law

                    via a strengthening of the Safety Certificate mechanism.




        With regard to the medical              emergency response            itself it should be the

        responsibility        of        the     consultant           casualty         surgeon     to         make

        recommendations    for      staffing,      training          and    equipment      to   provide       the

^       necessary   emergency       service.       The    involvement          of   more     highly    trairsd

        health workers    in a duty rota would be                    anticipated to free St John's

        Ambulance staff to concentrate on the less serious emergencies.




        An    emergency plan       for minor      emergencies         for     which    the    on-site       staff

        might oxj-ccl to be        self-sufficient and for major ei crgar.cies where the

        on-site staff would need to fall in and work closely with the district

        emergency plan should be formulated and be a statutory requirement for

        the issue of a safety zertificate.




        The    co-ordination       of    these    two    plans       should    be     facilitated       by    the

        casualty    consultant,         chief    ambulance          officer,     county      surgeon     of    St

        John's Ambulance,      Chief Fire Officer and Chief Constable being members

        of both emergency plan te a m s .




        Training and Equipment

        The on-site emergency plan should provide the basis                            for a programme of

        training to involve all those employed on the staff of football clubs

        and similar organisations so that they all know what to do in the case




                                                              5
•   V
    1
        of both      containable          emergencies          and       full-scale         disasters.             Training
    A
        should also take account of the need tui certain key staff eg stewards

        to be trained in basic first-aid.




        The interim report of the Taylor Inquiry makes certain proposals about

        the    first    aid       facilities       and    equipment            which     should         be    present      at

        football grounds.            We would'wish to commend to the inquiry the circular

        from Dr E B Lewis, Surgeon in Chief of the St John's Ambulance,                                              London

^       dated    9th   June       1989     which     lists         the       recommended         first       aid    medical

        arrangements         at    football        grounds         in    the    light       of    the        Hillsborough

        disaster.       We    note       particularly          the      inclusion      in    that       circular      of    a

        list of equipment which is only to be used by appropriately trained and

        designated personnel (oxygen and Entonox) and a list of equipment which

        is    only   .v. b*. used by        registered medical piactiuiontrs                             familiar      wiui

        their use      (advanced monitoring E C G , BP                       and pulse      oximeters,             advanced

        treatment      drips        and     sets     and       defibrillators               (appendix          2).      The

        equipment      to    be    contained       in    each        medical      room      wou„d       ultimately         be

        decided and regularly checked by the responsible casualty consultant.




        Lines of management, co-ordination and communication

        The     football          club     emergency           committee           should          be        responsible

        individually        and    collectively          for    the      arrangements            for    a containable

        on-site emergency and for ensuring adequate linking in to the district

        disaster     plan     response      in     the    event         of    a non-containable               emergency.

        The responsibilities are as follows:




                                                               6
The   football   club      to   convene       regular   meetings   of   the    emergency

committee prior      to    the start of each            football   season     and at   its

conclusion and at any time in between at the request of a member

of the emergency committee.




The casualty consultant should:

ensure that an adequate emergency rota is provided to a level as

agreed    with the        emergency   committee in         order     to satisfy        the

requirements for the Safety Certificate and the emergency plan;




ensure that a rolling programme of staff training is developed in

keeping   with the agi'eed emergency plan.




ens“re    tnat adequate         and   effective equipment            is provided        in

keeping with the agreed emergency plan.




The County Sur^cun of St John             's Ambulance should.

ensure that an adequate emergency rota is provided as agreed with

the requirements of the Safety Certificate and the emergency plan:




ensure that a rolling programme of staff training is developed                          in

keeping with the agreed emergency plan.




ensure    that adequate         and   effective equipment            is provided        in

keeping with the agreed emergency plan.




                                          7
              The responsible casualty consultant *.nd the County Surgeon of                           St
    *
              John's     Ambulance        should    be    rcc-      ible    for    co-ordinating      the

              medical and first-aid response and ensuring full understanding of

              each others r o l e s .




        4.    The Chief Fire Officer should:

              ensure that the Fire Service                response is fully co-ordinated with

              that of the       other    emergency services          and that      staff   training    is

^              developed in keeping with the agreed emergency                     plan.




        5.     The Chief Constable should:

              ensure    that    the    emergency    services       are   able     to carry   out    their

              tasks    in an orderly,       effective an-* efficient way in keeping with

              the agreed emergency plan and that appropriate                       staff training      is

              developed.




        6.   Tne Borough Engineer should:

             ensure     tftat statutory      requirements        for crowd        safety and   for    the

             issue of a Safety Certificate are insisted on and met and that no

             public     event   takes     place    without    these      requirements      having    been

             met.




        It     should    be the       responsibility of      all      members of     the     emergency

        committee to ensure that good communication                   between them is maintained

        a t all times both on and off match d a y s .




                                                      8
\

    The    interim       report          of     the       Taylor           Inquiry          makes      4    recommendations                 about
L

    communication            in    a    more     general              sense.       We       believe         these       to    be       of   great

    importance         in preventing                 another          Hillsborough.               However,         we    would wish            to

    poinc out the importance of good communications between emergency agencies as

    well     as    within              them.         In         our        opinion          the     failure         of        inter-agency

    communication contributed to the— chaos on April 15th 1989.




    Conclusion

    In     our    opinion,         the        medical           facilities             at    football            grounds          in    the    UK

    are    amateurish.             A     system        such       as        described         above         would       professionalise

    the    arrangements            and    bring        them           up    to    the       standard        which       the       public      has

    a     right    to     expect.              Part        of         the    weakness             in       the    present           situation

    appears       to    be        the    extent            to    which           what       ars     essentially               quasi-public

    organisations ie football clubs fall outside public jurisdiction because thev

    are     privately         owned.            If     an        acceptable             standard           of     public          safety      and


    emergency      provision             is    to     be    attained             for    all       stadia         nationwide            then   any

    recc~.Tiendations             ^rom         the     Taylor              Inquiry          should         _,e    made        a     statutory

    requirement         enforceable by law via the Safety Certificate mechanism.




    Sister Joyce Allen, Nursing Officer in Occupational Health, Merseyside.
    Dr John Ashton, Senior Lecturer in Public Health, University of Liverpool
    Dr Peter Brown, General Practitioner, Sheffield.
    Professor Tim Cooke, Department of Surgery, University of Glasgow.
    Dr Kaderasson Curpen, General Practitioner, Liverpool.
    Mr Fred Eccleston, Senior Nurse Manager, Wirral Health Authority.
    Dr David Gellipter, General Practitioner, Sheffield.
    Dr Tom Heller, General Practitioner, Sheffield.
    Dr John Hewitt, Consultant, The Women's Hosptial, Liverpool.
    Dr Amnanda Howe, General Practitioner, Sheffield.
    Dr G Phillips, General Practitioner, East Kilbride, Scotland
    Dr Paul Redgrave, General Practitioner, Sheffield.____________________




                                                                      9
Appendix 1.    Recommendations of the Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry

Interim Report




Coordination of emergency services

     The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through

     senior nominated officers regular liaison concerning crowd safet

     at each stadium.

     Before each match at a designated stadium,     the police should

     ensure that the fire service and ambulance service are given fu.

     details about the event,   including its venue,   its timing,    the

     number of spectators expected,    their likely routes of entry and

     exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties concerning r

     contro]   or movement of the crowd.    Such details should be read:..

     Evsilsble in th. 0 control roonis of esch of r.he emergency service:

     Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium or

     emergency vehicles from all three services should be reviewed.

     ’..:ey should include routes of access,   vendt .ivous points,   and

     accessibility within the ground itself.

     Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be

     briefed as to the contingency plans for the arrival of emergent;

     services and should be informed when such services are called £

      to where and why they are required.




First aid, medical facilities and ambulances

      There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trai

      first aider per 1,000 spectators. The club should have the

      responsibility for securing such attendance.




                                      10
#
(




         -   There should be. at each stadium one or non*, first aid roonvs.        The
    %
             number of such rooms and the equipment to be maintained within

             them should be specified by the local authority after taking

             professional medical advice and should be made a requirement of

             any Safety Certificate.

             The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at

             each match and available to deal with any medical exigency at the

^            ground.       He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid.

             He should be present at the ground at least an hour before

             kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the

             match.    His whereabouts should be known to those in the police

             control room and he should be immediately contactable.

             At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate

             ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with an

             expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

             The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where
                       I
             larger crowds are expected should be specified by the luvial

             authority after consultation with the ambulance services and

             should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.




        Communications

             There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to

             enable all radio transmissions to be received, evaluated and

             answered.       The radio system should be such as to give operators in

             the control rooms priority over, and the capacity or override,

             others using the same channel.         Additional channels should be

             used, where necessary,      to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves.




                                               11
Consideration should be given to sou d-proofing the control rooms

against excessive crown noise.

To complement radio communications, there should be a completely

separate system of land lines with telephone links between the

control room and key points at the ground.

Within the control room, there should be a public address system

to communicate with individual areas outside and inside the ground

with groups of areas or with the whole ground.                Important

announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the

attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the

ground.     This arrangement should be prominently advertised on

every programme sold for every match.

Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising

boards    i_c_- -h(1cli.esi the   crowd.   Consideration should also be giv-;r.

to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals :o

indicate to the control room the existence of certain emergencies

or requirements.
