NOTE OF A MEETING WITH THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND FOOTBALL
LEAGUE HELD AT 2.30PM ON TUESDAY 21 NOVEMBER IN QUEEN ANNE'S GATE


Present:    Lord Justice Taylor      Mr A      D McMullen }
            Mr B Johnson             Mr A      R Titcombe } FA
            Professor L Maunder      Mr R      H G Kelly }
            Mr R Whalley
            Mr J Sweet               Mr   W   Fox        }
                                     Mr   J   Dent       }   FL
                                     Mr   I   H Stott    }
                                     Mr   R   T Chase    }


All-Seater Stadia


1.   Lord Justice Taylor sought clarification on the FA/FL's
attitude to seating, and on the impact of European requirements.
It was clear that the trend generally was towards all-seater
stadia, and both FIFA and UEFA were pursuing that objective.
Indeed, FIFA had already stipulated that from autumn 1992 every
World Cup match was to take place at an all-seater ground, whilst
UEFA members were currently debating a resolution requiring the
elimination of all standing at European Cup competition matches
by the year 2000 and a requirement on national associations to
hold "high-risk" games in all-seater stadia from 1 January 1993.
"High-risk" would include some Cup competition games, matches
where visiting supporters exceeded 10% of the standing capacity
or 3000 persons, or those games attended by more than 50,000
spectators or played before a full capacity crowd.


2.   Failure by domestic authorities to comply with any such
requirements would lead to sanctions, including the possibility
of a ban from World Cup games, but the Football authorities
expressed some anxiety about the anticipated timetable.           Their
own preference was to move towards all-seater stadia in
accordance with the timescale set out in their written evidence.
Mr Stott believed that a number of clubs would favour restricted
capacity rather than going all-seater by 1993.


3.   Discussion turned to the particular topic of away
supporters.    A number of clubs had already reduced their
allocation of places to such supporters:        Liverpool to 3000 all­
seating ^   Leeds to 1000 standing and Norwich to 2500.       In
describing the Norwich experience, Mr Chase emphasised the
resultant benefits, including a greatly - reduced police
requirement, which allowed the Chief Constable to utilise his
scarce resources more effectively, cost savings, and an upsurge
in home fans taking advantage of the improved atmosphere.      The
general consensus, however, opposed the total abolition of
standing, recognising that an integral part of the atmosphere at
a game was the highly-charged emotion generated by the presence
of away fans.


4.   What was important was to attract the right type of away
support, and doing so involved a more selective approach to
ticket allocation.   Increasingly, clubs were distributing tickets
to recognised away supporters' clubs only, often through the
auspices of the away club itself.


Football Spectators Act


5.   Both the League and the Association felt that the
Government's scheme had serious flaws, particularly in view of
uncertainty about the existence of suitable technology and the
unwillingness of fans to participate.   It was unwise, for
example, to draw an analogy with the use of plastic bank cards at
automatic cash tills since opposition to the Government's scheme
was almost universal among fans, who would have no interest in
seeking to facilitate its smooth operation.   There was concern
that the police would encounter difficulties at the turnstiles,
particularly in dealing with supporters whose cards had been
rejected, and that the problems of damaged and unreadable cards
had been underestimated.   Plymouth, for example, had had to
abandon their equipment on every occasion they had sought to use
it because of mechanical failures.   The Football League's own
research at Arsenal had suggested that the operation of the ID
scheme would slow substantially, entry to the ground and
exacerbate problems outside.   The general preference was for a
continued emphasis on schemes designed to attract the respectable
spectator and the expansion of other anti-hooligan measures such
as CCTV, which had been a major success in combatting violence.
Ticket Touts


6.    Whilst there was unanimity about the value of legislation to
deal with the problem of ticket touts, there was recognition that
the drafting of the offence would need careful thought.
Confining the offence to "designated sports grounds" was,
generally, felt acceptable.


Pitch Invasion


7.    Lord Justice Tavlor sought views on the possibility of a
reduction in fencing in conjunction with the creation of a
specific offence of going onto the pitch area without reasonable
excuse.   Such an offence would address the problem of pitch
invasion more precisely than the offences created by the Public
Order Act 1986.


8.    Mr Kelly believed that there were no incidents this season
which could be attributed to the removal of fences, or the
opening of perimeter gates, and thought the aim should therefore
be the gradual removal of perimeter fencing, as was already
taking place at a number of grounds.   Other ideas canvassed
included the creation of a sterile walkway between the perimeter
and the first row of spectators.


9.    There was general acceptance that whatever the scheme there
needed to be a greater degree of standardisation.   Although the
Government's Act might not be popular, the proposed creation of
the FLA would at least provide a supervisory body able to enforce
common practice.    That did not mean, however, a universal view in
favour of making the Green Guide compulsory;    it would be
nonsensical, for example, to close a perfectly serviceable stand
which had operated safely for many years merely because its
risers were 1mm out.


Ticket Allocation


10.   Dissatisfaction had been expressed elsewhere about the
proportionately small allocation of tickets to the clubs actually
involved in FA competitions, and Lord Justice Taylor sought the
FA's views.   Mr Kelly confirmed that the matter was still under
discussion within his organisation.


Merger of FA/FL


11•   Mr Kelly argued that there already was only one governing
body in football, the FA which acted as the umbrella organisation
under which all others, including the FL operated.      Clearly,
however, the FL was a powerful voice, representing the
professional game, and its representatives sat on numerous FA
committees as well as on the FA Council.      Although the FA and the
FL might be expected to have different perspectives, given the
former's wider ambit, nonetheless, problems were resolved by
negotiation and agreement.   A change in the administrative
structure was not, at present, called for.


Reduction in Pool Betting Tax


12.   The FA/FL repeated the arguments already contained in their
earlier written submissions about the iniquity of the present
system.   Their concerns were noted.


New Stadia/Ground Sharing


13.   There was clearly much to be said in favour of new, purpose-
built, green field stadia if financial and planning difficulties
could be overcome.   Clubs were more likely to agree ground-
sharing arrangements there than they ever were at existing
grounds enmeshed in tradition, and with local allegiances.         The
FA were currently in the early stages of negotiation with British
Aerospace about the possible construction of a new stadium on the
site of the NEC in Birmingham.


Overseas Visits


14.   Mr Kelly explained the FA's approach.     Whilst successful in
deterring fans from travelling abroad for one-off matches, the FA
had recognised that they would be unable to do so for the World
Cup, and had therefore re-established their travel club to
encourage bona fide supporters.


15.   It was recognised that trouble-makers might still travel
abroad;   what the FA looked for were convictions by authorities
abroad, enabling the provision of Part II of the Spectators' Act
to be enforced.


16.   On a more general note, there was general acceptance that,
with some modification, the principles of Part II could be
applied equally to the domestic scene.   This would provide a far
fairer and more targetted approach than the current blanket
method which hit respectable spectators as much as the hooligan.
