D r . E d W a lk e r


W e s t Y o r k sh ir e   WF17J
H ome                       W ork                          M o b ile



3 December 1997

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 1106,
50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
LONDON SW1H9AT.


Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,

       I apologise for having to use facsimile transmission, but the deadline o f this Friday the
5th December 1997 makes it unavoidable. I shall send this letter by fax today (Wednesday 3rd
December 1997) and by post tomorrow (4th December 1997).

         I should like to put on record my comments on two statements, those o f P J MARSH
 dated 110789 (11th July 1989) and F Y LAM dated 170889 (17th August 1989).
         In his statement, Dr. MARSH makes reference on page 5 to a short, clean-shaven man
 in his mid to late 20's, with ginger hair, who had had his top clothing removed. He says that
 ‘..a medical student administered the heart massage.’ I am clear that this ‘medical student’
 was in fact myself. This victim would be the ginger-haired victim to whom reference is made
 in my statements. I am sure of this as I remember the doctor I now know to be Dr. Marsh
 being present at the time.
         Dr. MARSH then gives a second statement dated 130989 (13th September 1989) in
 which he identifies two bodies. He says that the ginger-haired victim is Gary JONES, and one
 reason for this is that he has been shown photographs o f the victim’s clothing, which he has
 positively identified. This does not seem to be a valid way to identify someone, when you have
 already stated previously that half their clothing was removed by the time you saw them.
         Concerning Dr. LAM’s statement, he states that he was first ‘bleeped’ by switchboard
 at 15.55, that is nearly 30 minutes after I had arrived at the hospital. He states that when he
 arrived in the resuscitation room, there was only one patient there, and he identifies this
 patient as being Lee NICHOL. He also says that this patient was in the bed furthest from the
front entrance.
         In a major accident plan, one o f the very first people to be contacted is the resident on-
 call anaesthetist, regardless o f his rank. It is therefore evident that the plan was not activated
 until 15.55, when Dr. LAM was bleeped.
         This is evident not only from the fact that he says he was called at 15.55, but by the
fact that by the time he arrived in the department, Lee NICHOL was the only patient in the
resuscitation bay, and was positioned furthest from the entrance. When I initially treated the
first arrival, I did so in the treatment bay immediately adjacent to the entrance. At the time Dr.
LAM arrived, I was already in the room next door (the A&E theatre) treating other victims.



Yours sincerely,




D r . Ed W alker



 c.     Alun Jones QC
        HFSG
