From: C F Bone                                              cc
      Hillsborough Scrutiny
      Room 1106, QAG
      9 273 2512

        17 October 1997




Dr Athwal. HOEP




PROFESSOR PHIL SCRATON


We spoke.

2.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been appointed by the Home Secretary to
conduct a scrutiny of new evidence relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium
disaster. I am acting as secretary to this exercise. You may be interested to see the
Judge’s terms of reference, and I attach them.

3.      Since this work began in the summer we have had some contact with Professor
Phil Scraton, of Edge Hill College (which is of course near Liverpool). We met him
when the Judge went to Merseyside last week to meet and listen to the families of
those who died. The Professor seemed to be acting as a spokesman of sorts, and sat
in - with their consent - on several of the private meetings which we had with
relatives. He is coming to London next Friday for an interview with the Judge.

4.      Professor Scraton has told me over the phone - and you kindly confirmed -
that he has written a research paper for HOEP on the management of the aftermath of
major disasters such as Hillsborough (he also mentioned the Marchioness, Lockerbie
and Dunblane as other examples which he has researched).

 5.     It would be helpful if, before we see the Professor again next Friday, we could
 have a chance to look at his research paper, which I think you said was with you. We
 ought I think to know what it says.




 C F BONE


 G: | HILLSBOR | MAIN\ A THWAL. 1 1 7
From: C F Bone                                                cc Mr Pugh /
      Hillsborough Scrutiny                                      Mr Clifford, ABCU
      Room 1106, QAG                                             Mr Edmundson
      9 273 2512

       15 October 1997




Mr Evans
ABCU



HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - LETTER FROM THE CORONERS’
SOCIETY


You may wish to see the attached letter which I have had from the Coroners’ Society
of England and Wales.

2.    The Hillsborough inquests took place in in three separate phases during 1989 -
1991. They were conducted by Dr Stefan Popper, who has since retired, and
produced verdicts of accidental death on each of the (then) 95 people who had died.

3.      Relatives of the victims have criticised the verdicts and various aspects of the
way in which Dr Popper ran the inquests. Many of their criticisms have already been
examined by the Courts (in the Stringer case, mentioned in paragraph 11 of the
Society’s letter). But Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will need to look at the issues afresh
as part of his scrutiny of evidence relating to the disaster.

4.      I intend to reply to this letter as attached. Before I do so, is there anything
else you think it might be sensible for me to say?




 C F BONE
DRAFT

Thank you for your letter of 4 October.



2.     As you know, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been appointed by the Home

Secretary to conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough

Stadium disaster. I am acting as Secretary to the scrutiny.



3.     It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s

scrutiny is to establish whether there is any significant new evidence which was not

previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or

police disciplinary authorities. If there is significant new evidence, he will aim to see

if it would have affected the outcome of the Inquests or any of the other proceedings

which took place.    I attach a copy of his terms of reference.



4.     I have shown your letter to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. He has asked me to

thank you for it and to say that he expects that it will be helpful for him to see Dr

Popper, who conducted the inquests on the (then) 95 victims of the disaster, to discuss

various questions which have arisen in the course of the scrutiny. Dr Popper has I

understand retired, but he has already written to us and I am sending him a copy of
5.     We will of course offer Dr Popper the opportunity to respond to any criticisms

made of him in the course of the Scrutiny. If he wishes, we will also ask for your

Society’s views on the questions which are involved.




C F BONE
From Hon. Secretary                                                         Coroners' Society o f England & Wales


Michael J.C. Burgess
HM. Connerfor Sumy-. dr-S o M to ra fb rS m rm rG * *



4 October 1997

C.Bone Esq^
Secretary to the Scrutiny,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 528,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON SW1H 9AT



 Sir,
 re:         The inquiry following the Hillsborough disaster
 I understand that yours is one of a number of inquiries, recently ordered by .Mimsters
 events and/or matters leading to or following deaths, the other ltuiwnes being th o se m o
 matters surrounding the death of Stephen Lawrence and the DPP’s decision not to prosecu
 S     S      S     l     In. each case,-of        because, the. deaths concerned, were, either
                                                        c   o   u   r s e   ,



 violent or unnatural or occurred in prison, there has already been an inquiry in the form of
 a coroner's inquest, when evidence has been aired and tested and an empanelled jury
 returned, on the basis of that evidence a conclusion.

  In each case I am sure that the coroner will make available the material he has and his
  E c S ? o ? E inq^st proceedings. What may no, be so readily available or obvtous is diat
  in each of these cases, the coroner was beset with very serious problems which caused him
  ereat difficulty in trying to ensure that, in the course of his inquiry, in the words of Bingham
  m m l a r l m r fo r Humberside ex p. Jamieson - Court of Appeal)’ .. .* * re b o rn facts are
  Z y M r i y and fearlessly investigated.        . . . H e must ensure that the relevant facts are
  exposed to public scrutiny, particularly if there is evidence o f foul play, abuse or inhumanity.
  He fails in his duty if his investigation is superficial, slipshod or perfunctory. But the
   responsibility is his. He must set the bounds o f the inquiry- "

   In each case of these cases, use was made of the various media with talks, interviews and
   articles often based on totally spurious and attention-seeking statements. In some instances,
   there were processions, "vigils" or pickets by placard waving and chanting groups m the
   immediate vicinity of the coroner’s court. Sound bites were made to the TV a n d o th e r r^ ia
    stating "we thought it was going our way ...", "we thought we were getting the verdict {of
    unlawful IdllingJ we wanted...” and even "the coroner was with us...

    Despite this, the coroner had to try, day after day, to direct the jury to pay no heed and to
    ignore these insidious pressures. These pressures have been the subject of judicial comment
    and mention in the past. As mentioned by Woolf, J (*.v H.M.Coroner fo r Inner London
    ex p. Chambers (1993) - ”... It is to be remembered that the decision at the inquest is to be
    ziven by a jury and it is quite wrong that the jury should be subject to undue pressure. The
     problems which can occur when large numbers o f the public attend an. inquest at which
    feelings run high have been recently demonstrated and it is perfectly proper fo r the coroner
From Hon. Secretary                                      Coroners' Society o f England & Wales


not to want to run the risk o f a repetition o f the sort o f situation which existed at the Deptford
fire inquest which was the subject o f the Divisional Court given on 8th July 1982.

In the Deptford fire inquest case, (R.v S.London Coroner, ex p . Thompson [1982]), Lane LCJ
I T ' A c e r ’s           in a case such as M s is a formidable one, and no one would d,spute
that■ that is quite apart from the difficulties which inevitably anse when feelingsarerunning
Z h l ^ l ^ p e c t L s a r e emotionally involved and vocal Once agmr<« shouU , m b e
forgotten that an inquest is a fact finding investigation and not a method o f apportioning
g j lt The procedure and rules o f evidence which are suitable fo r one are u™ult^ e f ° [ th*
other In an inquest it should never be forgotten that there are no parties t her e '5 ™
indictment there is no prosecution, there is no defence, there is no trial, simply a* atte™V
 tn establish facts It is an inquisitorial process, a process o f investigation, quite unlike a trial
 ' Z n t l Z c m Z c Z and the L u s e d defends, the judge hoUUng the balance or the
 ring, whichever metaphor one chooses to use




  the impression of partisanship.
                .u rrimnpr has told us that those representing some of those having a "proper
  In one                            themselves between the coroner and potential witnesses,
  interest, deliberately intetposed tne                        f ^      diems) ^ ^ mquest
  strove to give the impression that it was the ( . .,           statement or proof of evidence
  T                                          W           " n       “ o tu p p o n one or other of the
  f o        "   «     L   T       n    l^        of die coroner's examination of such witnesses, ,t
  became clear that this had occurred.
  w , hplieve that too often there is an expectation, ill-founded but nevertheless fostered by
  "      L           t X       ro u p s, T L d       i      e       C      o      Z      r      s
   S                                         of   ZIZ*          K i H ^ u i r e s the iury to a—        ,




   auestion o f criminal or civil liability, to apportion guilt or attribute blame. TTus P "’* ']’1*
   im ressedin Rule 42 o f the 1984 Rules. The Rule does, however, treat cnmtnal and a vtl
   ffSnii/v differemtv whereas a verdict must not be framed so as to appear to determine any
      atTon f^ U a m ty „ to m                                    P*?* «*"* ' ^ " L                 ^
      Z m L Z killing provided no one is named, the prohibition on returning a verdict so as to
      Ippear to determine any question o f civil liability Is unqualified, applying whether anyone
      named or not.
  From Hon. Secretary                                Coroners' Society o f England & Wales


 This prohibition in the Rules is fortified by considerations o f fairness. Our law accords a
 defendant accused o f crime or a party alleged to have committed a civil wrong certain
 safeguards rightly regarded as essential to the fairness o f the proceedings, among them a
 clear statement in writing o f the alleged wrongdoing, a right to call any relevant and
 admissible evidence and a right to address factual submissions to the tribunal o f fact. These
 rights are not granted, and the last is expressly denied by the Rules, to a party whose conduct
 may be impugned by evidence given at an inquest.

  All too often we find that the same few persons legally represent the (usually unsuccessful)
  applicant at any judicial review of the coroner's decisions. They are seeking, normally, to
  obtain from the inquest more than it ever can deliver. Although representation at an inquest
  is not covered for legal aid, if there is a judicial review then legal aid will (subject to the
  usual conditions) be available.

   in some of these cases, after (or even in the course of) the whole inquest process there has
flfeben a judicial review before the Divisional Court. In this instance, under the name R.v
   (kroner fo r South Yorkshire, ex parte Stringer, the Divisional Court had, in die course of 5
   days a veritable replay of the issues which, it was asserted, had led to a flawed inquest. The
   Court examined each in detail and, in effect rejected, these assertions,finding. t o t the
   applicants had failed to demonstrate that the inquest was anything but the inquiry that it set
   a it to be Despite this, the grounds of that judicial review, rejected by the Divisional Court,
   re-surfaced in the various campaigns and are now enshnned in drama and believed or
    accepted as what did happen.

   So the truth is intermingled with partial truth and patent untruths making it extremely difficult
   to unravel, and for the jury, unaware of these matters, impossible. The inquest, whether with
   or without a jury, cannot find answers to questions in the absence of evidence. We believe
   that the inquest process should be, and can quite properly be, used for dispelling the rumours
   or widespread ideas by demonstrating that there is no evidence to support them.
    Unfortunately, this does not always happen because the coroner and his jury may, in some
    way, be prevented from pursuing their inquiries.

   Our concern, then is that you will receive either a misrepresentation of the coroner’s inquest
   and his inquiries surrounding it or fail to appreciate the difficulties which the coroner had to
   face in trying to conduct his inquest. All too often the coroner has been faced with those
   whose every effort has been put into ensuring that the inquest was anything but full and fair.
   If they fail to get the result they seek from the inquest, then they pursue it, through the
   judicial review process. The inquisitorial process is thus usurped and the result may well be
   a distortion. As Bingham, MR said (Jamieson) - Despite the rulings given by the appellate
   courts problems continue to arise both fo r coroners seeking to conduct inquests and direct
   furies in accordance with the law as they understand it and fo r those interested in the death
    o f a deceased person seeking to explore the fu ll circumstances o f the death and draw lessons
    which may prevent repetition. Coroners do their utmost to confine the proceedings before
    them within the bounds o f what they consider to be proper. Interested parties not irtfrequentty
    strain to pursue their quarry well beyond the bounds set by the coroner.

    It may be that in the course of your inquiry, you will receive representations critical of the
    coroner or his inquest. In that event, we hope that you will afford the coroner (and this
    Society should you and he so wish) the opportunity of addressing those concerns and placing
    them into context.
      From Hon. Secretary                              Coroners' Society o f England & Wales


15.   If there is any other information or further detail which you might like on any of the above
      issues, we would be happy to provide it to you.

      Yours faithfully,
