                          QUESTION                 NINE

Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on
to the pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent
need of trained medical help?


The SYMAS ambulance located at the ground was for use in the event of a major
incident as a base for communication and not for use in the rescue operation.

Mr Hopkins SYMAS was aware of damage caused to ambulances who had in fact
been onto the pitch and of the problems encountered by the drivers of the
ambulances as they attempted to negotiate the ramp giving the only access and
egress to the playing area.

Mr Higgins SYMAS took the view that it was impracticable to take ambulances onto
the playing area due to the crowd and melee that was going on there. A bottleneck
would have been formed by there being only one route into and out of the playing
area. The evacuation of the injured and dead to the Gymnasium was carried out very
quickly and because of the involvement of the police and fans it helped the operation
of dealing with them more smoothly than if they had been dealt with in isolation out on
the pitch.

Mr Eason SYMAS describes actions taken by Mr Higgins in radioing for assistance
and preparing Gymnasium area to receive casualties.

The problems experienced with the only ramp giving access and egress to the playing
area, the crowd, the melee, in contrast with the speed in which the casualties were
evacuated from the playing area by the rescuers would indicate that the decision not
to allow the ambulances onto the playing area was correct.



OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 149 -1 56, Volume 2.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on 15
April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only attack
on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances did not
arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage. He was
proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on
television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

302. Finally, there was evidence that an advertising board had to be knocked down at
the north-east comer of the ground to allow an ambulance onto the pitch and that the
top of the ramp leading to the pitch the access for ambulances was inadequate.
There was also evidence that the pre-match arrangement for ambulances to use the
two gates from Penistone Road at the north-east end of the ground as in and out
routes was frustrated by the presence of vehicles just inside the ground. In the event,
none of these matters affected operations. The hoarding was quickly knocked down.
The difficult access to the ramp was negotiated and ambulances used one entrance
satisfactorily by backing out when loaded.



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 64 to 69

64. There should be at each sports ground at each match at least one trained first
aider per 1,000 spectators. The club should have the responsibility for securing such
attendance.

65. There should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms.
The number of such rooms and the equipment to be maintained within them should
be specified by the local authority after taking professional medical advice and should
be made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.

66. (a) At every match where the number of spectators is expected to exceed 2,000,
the club should employ a medical practitioner to be present and available to deal with
any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in
advanced first aid. He should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-
off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match. His whereabouts
should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
contactable.


   (b) At any match where the number of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000,
the club should make arrangements to enable a medical practitioner to be summoned
immediately to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained
and competent in advanced first aid. The arrangements made should be known to
those in the police control room.

67. At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by the appropriate
ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd
of 5,000 or more.

68. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger
crowds are expected should be specified by the local authority after consultation with
the ambulance service and should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.

69. A "major incident equipment vehicle" designed and equipped to deal with up to
50 casualties, should be deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at a
match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.
                        3




from the Ambulance Service that there were two ambulances
there befoce the match began. Is that right?

     MR. KALLIPETIS:        No sir, one was there.

     LORO JUSTICE TAYLOR:        And one within a mile.

     MR. KALLIPETIS:        And one was on standby.

     LORO JUSTICE TAYLOR:   We saw on the film that the
St. John's Ambulancesingle ambulance comes on first and
it seems to be quite a long time before one sees any other
ambulance. What happened to the SYMAS ambulance that was
actually at the ground? What happened to that, do you
know, in the early stages?

     MR. KALLIPETIS:    That stayed in situ according to
the plan to act as the base for communications. The
Officers from that ambulance want to the Leppings Lane
end to find out what was happening because they couldn't
see from where they were. Thera was then a call through
to'Headquarters at 15.13 declaring that there was a major
incident, and by that time, 15.13, already ambulances had
arrived at Leppings Lana end in response to the earlier
call from the Police.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Am I understanding correctly
that the ambulance that was on at the ground as the SYMAS
ambulance on duty so to speak was not an operational
ambulance, it was a communications ambulance was it?

     MR. KALLIPETIS:    It is an operational ambulance sir
but as you will see from the:plan the first ambulance on
site does1not rush- straight into the s c a n e T h e r e ^ h a s got
to be a n assessment of exactly what is -te^uiSre^d. Thers-
are several reasons for this1, sir, which will become
apparent.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I don’t want to anticipate. I
just wanted to know why we had not seen it at an early
stage on the ground but I thi-nk you have explained it, and
we will hear the evidence later.

     MR. KALLIPSTIS:   You will hear why it is not a good
idsa for the ambulances to go right on to the pitch.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Very well, thank you.

     Now, Mr. Collins I understand that — of course the
video that was shown last Friday as a compilation of
about two and a bit hours out of many, many hours of
video.



                                                            149
                                  91


                                                    A. HOPKINS


     serious had hap pened at the other end of the ground.

Q. A St. John's ambulance had gone on to the pitch, had it
   not?   A.   With hindsight, yes, sir, but I wasn't aware
   of that at the time.

Q. You did not see it when you were there?   A. I know it
   was there, looking at the video, but I was not conscious
   of the fact that it was there.

Q. When you were outside the gymnasium, did you have any
   problems with vehicles?   A.   There was- quite a lot of
   vehicles there, sir, yes.

Q. Did it make any difference to the use to which you could put
   your ambulances, because by that time you would have had
   some attend at that end of the ground, would you not?
   A.   Yes, we did.   It caused us to reverse in, which is
   negligible, really.

Q. You also men t i o n horses.        A.   There were some horses
   there, yes, sir.

Q. You see, Inspector Hand-Davies said that they had gone
   before the fiist ambulance arrived.  Is it your recollection
   that they were still there when the ambulances arrived?
   A.   I know they were there when I arrived, sij. .

Q. You were not in an ambulance, you were in a Range-Rover.
   A. Well, they were there when the ambulances arrived
   as well, sir.

Q. I see.    I think Mr. Beevers and Mr. Edwards came in an
   ambulance and you wanted to get them on to the pitch;
   that is right, is it not?    A.  Yes, sir.

Q.    And you also  got Mr. Morley lining up ambulances outside?
     A.    That is correct, sir.

Q.   Did you send    an ambulance on to the pitch driven by Mr.
     Wad swort h?   A.    Yes, I did, sir.

Q.   I think that   went on to the pitch.   Did you see the St.
     John's ambulance coming off the pitch?    A.   Yes, I did,
     sir.    We were, in fact, trying to get one on at the top
     of the slope and there was a problem there which, frankly,
     sur prised me because I had not seen it before and there
     was a ramp running down the side of the Stand on a large
     block of concrete at the bottom of it.

Q. That leads to the disabled area, the Westfield enclosure,
   I think, in the North Stand, does it not?     A.   Yes, but
   I had never seen it before, sir, and my ambulance came in
   on a lef t-hand lock and Tfie moment he hit the concrete
   his body on the other side went over on to the gate-post.
   You could not negotiate the gate-post unless you came at it
   straight and we were attempting to push the vehicle off
   the top gate-post when the St. John's came out, trying to 1 5 0
                                    92


                                                        A.      HOPKINS

                                                                            *
        come off the pitch at the bottom and his bumper was
        fast on the sta nchion holding the perimeter railing up
        and I recall he had a couple of runs at it and bounced
        off it again and then had a real run at it and came off
        it minus his n um ber-p late and I think some damage to
        his bumper.
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Can we see this?

                  MR. KALLIPETIS:    Sir, if I may, I think these
        p h o t o gra phs are easier to demonstrate what Mr. Hopkins
        is talking about.
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Are these some new ones?

             MR. KALLIPETIS:     Sir, yes.     (H a n d e d )

             MR. PHILLIPS:      I have not got them but do they
        help,sir?
              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I think they may do, yes, because
        they look at it from the top of the ramp whereas the
        pho togra phs we have got I think look at it from the bottom.

q   .         MR. PHILLIPS:    Yes. Can you just perhaps point to
        the par ticul ar post that you say the ambulance was getting
        cau ght.o n?   We can see the ramp there.   A.'  It was the
        gate and the post, sir.
Q. On the lef t-hand side of the large photograph?    A.   Yes.
  .'We were having to come in and turn sharp left and the moment
    the front wheel hit the concrete nodule, it threw the
    ambulance across on to the pillar - both amb ulances that
    went on to the pitch - sort of identical damage.

q   .        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The bit of lighter coloured
        con crete on the right is a rise, is it? A.      My Lord,
        I think the concrete is to accommodate the ramp.

q   .       MR. PHILLIPS:   So it is the thin end of the ramp,
        is it?   A.   I don't.know what one calls it, b u t --
q   .       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You are talking about coming
        in past where you are standing there.   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. Turning left.          A.    Turning left in.
Q. And the rig ht-ha nd front wheel goes up, does it?
   A.  Up on to the concrete, sir, and throws the offside
   on to the gate-post.
q   .        MR. PHILLIPS:    Was that the same gate-post that the
        St. John's ambulance .g.ot_&tack on?  A.   Yes, b u t --
        No, no, he was at the bottom of the ramp trying to come
        off.    There are some angles holding the perimeter fence.
        He had come down and tried to turn right up the ramp and
        got fast.                                                         151
                                    93


                                                   A.   HOPKINS

                                                                              *
Q.       You had not seen that before, you say?    A. No, I hadn't.

Q.       When had you last been to the ground?    A. I went to the
         ground the year before merely on a courtesy visit because
         Officers were on duty there and I wasn't conscious of it
         then, and I was quite surprised.

Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Had anybody actually tried
         driving an ambulance in there before, do you know?
         A.   No, sir.   I am sorry, before the ramp, my Lord?

Q.           HR. PHILLIPS:       Yes, before the ramp was put on.
         Do you know if an ambulance had been sent through on any
         earlier occ as i o n ? A. No, I don't, sir.

Q. Well now, these two or three of your ambulances went on
   to the pitch, did they not?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. I think you then came into contact with Mr. Hornsby, the
   Assistant Chief Fire Officer.   A.   That is correct, sir.

Q. Can you say what time that was?    Paragraph 30 of your
   statement, you just sent a couple of ambulances down to the
   pitch.    How long had you been there before you spoke -
   perhaps you can remember it that way - how long had you
   been there when you spoke to Mr. Hornsby? ... A.  I think
   possibly around 15.44 I spoke to Hornsby.

Q. By then you still had not spoken to a senior Police
   Officer?    A.    Bearing in mind, sir, I hadn't .been back
   to the gym nasiu m and I hadn't seen one in the area where I
   was working.
Q. But you had been in the vicinity of the gymnasium, had
   you not?   A.   Yes, sir, I was there all the time.

Q. In the yard, sending ambulances to the pitch and getting
   people sorted out into ambulances?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. And I think you gave various other instructions and the
   major incident vehicle arrived.   That was about 15.45, was
   it?   A.   Yes, sir.
Q. And then you started to use the body-bags which had been
   pro vided with that ambulance, is that right?           A.         Yes--

Q. You tell us then that --
q    .         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sorry, did you want to
         say som ethin g? A.  I thought around that time, sir, I
         went into the gym nasiu m and met Chief Superintendent Addis.

                                                  /MR. PHILLIPS:    I a m . v._



                                                                      152
                                                           55
                                                                               P. HIGGINS

                                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Thank you.

                        q   .        Mr. KALLIPETIS: Just look at these items, Mr. Kiggins?
                                 (Handed to the witness). Do you have there a bag and mask?
                                 A. Yes, sir.

                        Q.       Can you just produce it?   A. That is it. You fit that
                                 over the mouth, press the bag and it inflates the lungs.
                                 (Demonstrating).
                    B
                                      Hr. KALLIPETIS: Do you want to see it, sir, and then
                                 it can be handed round.

                                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Thank you very rnucn.

                        q   .        Mr. KALLIPETIS: Can you be getting some airways out,
                                 Mr. Kiggins?   Do you have some airways there? A. Yes,
                                 sir.

                        g.       Just pass those to his Lordship, will you, and tell us
                                 briefly what they do.  (Witness demonstrating to Lord
                                 Justice Taylor).   Forgive my ignorance, Hr. Higgins, but
                                 how do they compare with the Brooks airway?   A. Basically
                                 you achieve the same objective. You are keeping the tongue
                                 down and maintaining a clear airway, sir.
                    D
                        Q.       And do you have a minuteman there as well?        A. We have
                                 got a new pack, sir, which is similar.

                        Q.       Let us have a look at that, please. A. That is just a
                                 mechanical resuscitator which inflates the lungs and
                                 empties them.  (Demonstrating).
                    E                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   And that fits inside them?
                        Q.
                                 (Indicating).   A. Yes, that is the mechanical part,
                                 and this piece is in the yellow box.  (Indicating).

                                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I see.   Very well, thank you.

                        q    .           Hr. KALLIPETIS: Is that portable, Mr. Higgins, in
                                 fact?      A. It is carried on all the emergency ambulances.

                        Q.       So you could take that on to the pitch,        for example, on
                                 this occasion, and use it?   A. Yes.

                                         Mr. KALLIPETIS:   Thank you.

                                                Re-examined by Mr. GOLDSACK:

                        Q.       Mr. Higgins, just two very brief matters, please. I should
                                 have dealt witn one of them earlier. On the day, I think
                                 you took the view that it was impractical to taxe the
                                 ambulances on to the pitch?   h. It was impractical, yes.
                                 Because of the crowd and the melee that was going on, it
                                 would have been impossible to take people round there,
                                 and it formed a bottleneck anyhow with there being just
                H                the one access point.

                            Q.   With a better access point, would you have           ....
                                 taking the ambulances on to the pitch?   A. If there
J. L. Harpham Ltd                been a dual access point, it would have been practical,! 3 #
        «.r-
                                                     56

                                                                               P. HIGGINS

                              but with just one access point it became impossible.

                        Q.    Do you think it would be advisable if you were able to get
                              ambulances on to the pitch? A. In some instances, yes,
                              possibly, but in an incident similar to the one that
                              happened this year, I don't think it would be practical.
                              It would still have sufficed to use the gymnasium and the
                              methods that we used this time, sir.
                    B
                                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: The only thing is that all
                              these people carrying the injured quite a distance on
                              improvised bits of boarding added greatly to the amount
                              of physical effort, I suppose, and also the time taken.
                              Do you think it would create more confusion if you had an
                              ambulance on the pitch?   A. Well, the way it worked, my
                              Lord, the patients got to the one focal point very quickly
                              because of the involvement of the police and the fans
                              and it helped the operation of dealing with the patients
                              to run more smoothly than it would if we had had isolated
                              incidents out on the pitch.

                                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes, I see.   Thank you.

                        Q.         Mr. GOLDSACK: The other very brief point is this:
                    D         You heard Dr. Purcell's evidence this morning?  A. Yes.

                        Q.    The ambu-bag that he was describing, is that similar to
                              one of the items tnat you have just shown us?   A. That
                              is the one, sir.

                              That is the same?    A. Yes.
                    E              Mr. GOLDSACK:   Thank you very much, Mr. Higgins.

                                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you. I gather that you
                              have problems of your own, Mr. Higgins. Thank you very
                              much for coming.

                                   Mr. PHILLIPS:   Mr. Eason please.

                                   Mr. KALLIPETIS: Sir, if it assists, I can comply with
                              your request.  (Document handed to Lord Justice Taylor).

                                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Thank you very much. It might
                              be helpful for everybody to have copies; I do not know.
                              We can"get it copied, if you like. Thank you.

                                         PAUL ANTHONY JAMES EASON, Called
                                            Examined by Mr. PHILLIPS:

                         Q.   Paul Anthony James Eason, is that right?        A. Yes.

                         Q.   You are a Station Officer at Longley Ambulance Station
                              in Sheffield? A. Yes^jsjir.
                H             And you have been a liaison officer with Sheffield Wednesday-
                         Q.
                              along with Mr. Higgins, have you?   A. That's correct.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                         64


                                    P.A.J. E&SOM


O. Were you able to do anything about him? - A. When we got
   back to him Ambulanceman Worrell and Chippendale dealt
   with his leg injury. They splintered his leg and myself
   and Station Officer Higgins tried to assess the situation.

Q. What view did you come to then when you went back the
   second time? - A. Well things as I say sir had started to
   develop. There were far more people spilling on to the
   pitch; there was a lot more noise and people who were
   injured were starting to come on to the pitch.

Q. So I think it was Mr. Worrell and Mr. Chippendale who
   started attending to them as quickly as they could? - A.
   What happened sir was Station Officer Higgins and myself
   discussed the matter and it was decided he would return
   to the ambulance and then start preparing the gymnasium
   area while I stayed up the field in an assessment
   situation. That then released Worrell and Chippendale
   to deal with casualties as they found them.

Q. You were putting into effect the plan you already had to
   use the gymnasium as a clearing station, a casualty
   station? - A. Yes.

Q. And to leave it to Mr. Higgins to deal with Control? -
   A. That is right sir.

Q. Were you able to report back to Mr. Higgins what you saw
    or indeed to Control? - A. No, the only method of comnuni-
  - cation after that that I had *?ith Mr. Higgins was by
    running myself. I left Worrell and Chippendale working
    with patients and I was doing assessment and running with
    the information.

Q. Do you think you would have been assisted by having a
   direct link with each other in the ground? - A. It is
   possible but it is difficult to say. You asked earlier
   about earpieces.  It is quite possible that may have
   been of assistance but I have experience in the past
   where it has not been because of thenoise around.

Q. Now I think you left Mr. Higgins to deal with the situation.
   Did you come to the view that this was a major Incident
   at some stage? - A. At that time I considered we were
   developing a serious incident, not a major incident.

Q. What did you propose to do about that?- A. In what way
   sir?

Q. What steps did you propose to take when you came to that
   conclusion? - A. What, that we had a serious incident?

Q. Yes? - A. We had alreadjt^decided that we were building
   up to a serious incident. The idea would be that Higgins



                                                            I 3f- 3
                          65

                                    P.A.J. EASON


  would go bach to the vehicle; would radio for assistance
  which I believe he did; would then prepare the gymnasium
  area and all the casualties and injured and people
  helping casualties and injured would be funnelled towards
  the gymnasium area, which is what happened.

Q. Did you at any stage think to yourself: "Now this is a
   major incident.  I have got to do something about that"?
   - A. I only considered the incident in terms of a major
   incident as the bodies started coining on to the pitch
   and I saw multiple resuscitations taking place.

Q. What sort of time would that be. Can you help us? - A. I
   believe it would be something round about quarter-past,
   16-minutes-past-3.

Q. That would be about the time when the St. John's Ambulance
   first went on to the pitch? - A. I think the St. John's
   Ambulance was on the pitch a little earlier than that sir.

Q. You I think went to deal with a small boy? - A. My attention
   was drawn to the fact that there was a small boy laid on
   the pitch sir, yes.

Q. This was I think over by the player's tunnel, wasn't it?
   - A. If you look at the player's tunnel, come inside into
   the field, round about there, it would be round about
   that area.

Q'. I think there was a doctor working with that boy? - A. A
    gentleman who claimed to be a doctor was resuscitating him,
    yes.

Q. You went to get help did you? - A. I went to see what was
   going on. Again I have been dragged by a fan and informed
   about this child and he said "There is a doctor with him".
   I went to speak to the doctor. The doctor told me in his
   opinion there was a chance for the child and could I get
   an ambulance to him straight away.

Q. vie know that Ambulanceman Flack arrived on the pitch at
   about this time? - A. Yes.

Q. Was that in response to a request from your or just a
   coincidence? - A. As I got back to the area of the ramp
   I was aware of coming into contact with Flack. I would
   say that was a coincidence sir.

Q. And you sent him to fetch this little boy, did you? - A.
   No. I pointed out where the child was roughly situated
   but again at ground level you could not see anything,
   so we took the cot out of the vehicle we had originally
   used as a control vehicle and I ran with Flack to-where
   the child was.            ~



                                                              156
