                                                 1
INQUIRY     INTO      THE           HILLSBOROUGH

       STADIUM                  DISASTER




                     Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                          and

               PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                          At

                The Town H a l l ,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

            Friday, 9th June, 1989.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Morning        Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                      (Morning Session)

                                           Page

F, RICHARDSON Recalled

     Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow          1

D. ILLINGWORTH Recalled

     By Lord Justice Taylor                 3

J, PACKER Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins                4
     Cross-Examined by M r . Woodward       8
     By Lord Justice Taylor                10
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins            11

M. BUXTON Called

     Examined by Mr. Phillips              12
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Hytner        18
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Gibson-Watt   19
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Kallipetis    21
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Glasgow       21
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Woodward      22
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins            25
     By Lord Justice Taylor                25
     Further re-examined by Mr.Collins     26

P. MORTON Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins               26
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Hytner        33
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Kallipetis    34
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Glasgow       34
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Woodward      36

D. GUTCHER Called

     Examined by Mr. Phillips              38
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Hytner        47
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Jackson       48
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Muller        49
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Woodward      49

M.V. RYAN Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins               51
               EIGHTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                   FRIDAY. 9th JUNE. 1989

                     (MORNING   SESSION)

     MR. COLLINS:     Police Constable Richardson, please.

      9
     L RD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Collins, what we will do
today if it is convenient is to break for mid-day at
half-past-12.  Perhaps if everybody is having their lunch
in and around the building we could take something rather
less for the lunch hour and then break up a little earlier
this afternoon if that is convenient.

      POLICE CONSTABLE FIONA RICHARDSON Recalled

     MR. PHILLIPS:      I had finished examining in chief.

     LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:    That is right, yes.

     MR. HYTNER:     I rather think I had no questions.

              Cross-examined by   MR. GLASGOW:

Can you help us with the question of timing, please? You
say in your statement, and you might like to have it in
front of you, on the second page that it was at 2.53 you
looked at your watch when you started to organise people
into Pen 1. - A. Yes, that is right.

Do you remember that? - A. Yes.

And then I entirely accept it was a mistake on your part.
You thought that it was a club official who came and
intervened? - A. Yes.

And again you say the club official in the suit was trying
to push people back in the gate, whoever it was was trying
to push piople off the perimeter track into Gate 1? - A.
Yes, he was trying to move them faster or keep them off
the pitch.  The game was still in play at that time.

You were never suggesting that any official or person in
a suit, whoever he may be, was trying to push people back
into pens 3 or 4? - A. No.

No.  Can   you just help us as to who that was because you
now know   that it was not a club official and that it was
a Police   Officer.  You thought his name was McSloy but I
think we   will be told there is not one. - A. It is McRobie.

It is Mr. McRobie.  I wonder if you can just help us about
him.  We have been told he was wearing a blazer and flannels
                                              F. RICHARDSON

For the use of the transcript, Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield told us that at page 59 of his evidence.
- A. He was smartly dressed, yes.

Y e s . We see him on the video and that is of course
timed.    Have you had a chance of seeing the video?
- A. Yes, I have had a look.

And we see the man in the blazer and the light coloured
trousers standing beside you at Gate 1 and is your re­
collection as well he then went and physically got hold
of a number of people who were on the perimeter track?
- A. Yes.

And that is the time when you say he was pushing and
swearing? - A. The fans were swearing at him and pushing
and he was retaliating mainly.  They did not know who
he was,   I did not know who he was.

I see.  After he had helped push people back into Gate 1
were you then aware of the fact that he walked up to
Gates 3 and 4? -A. Yes, he went that direction.

And as we see on the video he stayed with you with the
Officers at Gate 3 and 4 for some time? - A. Yes.

Were you aware of the fact - that is a silly question -
presumably you were not aware of the fact that he had
actually been sent down by the control box to find out
what was going on?-A. I was not awaresat the time.    I
have been told afterwards that is why he came down to
speak to me because I did not have a radio.

Those in the control box had apparently got the impression
that you did not know what was going on and you were just
standing by the gate unaware of the fact that there was a
problem? - A.I was talking to the man and the five
children that came out earlier.   I was stood talking
tothem and facing them.  I did not   look around until
afterwards and that is when I opened the gate before
McRobie got to me.

But whatever the reason may be, Miss Richardson, it is
quite apparent, is not it, as we see on the video that
that man in the blazer and trousers spent some minutes
walking around before he finally turns and runs away at
I think something like five-past-three? - A. I cannot
remember.

Have you seen that on the video? - A. I have seen it but
I did not take much notice of him.

     MR. GLASGOW:    Yes.   Thank you   very much.

     MR. WOODWARD:    No questions.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you very much.    Can we
                                            D. ILLINGWORTH
just before you go on, I think I see at the back Mr.
Illingworth.  Could he come back again for a moment?

     MR. COLLINS:    Police Constable Illingworth.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Could you come back a moment,
please?

       POLICE CONSTABLE DAVID ILLINGWORTH Recalled

                By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

I just wonder if you can help about something you said
yesterday. -A. Yes.

You remember you said that you were looking into Pen 4.
It was full but not overfull.  Remember? - A. Yes, My Lord.

Then you said this, HIt immediately all went wrong at the
front.  People suddenly got in distress, heading towards
pain." Do you remember saying that? - A. I do, My Lord,
yes.

Assuming you were looking continuously into 4 are you
able to help about how it immediately all went wrong
and what suddenly happened? - A. My impression, My Lord,
was that it was the swaying.

Swaying? - A. Yes.

Well, did you see a sway in any particular direction when
it suddenly and immediately all went wrong? - A. The fans
in the pen were continually swaying.  I got the impression
that a more serious sway must have occurred to cause the
distress.

We have been told by a number of witnesses - indeed, it is
perhaps common knowledge - when a sway occurs it normally
goes one way and goes back.  Is that right?  Is that what
you would call swaying? - A. Yes, I would agree.

Yes.  On this occasion when it, as you put it, immediately
all went wrong and people suddenly got in distress was it
a sway that did that or was it a sway that just went one
way and stayed there.  Can you .... - A. I find it diff­
icult to clarify, My Lord.  I just got the impression it
was a serious sway that caused pressure on the front.

And that continued? The pressure continued or what? - A.
The pressure was not relieved.

Was not relieved? - A. Yes.

I see.  But, I mean, were you able to see whether there
were at that stage people coming in in noticeable numbers
                           4




                                                 D. ILLINGWORTH

   at the back or what? - A. I could not see that, My Lord.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes, thank you.     Thank you
   very much.

            POLICE CONSTABLE JAMES PACKER Called

                    Examined by   MR. COLLINS:

Q. Yes.  It is James Packer, is that right? - A. That is
   correct, My Lord.

Q. And you were in fact on Serial 16 of D Division? - A. Yes,
   My Lord.

Q. Which meant   that you were in the gymnasium I think it was,
   was it not,   when the tragedy began to happen? - A. I
   believe so,   My Lord.  Came from the railway station and
   reported to   the gymnasium to receive further instructions.

Q. Yes.  I think on your way to the ground you passed by the
   Leppings Lane entrance? - A. That is correct.

Q. And that was about - what - ten-to-three? - A. I have said
   ten-to-three on my statement initially but having since
   seen the video I can honestly remember seeing a bus going
   past at about 2.45 to 2.46.

Q. So you think it was a little bit earlier than that? - A.
   Y e s ..

Q. Do you remember a comment being passed by a fellow
   Officer? - A. Yes, I do.  It was to the effect that he
   says to me they will never get that lot in there.




                                  / Q. Was that your
                                  J. PACKER


Was that your view too? - A. That was my view as well, yes.

You were I think under Police Sergeant Swift who was being
described as rather noticeable because he has in fact a
bald head.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Did you in fact end up on the track in front of the West
Stand, that would be, would it, at the Leppings Lane
- A. At the Leppings Lane end sir, yes, we were deployed
there.

At about 3 o'clock? - A. Yes.

What were you to do? Why was it that you were sent down
there, did you know? - A. Well we reported to the gymnasium
as soon as we got there and we were deployed to the track
at the Leppings Lane end. We marched up there at the side
of the North Stand and then Sergeant Swift deployed us to
split up and to cover the front of the whole of the
Leppings Lane end, I would think because of public order
in case they tried coming over.

You went down towards the West Stand by which way, by the
fcorth or the south? - A. In front of the North Stand.

When you got down towards the end what could you see
happening? - A. I remember when we got to the corner just
before being deployed the match kicking-off so I presume
that was about 3 o'clock.  We were then deployed to march
across the front.  As I was the front Officer behind
Sergeant Swift I was going to the furthest corner of the
Leppings Lane end towards the South Stand. As we passed
Pen 5 you could see there was still plenty of room and
loads of empty steps.  Pen 4 was absolutely chock-a-block
and so was Pen 3, and then Pen 2 again there was pl&nty
of room.
When you got near enough to 4 and 3, were you aware of
the effect this crushing was having on people inside it?
- A. There was a lot of shouting but there was more noise
from the crowd as a whole than there was the individual
shouting at first.

 Did you hear any particular shouts? - A. I heard a shout
 from a man I would say in the middle, he particularly
 grabbed my attention, in Pen 3.

 What was that shout? - A. He was saying that there was
 somebody at his feet who was dead.

 At this stage was the gate to Pen 3 open or not? - A. It
 wasn't.
 What about the gate to Pen 4 or weren't you aware of
 that? - A. I can't recall.  It was not open when I walked
 past it initially.
                                       J. PACKER



Q. It was not? - A. It was not open then.

Q. Was there an Officer at Gate 3? - A. There was an Officer at
   Gate 3, yes.

Q. Do you know who that Officer was? - A. Only now I think it
   was P.C. Smith.

Q. Did you say anything to P.C. Smith? - A. Not that I can
   recall.

Q. Did the gate get open? - A. Yes, I walked past and got about
   level with Gate 2 which was my position.  Behind me was
   P.C. Taylor and P.C. Cooper and when I heard the man shout
   to me and saw him I told them to get the gate open.

Q. I see you had already passed P.C. Smith when you heard the
   shout, had you? - A. Yes, I had passed and when I heard the
   shout I was to the left of him.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Behind you were Cooper and ...
     A. P.C. Taylor who were also on my Serial.

Q.         MR. COLLINS:   You say you called out to P.C. Smith
     to get the gate open? - A. P.C. Cooper who was directly behind
     me, I told him to go and get the gates open and we would
     try and get some fans out and   into Gate 2.

Q.   Did you see what he did? - A.  Both of them went straight
     away to the gate and opened the gate.

Q.   Did they open the gate or did  they get P.C. Smith to open
     it? - A. I think P.C. Smith joined them.   I think all three
     of them got there because as soon as they opened the gate
     there was such a rush of fans coming through.    Obviously
     some fans fell over and they were trying to get back in
     to drag some of the fans out because there was that much
     weight going on to the ....

Q. were fans already climbing over the perimeter fence at
   this stage? - A. They weren't already but as soon as they
   could see what was happening they started to climb over
   the gate.

Q. Initially what were you doing? - A. As they were coming
   through the gate those that were walking and what have you
   I was directing them to the other pen, Pen 2. Those who
   weren't walking I was sitting them down against the side
   of the fence.

Q. It was obvious, was it, that some of them needed to be sat
   down because some of them were short of breath? — A. Some
   of them were struggling to breathe, yes.

Q. Did you begin to realise that the incident was rather more
   serious than you had first thought? - A. I did realise
                                     J. PACKER


  a short time after, yes.  There seemed to be more of a crush
  than initially.  Within the first few rows people were
  stopping to scream and shout, but people at the back were
  still chanting and what have you.

Q. We know that the game was stopped by Superintendent Greenwood?
   - A. Yes.
Q. Were you involved in any way in that? - A. In my statement
   I thought it was an Inspector but obviously I was not looking
   that closely at his rank, but I toow know it was Superintendent
   Greenwood.  I went on just behind Superintendent Greenwood
   and a few of the fans were running on to the pitch at the
   same time because they were also saying:   "Stop the game.
   Stop the game" and they were coming over at the same time.

Q. I think you, with other Officers, formed a line across the
   pitch at the other side of the goal, did you? - A. When fans
   were coming out a cameraman was being attacked, a Press
   photographer and I helped drag him away from some of the
   fans and took him to about the 18 yard line.   It was an
   Inspector, I think it was Inspector White, who was at about
   the 18 yard line and he said:   "Stay here and make sure they
   don't get past here to prevent any public disorder".

Q. Inspector White, is that the Inspector with the beard? - A.
   Yes, I believe it was, yes.

Q. There was, I think, a degree of hostility from certainly
   some of the fans? ~ A. Yes, there was.

Q. Who appeared to believe that the Police were responsible?
   - A. The Police and at one point the F.A.    They all ran over
   towards   the South Stand side towards the halfway line area
   and were shouting up to what normally is the Directors
   Box at Sheffield Wednesday, at F.A. Officials and waving
   tickets and money.

Q. What was the complaint, as you understood it, against the
   F * A i ? - A. It was mostly to do with them being given the
   wrong end of the ground.

Q. But you  say they were waving tickets? - A. They were waving
   tickets  and shouting general abuse at them.  I was trying
   to usher them away and calm them down.

Q. Had you had a radio? - A. Yes, I did initially have a radio.
   I gave that up to Superintendent Murray after a short time
   of going on to the pitch.

Q. why did Superintendent Murray need your radio? - A. Because
   he did not have one initially or his was not working.

 Q. Well can you remember whether it was that he did not have
    one or that his was not working? - A. I can't remember
    exactly.  He just said:  "Can I have your radio?" a n d I
    gave it to him straight away.
                               8

                                         J. PACKER


Q. Now you have told us your recollection is you got to the
   corner of the North Stand effectively, correct me if I am
   wrong, about kick-off? Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. ©id you then walk across the front of the West Stand? Was
   there any haste as far as you were concerned at that stage?
   - A. At that stage, no. We walked across as a march type
   pac e, you know.

Q. What I am trying to get at is the time at which you got the
   gate, Gate 3 opened.  Can you help about that? - A. I would
   have said it was between 3 o'clock and 1—minute—past—3.

             MR. COLLINSs   Yes, thank you.


                      Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD;

q   .   officer, on your recollection on times of course an awful
        lot happened that afternoon? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. Have you had a look at the photographs at all? - A. I have
   had a look at some of the photographs but I had a quick
   look at the video as well.

Q. So when you give your evidence about times is it in fact a
   reconstruction or is it your recollection? - A. It is as
   far as I can remember.

Q. The time of Gate 3 being opened first, as you saw it, would
   be when? - A. I said between 3 o'clock and l-minute-past-3.

Q. Did you see it closed again? - A. It closed for a short
   time after a number of fans spilled out.  I am not 100%
   sure because I was not stood on the gate, but I think it
   was because fans who were at the front were getting trampled
   on and pushed down and I think they shut the gate for a
   short time and then reopened it again to try and get these
   fans out because they were getting squashed, so they shut
   the gate, it was only a matter of seconds, and then opened
   it again.

Q. So when it was closed it was only for a matter of seconds?
   - A. Yes.

Q. In your view of what happened then did it seem a reasonable
   thing to have done to have closed it at that moment? — A.
   In my view if the person at the front was getting squashed
   by other people climbing over the top of him I would think
   yes, it would be reasonable, because it would be impossible
   to get him out.  I know Officers were trying to pull him
   up because there is a step up on to the perimeter track.

Q. When you walked across in front of the terrace to make your
   way to your position, you had passed across in front of
                             9

                                       J. PACKER


     the crowd all excited, shouting, surging, doing the sort of
     things that you would expected to encounter? - A. Yes.

Q. There was nothing about the crowd at that time that caused
   you any anxiety? - A. Not at that particular time, no.

Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, which time is that?
     - a . Straight away.  I would say about 3 o'clock.  They
     were packed out but there was nothing to cause me any
     serious anxiety.

Q. I am sorry, 1 don't follow this.  I thought you came along
   and walked across the back of the goal.  Is that right?
   - A. Yes.  As I was walking across there was nothing to
   cause me any anxiety.  When I stopped and took up my
   position after about five or six seconds this bloke caught
   my attention and was saying somebody was at his feet, but
   even then the rest of the crowd were still shouting and
   whatever.  There was not a general hysteria about them.




                             /Q. I notice
                                         J. PACKER



I notice you say in your statement:

      "...I turned to face the crowd and stopped.    It
      was then I could see many children and females
      being crushed against the wall and crash barriers.
      At the front end a number of people were screaming
      and shouting for us to get them out.   One man
      shouted from about the middle that there was a man
      at his feet who was dead."

It wasn't just the one man, was it? - A. I saw the people
at the front as well, but this one man particularly
grabbed my attention and that is why I told them to open
the gates.

      MR. WOODWARD:   It was not something you had seen,
it was the man shouting that somehow in some manner your
attention was focused on him? - A. Yes, that is correct.

However, prior to that stage you had walked the whole of
the front of that terrace? - A. Yes.

In that walk nothing had drawn your attention to the
crowd to cause you to be concerned about it? - A. No, not
seriously concerned.

You say in your statement concerning the use of the
radio, is it right that the volume of noise that you
encountered along there was tremendous? - A. Yes.    I
think on some of the pitches and video I had my radio in
the top of my tunic pocket here and I had my radio to my
ear trying to listen for instructions, but I just could
not hear a thing from it.

So your radio was working, something was coming... - A.
It had been working.   There was noise but I just could
not hear a thing from it.

That was because of the competing sound outside? - A.
Yes, sir.

               By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

I am sorry to press you about this, but I do want to try
and get the picture.   You turned and faced this crowd? -
A. Yes.

Then you saw this man, did you? - A. Well, as I turned to
face them I took a general look at the crowd and I could
see the people at the front, but this man in particular
grabbed my attention.   Initially when I saw the people
at the front, and I said this in my statement, I would
have thought they were just saying, from the surge or
                            11




                                           J. PACKER


  whatever, "We are getting squashed", and it would have
  come back.   However, this man then in the middle said,
  "There is somebody at my feet and I think he is dead".
  I could see through this man's action that he could not
  get down to help him, to assist him.

Q. You could hear this man saying this? - A. This one man in
   particular, yes.   I do not know how he grabbed my
   attention, but he must have had a very loud voice and he
   was shouting.

Q. The other thing I wanted to ask you:   up until then when
   you turned and faced the crowd, as you put it, you had
   not seen anything amiss? - A. No.    I just thought it was
   a busy crowd.

Q. That could be for two reasons:   one, because you were
   looking and nothing struck you as being wrong, or two,
   because you were just walking along without particularly
   looking at the crowd until you faced them? - A. I was
   looking into the crowd at that time because there was a
   lot of noise coming from   the crowd and as   I was walking
   along I was looking into   the crowd.

Q. You were looking into the crowd but nothing struck you as
   being particularly wrong until you saw people being
   crushed to the front and even then you thought... - A. It
   was from the surge.   I have been in big crowds myself as
   a football supporter and   you do sometimes  getcrushed for
   a couple of minutes and then it eases off    andyou drift
   away.

Q. So it is a very fine line between a surge that is going
   to go back and be all right and one that isn't? - A. I
   would say so.

         MR. COLLINS:   Sir, I wonder if I might ask one
   matter arising out of that?

            Further Re-Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q. You are walking along at a level which is slightly higher
   than those at the front? - A. Yes.

Q. When you walk along and look into the stand, are you
   looking at those at the front or are you really seeing
   those about half way up? - A. I was looking probably
   about half way up initially when I was walking along.

         MR. COLLINS:    Yes, thank you.

         MR. PHILLIPS:    Constable Buxton please
                           12




                                          M. BUXTON



           POLICE CONSTABLE MICHAEL BUXTON Called

                 Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

Q. Are you Police Constable Michael Buxton? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Were you in the landrover fitted with a public address
   system on the day of this match? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is this a regular duty that you perform? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Where do you normally go with this landrover? - A.
   Leppings Lane end, sir.

Q. Had you been there the previous year on the semi-final? -
   A. I had, sir.

Q. Had you attended there on other occasions when League
   matches were played? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You have some experience of the sort of crowds   that
   gather at Leppings Lane? - A. I had, sir.

Q. On previous occasions had you had much occasion to use
   the public address system on your landrover? - A.
   Frequently, sir.

Q. What sort of purposes would you be using it for? - A.
   When the visiting fans arrive at Leppings Lane they come
   on coaches which drops them off outside the ground.   The
   coaches are then driven away and parked up near the
   railway station.   When the fans come out of the ground
   the coaches are not there, so I instruct them to follow
   the Police horses to the coaches.

Q. You role is usually at the end of the game rather than
   the beginning? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Have you had many occasions when you have had to use your
   public address system to get or keep control before a
   match is started? - A. No, sir.

Q. On the 15th of April of this year you were in your
   landrover when you heard a message on the radio? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. Where exactly were you when you heard that message? - A.
   Herries Road South.

Q. Can you give us a time for the message?    To help you,
   Constable Bishard says that the message, or the request,
   went out at 2.40? - A. Yes, sir, that is correct.
                             13



                                               M. BUXTON


Q. Would that be about the time you heard it? - A. I have
   seen the video and I am not on the video at 2.47.   I am
   on the video at 2.50.

Q. You had heard that message sometime after 2.40, do you
   think? - A. About 2.40, sir.

Q. You responded by driving from Herries Road South to
   Leppings Lane? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q.   What was the actual message you heard? - A. To go to
     Leppings Lane and assist with crowd control.

Q. Did you have anybody with you in the landrover at the
   time? - A. No, sir.

Q.   Did you go along Leppings Lane? - A. I    did, sir.

Q. What did you find as you progressed along Leppings Lane
   from Penistone Road? - A. A very large number of
   supporters, sir.

Q. Were they in any sort of orderly condition? - A. They
   were simply pouring down Leppings Lane towards the
   turnstiles, sir.

Q. On to the road, or confined to the pavement? - A. Wall to
   wall fans.

Q. Across the road as well? - A.   Yes, sir.

Q. Did you see Police horses and    other Constables? - A. I
   did, sir.

Q. When you got to Leppings Lane where did you put your
   landrover? - A. It was exactly where the end of the cue
   is, sir.

Q. The end of the pointer? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What did you see when you got there?   What time would
   you put it, just before 2.53 you say? - A. I was there at
   2.50.

Q. What did you see? - A. A very large number of supporters.

Q. Doing what? - A. Trying to get into the ground.         It was
   absolutely packed.

Q. Were there mounted Officers working there? - A. There
   were, sir.

Q. Were they having any success? - A. No, sir.
■5
                                  14




                                                  M. BUXTON


     Q. Did you come across Inspector Ellis? - A. Later, sir.

     Q. Did you use your public address system? - A. I did, sir.

     Q. What did you say? - A. I appealed to them to restrain and
        stop pushing in a Police message.   When I realised that
        was not working I appealed to them in unofficial Police
        terms.   I told them there were women and children being
        crushed, their own people.

     Q. Was your loud speaker volume turned up? - A. It is on a
        constant volume, sir.

     Q. One standard volume? - A. It is not adjustable.

     Q. Your speakers, which way were they pointing? - A. The
        speakers are on the Police side.

     Q. So they only point one way? - A. They point out either
        direction.

     Q. Out either side of the landrover? - A. Yes.

     Q. So there was one aiming directly at the turnstile area? -
        A. No, sir.    There was one pointing towards the shop
        just before the turnstiles and one pointing towards
        Leppings Lane.

     Q.         LORD JUTICE TAYLOR:    Your PA system had a single
          volume? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. Are there any you know of where the volume can be
        increased? - A. Prior to the system that is fitted now,
        sir, I had four speakers on the roof and that was
        adjustable.




                       Q. Could it achieve a
                            15

                                                  M, BUXTON


Q. Could it achieve a much louder report than this one? - A. No,
   sir, this is supposed to be the best one we could put on.

Q.        MR. PHILLIPS: It is very loud, is it? - A.     Yes, sir.
     It is for that particular purpose.    It has been designed and
     put there for that particular purpose.
Q.   Did your messages appear to have any effect? - A. No, sir.

Q.   You would not be able to tell whether anybody had heard them,
     would you? - A. It was not having any effect, sir.

Q.   Did you hear any Tannoy announcements from the ground tunnel?
     - A. I have no recollection of that.

Q. How long did you continue yourself broadcasting these
   messages? - A. For several minutes.

Q. What did you then decide to do? - A. I realised the futility
   of my situation, so I tried to attract the attention of the
   mounted Inspector using the PA.

Q. Was he able to hear you? - A. They wear crash helmets, and he
   was not able to hear me.

Q. Did you get in touch with match control by radio? - A. I asked
   match control to delay the kick-off.

Q.   Can you give us an idea as to what point you did that? - A.
     No, sir.  It was probably approaching 3 p.m.

Q. You had already been broadcasting messages before then? - A.
   before I asked for the kick-off....

Q. Before you made the request? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you think delaying kick-off would be a sensible thing? -
   A. I thought it would be a sot to offer the crowd.

Q. Had you had any discussion or instruction from any senior
   Officer to do that? - A. No, sir.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    A sot that you thought was likely
     to work? - A. I thought it was something, it may be something
     to appeal to them.

Q.        MR. PHILLIPS:  Did you get any acknowledgment from
     ground control when you sent this message? - A. Yes,
     sir.

Q. What were you told? - A. It was too late.     It was too late.

Q. Did you say to ground control why you wanted the kick-off
   delayed? - A. No, sir.

Q. Why not? - A. They would be aware of why I wanted it delayed.
'



                                 16

                                                        M. BUXTON


    Q. From their video cameras you mean? - A. Yes.

    Q. You say you called and tried to get hold of the mounted
       Inspector? - A. I did, sir.

    Q. To no avail? - A. I managed to catch his attention
       eventually..

    Q. Were you able to speak to him? - A. Oh, no, I couldn't speak
       to him, sir.  I gesticulated to him for him to form a line.

    Q. And did a line then form? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. And we have heard quite a lot about that line of horses across
       the gates, and I think the outer gates were closed for a short
       time? - A. I have no recollection of that.

    Q. Can you help us about Inspector Ellis who gave evidence of
       getting on top of your Land Rover and taking the mike from you
       and addressing the crowd himself? - A. He did.

    Q. Can you say when that was? - A. It was after I had asked the
       mounted Inspector to form a line.

    Q.   Was it after you had called the ground control    to delay the
         match? - A. yes, sir.

    Q. Did you hear him saying to the crowd that you were trying to
       have the match kick-off delayed? - A. I have no recollection
       of his words to the crowd at all.  I just thought it was
       futile.

    Q.   You thought it was futile what he was doing?    - A. Yes.

    Q.   As much as what you had been doing yourself? - A. Yes.

    Q. What is the next thing that happened? - A. The next thing the
       crowd suddenly disappeared.

    Q.   Did you see any of the gates opening? - A. I can't say I saw a
         gate open, but there must been a gate open because the crowd
         simply disappeared.

    Q.   Can     you help us, please, with the attitude of the crowd as you
         saw it from your position? -A. They seemed to be   gripped with
         a grim determination to get in.

    Q.   Had you experienced anything   like this before? -A. No, sir.

    Q.   Was anybody willing to stand   back or come back? - A. No, sir.

    Q.   When the crowd had gone you then drove into the south road
         alongside the river, did not you? - A. I drove down towards
         the back of the South Stand.

    Q. Was Inspector Ellis still on the Land Rover then? - A. Oh, no,
       sir.
;
■


                                 17

                                                        M. BUXTON



    Q. He had come down, had he? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You then heard a message I think for Officers to go on the
       pitch? - A. I did.

    Q. I think you left your Land Rover and walked on to the pitch? -
       A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Towards the goal mouth at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes,
       sir.

    Q.   And you saw the Police there helping fans to get out of the
         pens on the terraces? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.   And you yourself joined in and tried to pull people out? - A.
         Yes, sir.

    Q. I think you were there for some time, were not you? - A. I
       was, sir, yes.

    Q.   But you also suffered some injury,   did you not? - A. Well....

    Q.   You said you were obliged, in your statement, to recover    by
         resting against the St. Jo h n ’s ambulance? - A. When I got to
         gate 3 the fans were trapped in the gateway.

    Q. Trapped between what? - A. They were on top of each other like
       steps rather than vertical.  We started to pull them out, and
       the male on the floor on the bottom said that his foot was
       trapped.  So we started to pull the girl out who was
       third.

    Q. On top? - A. Yes.  It was then - she was fast.  At some stage
       I realised that in the crowd was a dead body, and that the
       girl must come out so we could clear the way to get the people
       out.

    Q.   Was this at gate 3? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.   Did you get the girl out? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. What about the man at the bottom who was trapped? - A. We had
       to get his foot, when we got down to him, his foot was
       trapped between the stanchion supporting the fencing
       and the step.  There was a gap of about 4" to 6", and
       his foot was trapped in the gap.

    Q. Did you manage to release his foot? - A. yes, sir.

    Q. I think you saw Chief Superintendent Nesbit on the pitch, did
       not you? -A. Yes, sir.

    Q. With his loud hailer, and you then assisted in taking people
       across? - A. Yes, we formed a tunnel and we passed the bodies
       back through the tunnel of Police Officers.
                            18


                                                  M. BUXTON


Q. Can you help us with this:  this person whose foot was trapped
   you say was at the bottom of the pile of bodies by gate 3? -
   A. Yes, sir.  He was alive.

Q. He was alive? -A. Yes, sir.

Q. What about the girl who was trapped as well? - A. She was
   alive.

Q. She was alive as well.  So at the very bottom of this pile
   there were people alive? - A. Yes, sir.  They were trapped in
   the gateway.

Q. Did you see in this pile of people by the gateway to gate 3
   any who had died? Did you see any who were dead by the
   entrance to gate 3? - A. Yes, sir, to the right of gate 3.

Q. But not immediately in front of it? -A. No, sir.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   To the right looking from the
     ground? - A. To the right looking from the goal, yes.

                    Cross-examined bv MR. HYTNER:

Q. Mr. Buxton, how long elapsed between you arriving at the
   ground and the crowd suddenly disappearing - about? - A. I
   arrived shortly before 10-to-3.  I would say it was a few
   minutes before 3 p.m.

Q. We know the gates were opened at 2.52.    It sounded just a
   slightly inaccurate timing you got there at 2.50.    Do you
   think it was before 2.50 that you got there? - A. I have seen
   the video, sir.  I am not  on the video at 2.47 but the Land
   Rover is visible at 2.50.

Q. So it may be at 2.48 or 2.47 and a bit you got there? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I am only concerned to see what happened in those few minutes.
   When you arrived the situation was that there was a
   Billing throng of several thousand in the area of the
   turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. With a mass of people, wall to wall, still thronging down
   Leppings Lane? - A. That is correct.

Q.   What I want to ask you is this.  Have you yourself ever been
     in a packed crowd, afootball crowd or anywhere else? - A.
     Yes, sir.

GL If you are being pushed from the back your pressure is forward
   and you are in this ma s s , it is pretty pointless to be to l d ,
   is not it, "Move back", because you yourself are under
   pressure from the back? - A. My appeal was to the people who
   were coming from the back.

Q.   I am coming to that.   I am not suggesting for a moment you
c
                               19

                                                      M. BUXTON


      have done anything wrong, Mr. Buxton.  I am just seeing what
      the Police operation was.  There was this mass of people.  It
      was perfectly obvious to any Police Officer who was
      experienced that the only way of relieving pressure on the
      mass of people in the turnstile area was to remove the
      pressure from the back? That is right, is not it? - A. That
      is right, sir.

    Q. What was in fact happening was that the pressure from the back
       was increasing moment by moment by the arrival of the throng
       coming wall to wall down Leppings Lane? - A. That is right,
       sir.

    Q. So far from the pressure being relieved it was being
       increased? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. What efforts were being made by anybody to stop the incursion
       of fans down Leppings Lane who were joining the throng at the
       bottom of the Lane? - A. I was appealing to them and the
       mounted section formed a line.  Nobody was listening.  Nobody
       would take any notice of the Police at a l l .

    Q. Forgive me, Mr. Buxton.  What you were doing, and no doubt
       sensibly - in any event you were under orders - you had
       stationed your Land Rover actually on the edge of the mass
       that had already formed, and you were appealing to those at
       the rear of the mass not to push forward but to go back? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. But they were themselves being joined at the rear by a throng
       coming down the Lane? Now, what was being done further back
       towards the roundabout or over the bridge to stop the throng
       increasing the pressure that you were nobly trying to stop?
       - A. Nothing, sir.

    Q. Thank you.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. GIBSON-WATT:

    Q. Officer, I believe after you had done the initial rescue work
       of pulling bodies out of gate 3 you went and got a loud
       hailer.   Is that right? - A. Yes, sir. I saw Chief
       Superintendent Nesbit trying to instruct Police Officers and
       the crowd, with no effect, so I ran back to the Police Land
       Rover and took him a hand-held P A .

    Q. Just to get it clear,   did you do that on   your own initiative?
       - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Nobody gave you the instruction? - A. No, sir.

    Q. Perhaps I could just ask you this generally, we know that
       Superintendent Greenwood at about that time had a loud hailer
       and was addressing the crowd.  Was that the loud hailer that
       you got? - A. No, sir.

    Q. It was a different one? - A. It was from the Land Rover.     I was
L
                              20

                                                   M. BUXTON


       in possession of a hand-held PA as well as the one in the
       vehicle.

    Q. I am sorry, could we just clarify that? - A. There is a PA
       system fitted into the Land Rover.  It is part of the vehicle.
       I was also in possession of a hand-held PA, battery operated.

    Q. That was the one you ran to the Land Rover to get, was it? -
       A . Correct.




                                   /Q. What I am asking you.
                             21



                                               M. BUXTON

Q. What I am asking you is whether you can tell us whether
   the hand held PA that you ran to the vehicle to get is
   the same equipment that Mr. Greenwood was using from
   the advertising hoardings.  It may be you do not know.
   What I want to know is whether you can say that was the
   one or whether it is possible Mr. Greenwood got a loud-
   hailer from somewhere else and there were two? -A. It is
   more than probable Mr. Greenwood was in possession of a
   loud-hailer.

Q. Who did you give your loud-hailer to? - A. Chief
   Superintendent Nesbitt, sir.

Q. Yes, I see.  Thank you.  One other matter.  When you
   first got to the outside of Leppings Lane and saw this
   huge crowd did you assume that Police Control would have
   delayed the kick-off any way? - A. No.  That is why I
   asked them.

Q. I appreciate that but when you first saw the crowd did
   not it occur to you to be an obvious thing to have done,
   to have delayed the kick-off? -A. I do not think the
   cameras that the control room use go up Leppings Lane.
   I do not think they could see the view that I had.

          MR. GIBSON-WATT:    Thank you.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   If they had been able to do
     so would you have expected them to postpone the kick^off?
     - A. If they had got the view that I had, yes, sir.

         MR. GIBSON-WATT:     Thank you.

                Cross-examined by MR. KALLIPETIS:

Q. Mr. Buxton, did you respond to a general call from stand by
   to any traffic car available for Leppings Lane on the Tannoy
   PA system? Was that the message you received? - A. The
   message I received was to me personally to go to Leppings
   Lane and assist with crowd control.

Q. Personal message to your vehicle? - A. To me personally.

Q. I see.  So you are not Golf ....? - A. No, sir.    I am
   known by my shoulder number.

Q. So the transcript we have been given which I thought was
   a call for a Tannoy vehicle is at 14.45 and it is in
   general terms to any vehicle engaged on Leppings Lane.

                 Gross-examined by   MR. GLASGOW:

Q. I wonder if I can help on that, Mr. Buxton.  Were you
   aware of the fact that the message that had been sent
                          22



                                                M. BUXTON

   on the local Police radio, the VHF radio to control,
   had been overheard by you? -A. No, sir.  I was just
   using personal radio.

Q. Yes.  But the personal radio, the message that you
   picked up, was a request from the Officer on the ground
   at the Leppings Lane end? - A. The message I received
   was from SergeantCGoddard in match control 18 63 go to
   Leppings Lane end.  Assist with crowd control.

Q. After you had received that personal message which we
   have heard about were you aware of the fact that there
   was a broadcast from Police Control outside the ground
   not knowing that you had heard that message for any
   vehicle that could assist? Did you hear that as well?
   - A. No, sir.

        MR. GLASGOW:    Thank you.

               Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Hr. Buxton, how many years have you been acquainted with
   using this particular equipment on your vehicle tfyat you
   had .... - A. Several years, sir.

Q. And you have described its effectiveness.   It is sig­
   nificantly better than the one that was there before,
   is it? - A. We have had the speakers themselves on the
   bumper of the Landrover.   We removed them from there
   because they were ineffective.   It was then changed to
   four speakers on the roof.   That was then changed to
   the present one which it is believed is superior to the
   others.

Q. And have   you found it to be so? - A. Well, I do not hear
   it, sir.    It has been variously described to me.

        MR. WOODWARD:      Sir, might I interject, sir? I do
   not know whether the Inquiry intends to listen to such a
   noise.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well, we can easily listen to
   the PA but what we cannot do is summon 54,000 people to
   compete with it.

        MR. WOODWARD:   No.

       MR. COLLINS:      May     Ihelp on that? What we are
  hoping to do is get some decibel  levels from ....

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    From Anfield?

        MR. COLLINS:     Yes. We are trying to measure the
   decibel level of the Tannoy system at Hillsborough.   We
                                                M. BUXTON

can do the same with the PA from the Landrover if
necessary and to get a recording of - in fact it is
Anfield - but we hope it will be somewhat similar to
Hillsborough, measure the decibel level of that and
do a comparison.  It is a fairly crude way of doing
it, I think, but at least it gives some idea, we hope,
of how effective the Tannoy might be.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, with respect, that would? we
consider, be an exceedingly crude method of doing it.
Decibels can be very, very complicated.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well, of course.   What else
do we do, Mr. Woodward?

     MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, on® wondered whether it would
be ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am not suggesting one would
draw any precise inference from this test as to what was
the condition on the day.  I am concerned not only with
what happened on the day but the future.  This is why I
was asking whether there might be some adjustable volume
speaker which, you know, could be raised higher and
higher if necessary.  I do not know.  This is what we
must look into.

     MR. WOODWARD:  It could be very complicated and
those who happen to be rather close to it sounded
might ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.   I am conscious of that
as well.

     MR. WOODWARD:   The facility can be made available
at 12 o'clock probably today if one wanted to hear it
from this room, something being broadcast outside.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

     MR. WOODWARD:   Whether that would be helpful or not
I do not know.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Certainly like to hear it at
some stage but again one is hearing it without competition,
so to speak.

     MR. WOODWARD:   It will always be in a different
context.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

     MR. WOODWARD:   You parked your vehicle in a position
                              24



                                                  M. BUXTON

     that you chose, did you? - A. More or less, sir, yes.

Q. And as Mr. Hytner has put it to you you put it more or
   less at the edge of the throng you saw, the crowd? - A.
   Yes, sir, at its most advantageous point.

Q. Most advantageous in order to do what? - A. To address
   the crowd.

Q.   And in order to cause those who were coming to it to
     hold back? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   To warn them of what it was they were coming upon. Does
     it follow from that that those people you were giving
     the warnings and the announcements to were in aposition
     to have heeded them? - A. Oh, yes, sir.

Q.   You see, it may be being suggested   that what you did in
     the circumstances was quite futile   because those coming
     along had no choice.   Do you follow? - A. They had a
     choice.

Q. They had the choice.  Your address was not direted only
   at the people who happened to be inside the turnstile
   area but to those who were coming along to join it?
   - A. They can hear it, sir.   If they are around the
   Landrover they can hear it.

Q. Do you have any doubt about it .... - A. None.

Q          being capable of being heard? In your statement you
     talk about an air of determination, determined to get
     in, grim determination to get into  the ground? - A. Yes.

Q.   Why      do you say that? - A. Because they were.

Q. That obviously must be right.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You cannot improve on that.

          THE WITNESSs   It is a determination I have not seen
     before, sir.  That is why I said it.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:   In your statement you describe having
     an impression, saying although you did not think so at the
     time you now think they appeared to be storming the turn­
     stiles? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. That was because of their manner? - A. Yes.

Q.   And their refusal to listen to you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   When    they had the    opportunity to do    it.    Had you ever
                            25


                                                       M. BUXTON


     encountered a crowd like that before? - A. No, sir.

Q. How many years experience in all? - A. Since 1974 I have
   been going to football matches.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Have you ever seen that
     number of people that far from the turnstile wich such
     a short time to go to kick-off? - A. No, sir.  I just
     could not believe it.

          MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you.

                   Re-examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q. Do you know how many could hear what you were broad­
   casting? - A. I appreciate the distance was limited.
   Obviously I was not reaching the turnstiles.

Q. No.    Was the crowd making a noise? - A. Oh, yes, sir.

Q. A considerable noise? - A. Yes.

Q. So you cannot say how many even heard what you were
   saying? - A. No, sir.

Q. Or if they heard understood what you were saying? - A.
   I do not think they wanted to understand.

Q. Well, that may be but that must be an assumption, must
   it not? - A. It is an assumption.

          MR. COLLINS:    Yes.     Yes, thank you.

                     By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

Q. Can I just ask you about your request for the kick-off
   to be delayed?  I think Inspector Ellis said if I am not
   mistaken that he thought you tried three times to get
   that message through and that he believed it was acknow­
   ledged which is what - did you have more than one go at
   it? - A. No, sir, I think I just made the one request ....

Q. Just the one. - A             and Sergeant Goddard said it was
   too late.

Q. I see.  What I am particularly interested in is this.
   Are you sure that that was before the crowd dissipated?
   - A. Oh, it was before then, sir, yes.

Q. Can you give any idea how long before? - A. Minutes.

Q. Yes.    Well, are we talking          - A. Several minutes.

Q. Several minutes before yotli saw the result of the gates
   opening.  Is that it? - A. Yes, sir, to my relief.
                           26



                                                 M. BUXTON

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes.   Thank you very much.

        MR. COLLINS:   I wonder, sir, perhaps one could put
   it the other way round.

             Further re-examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q. How soon after your   arrival did you make that request?
   - A. I would say      after about    five minutes.  I tried
   appealing to the      crowd to no    effect.  I then asked
   for the kick-off to   be delayed.

Q. So it sounds as if you must have made your request,
   certainly if you are right on your timings, at about
   the time Gate C in fact opened? - A. Shortly before.

Q. You think it   was shortly before? - A. Yes, sir.    There
   was no point    if the gate had been open.

Q. Well, I know, but you may not have realised   the gate was
   opened? -A. Oh, I see.

        MR. COLLINS:     Yes, thank you.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you very much.

        MR. COLLINS:     Detective Sergeant Morton, please.

           DETECTIVE SERGEANT PAUL MORTON     Called.

                   Examined by   MR. COLLINS:

Q. Paul Morton? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. Are you a uniform Sergeant now or a Detective Sergeant?
   - A. I am a Detective Sergeant, sir.

Q. But on the day in question I think you were on uniform
   duty because obviously there was a call for everyone
   available to go on duty at the football match? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. You, I think, were on D Division Serial 14 and were
   doing duties at the Midland Railway Station meeting
   and escorting fans to the match? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. I am not going to ask you about that but I think at about
   ten-to-three you were in a vehicle which was travelling
   along Leppings Lane to §et to the ground.  Is that right?
   - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Did you see the mass outside Leppings Lane? - A. I did, sir.
   I had never seen a crowd as large as that outside Leppings
   Lane.
                          27



                                                  P. MORTON

Q. Did you have any thoughts about whether there was a chance
   of them getting in by kick-off time? - A. I thought for
   them to get in by kick-off time they would have to move
   very, very quickly and I did not think there was much
   chance of them all getting in by kick-off time.

Q. You then went into the ground.  Did you go"to the
   gymnasium? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Did there come a time when you were told to go to the
   Leppings Lane end of the ground? - A. There was, sir, yes.

Q. You put that in your statement at f ive**past-three. Now,
   how precise is that timing? - A. Well, I remember running
   down the side of the North Stand towards the Leppings Lane
   end and the players were still on the pitch and then I saw
   Mr. Greenwood run on to the pitch to talk to the referee.

Q. And where were you when he did that? - A. I was about half­
   way down the ....

Q. The North Stand? - A. The North; Stand, yes.

Q. Well, we can give that a pretty precise timing.  You were
   obviously aware, were you, of people having climbed over
   and having come out of the terraces by then because there
   were quite a few people behind the goal, were not there?
   - A. That is right.  What I saw, sir, was people actually
   on the surrounding track behind the goal and to the
   right and I thought at that time that we had got a
   serious crowd disorder situation.

Q. You mean a pitch invasion? - A. Well, some sort of
   invasion, yes, sir.

Q. Yes. -A. And I went down immediately to the rear of the
   Leppings Lane g o a l .

Q. Yes.  When you got there did you see the reality? - A. I did
   immediately, sir.  I could not believe what I saw because
   in front of me there were rows of dead people.  From where
   I could see there were, I would say, 30 or 40 people in
   the first three or four rows of people.   They were in
   upright position.  Their heads were purple and turning
   to grey.  Some had bulging eyes and there was vomit but
   they were still upright and the people that were behind
   them were obviously with a crush that was coming from
   behind them, the ones in the middle were panicking for
   breath and of course they were putting even more pressure
   on the people at the front.

                               / Q. Are we talking ....
                                  P. MORTON


Are we talking, Mr. Morton, about Pen 3 or Pen 4 or both of
them when you are giving this description? - A. We are
talking sir about Pen 3. When I looked up I could see the
entrance tunnel just to my right and I thought that I could
see a gap at the top of the entrance tunnel, a small space.
I realised then that the only way that these people could
be released was if the pressure at the back was in fact
released.  I turned and spokfe to Mr. Greenwood.  I told
him I thought there were 30 or 40 people dead and he was
going to use his radio.   I said that we needed oxygen
and ambulances.

And oxygen, did you say? - A. Oxygen and ambulances.

I am sorry to have to ask you this, but can you help us
as to these dead people which you have described, or people
you believed to be dead upright, as to how far along Pen 3
they were or where they were positioned? - A. Where the
gate is in Pen 3, from the pitch to the right of that gate
I would say some 15-20 yards and when I looked up I could
see the entrance to tunnel, this is how I am gauging my
position sir, and I think to my right and to my left although
my view was restricted because there were people milling
around and Police Officers there as well, I would say in
an area of perhaps 15 yards I could see that these people
in front of me were dead or appeared to be dead.

So they would all be to the right, as you looked at it,
to the right of the gate of Pen 3? - A. That is correct,
sir, some way to the right.

And stretching along what, almost to the end of Pen 3?
- A. I would say so sir, yes.

Having called that out to Inspector Greenwood did you see
him attempt to use his radio? - A. Yes, he said:  "I will
get on the radio".  I had a radio but ha had an ear pieee
so it would be perhaps easier for him to use his radio
than me use mine.

You mean you would not be able to hear anything? - A. The
noise sir, you virtually could not hear anything from the
radio.  I immediately jumped on to an advertising hoarding,
other Officers followed and we waved our arms and shouted,
well we were screaming actually to the people at the back
to get back to relieve the pressure because there was no
way that we could even move anybody.   We could not get into
the pen because you could not get over the top.   The people
that you would have got over the top and stood on to get in
would have been the ones that were suffering because the
ones actually under, closest to the pens were in fact, I
believe, dead.

Did your screaming and motioning back have any effect? - A.
No sir, it didn't.  I think the people at the back of that
area did not realise what was happening at the front and
,-V
                                 29

                                           P. MORTON


         in fact we were getting abused.   We were getting spit on and
         swore at.
      Q. When you were standing there could you see the mouth of the
         tunnel? - A. I could see the top of the mouth of the tunnel.

      Q. Could you see whether there were any people in the tunnel
         or coming along the tunnel? ~ A. I saw the occasional
         supporter still running through but I saw that there was
         room at the back and obviously I was screaming for them to
         turn round and go out through the back of that tunnel.

      Q. Were you aware of any Police presence at the tunnel at this
         stage? - A. No sir, I did not see any.

      Q. This not having worked did you notice at this particular
         time a person in Pen 3? - A. Yes sir, I was shouting.
         I was looking around me all the time and I saw a young boy,
         perhaps aged between 11 and 15 and he was halfway up.
         When I say "halfway up" half his body or perhaps the top
         third of his body had been lifted but he was about four
         rows back.   He was leaning forward and his hands or his
         finger ends were on the fence and he was leaning over
         people in front of him.   He was literally going purpde in
         front of me.   I could see that he was still alive.  I
         jumped down from my position and went to him to my left
         and tried obviously to get hold of him to pull him through
         the fence but it was totally impossible.   I just spoke
         to him and kept telling him to hang on, hang on, but then
         the people that were at the back suddenly starting using
          the supporters in the front, the dead, the dying and the
          injured as steps to get out and they actually stood either
         on or very very near to this lad and then I was in a
         position where I had got a supporter hanging on the spiked
          fencing in front of me trying to get out and of course
          I could not push him back, I had got to pull him out as
         well. I then spent time pulling him out and others followed.
         They just came from the back where they could have simply
          turned round and gone back.

      Q. You say in your statement that "complete panic seemed to
         break out"? - A. That is right, sir.

      Q. Was it your impression that they really were in a state
         of panic at this stage? - A. There was so much screaming
         and people shoutings  "They are dead.  There is dead
         people around".  Obviously there was language used and
         I would say that it was panic, but the people at the back
         were not the people that were really in a panic situation.
         They had got room and they could breathe.  If they had
         merely turned round and gone back it would have eased
         the position at the front for the rescue attempts.

       Q. Were these people coming right from the back or from halfway
          back or from where? - A. They were coming from halfway back,
          sir, they were coming from the back.
                             30

                                       P. MORTON


Q. You say also in your statement that you think about this
   time the advertising hoarding you were standing  on broke?
   - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. Anyway did you see Mr. Greenwood again? - A. Well I turned
   you see sir because there did not seem to be any medical
   supplies arriving, so I   turned to him andinfact he
   beckoned to me.  I went   to him and he said: "Doyou know
   where there is an ambulance?"   I said: "Yes" so I ran ....

Q. Just before we get there did you gather whether he had been
   able to get through on his radio? - A. He said he could not
   get through sir.

Q. Did you try on yours? -    A. Yes sir.

Q. Did you have any success? - A.    No sir.

Q. This was to get through to Control to indicate that ambulances
   etc. were needed? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. You say that he asked you to run to the ambulance point?
   - A. Yes, to fetch ambulances.

Q. Did you know where the ambulance was situated? - A. Yes sir,
   I have been going to Hillsborough for 30 years and quite a
   long time after that as a Policeman.

Q.    So it was at the other end of the North Stand, was it, in
     as it were behind the edge of the North Stand and the Kop
     where the Usher is pointing, that area? - A. Yes sir.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:Did you and   Mr. Greenwood fail
     to get through on the radio because of the noise there or
     because the radio was not working? - A. I felt, sir, it
     was because we just could not get in to talk on the radio.

Q. Too much traffic? - A. Too much air traffic, that is right
   sir.

Q.         MR. COLLINS:  You say also in your statement this:
     that you had seen Officers to your left attempting to open
     the steel escape gate to your left and you thought by this
     time it was open and persons were being removed.  Now which
     gate is it that you are referring to there? - A. The one
     sir in Gate 3.

Q. Does that mean that when you arrived on the scene your
   recollection is that that gate was still closed? - A. I am
   not sure sir on that.  I am not sure whether the gate was
   open or shut.  There was several Officers around the gate
   area when I arrived so I concentrated my efforts elsewhere.

Q. Is it the position that you can't say whether it was open
   or shut initially but you are certainly aware that it was
   open at this stage? - A. Th&t is correct sir, yes.
                           31

                                     P. MORTON


Q. Anyway did you run down to find the ambulance? - A. I did sir.
   I found the ambulance.

Q. Whei^Jot down the other end was it clear to you that the
   Officers at that end of the ground did not fully appreciate
   what was happening? - A. That is correct, sir.   I spoke to
   one Officer I knew, Police Constable Burkenshaw.   I told
   him there were 30 or 40 dead down at that fend and I spoke
   to an unknown Inspector and told him to get as many men as
   he could round the other end.

Q. Did you find an ambulance? - A. I did sir.

Q. Or the ambulance? - A. I did sir.  There were two ambulances
   there.  The first one I saw to my right had the rear doors
   open.  I went into the rear of that ambulance to find an
   Officer stood there.  I spoke to him to tell him that we
   needed oxygen and not only one ambulance but we would need
   a number of ambulances to assist.  The Officer had a hand
   held radio and he was talking on that radio and I was beckoning
   him to move quickly, that we needed the oxygen and the ambulances
   or at least some oxygen round at the other end very very
   quickly to try and attempt to save some lives.

         The Ambulanceman was talking on the radio, I believe
   to his control, so I turned and I saw the St. John's Ambulance
   there and I went immediately to the St. John's Ambulanceman
   and said:  "Bring your vehicle down" believing, I think quite
   rightly, that the ambulanceman having spoken to his control
   would in fact follow us up to the area at the end of Leppings
   Lane.

Q. Did you hear what he was saying to Control? - A. I could not
   hear what he was saying sir, no.

Q. So you were responsible for getting the St. John's Ambulance
   to come down and we have seen on the video the St. John's
   Ambulance coming down the ground? - A. We had to break the
   hoardings down sir at the ground.

Q. Yes, I was going to ask you about that. Where are these
   hoardings that you had to break down to get the ambulance
   into the ground? - A. They are the entrance to the North
   Stand and the Kop.  The advertising hoardings were situated
   there, just where that pointer is.

Q. Were they then obstructing or partially obstructing the
   entrance? - A. You could not get through for them sir,
   they were totally obstructing the entrance.

Q. Bodies could get through? - A. Oh sorry, sir, vehicular
   traffic could not get through.

Q. Was there any difficulty in breaking them down? - A. No sir.
                             32

                                      P. MORTON


Q. Did you run up with the ambulance as it came up? - A. Yes
   sir I did because I wanted to make sure we got the ambulance
   as close as we could, although not too close, but in the
   area where the Ambulancemen could best work.

Q. I think you reported back to Mr. Greenwood.     Is that right?
   - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. Did he again indicate that he had not been able to get through
   on the radio? - A. He did sir, yes.

Q.    We know what sort of time he reached because we have seen
     the video of the ambulance arriving.   I am speaking entirely
     from memory but I think it is about 11 or 12-minutes-past-3
     that this ambulance came up. Were you able again to look
     and see the back of the terraces round about the tunnel area?
     - A. I am not sure of that, sir.

Q. Well let me ask you this:were you aware whether or not   there
   were Police Officers on the terraces at this stage? - A. I
   was aware of Police Officers on the terraces, sir, at a
   certain stage.  I am not sure when that stage was.

Q. I think you were particularly aware of Officers climbing
   over the left radial fence when you look at Pen 3. That
   is from Pen 2 into Pen 3. Is that right? - A. That is
   correct sir, that is the fence there sir.

Q. I think you continued to help to lift people out at the
   front? - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q.     I think you were aware later of thearrival of Chief
     Superintendent Nesbit and his forming the tunnel that has
     been described of Officers? - A. Yes sir, that is right.

Q. I think there came a stage when it was plain that there
   was a public order problem, largely because the Nottingham
   Forest fans did not know what was happening and were still
   thinking that it was Liverpool fans disrupting things.  Is
   that right? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

 Q. I think you were aware of the measures that were taken to
    form a Police cordon to stop any public order problems? - A.
    That is correct.

 Q. Did you see the Fire Service in attendance? - A. I did sir,
    yes.

 Q. And oxygen being used? - A. Oxygen sir, yes.

 Q. Was that oxygen provided by the Fire Services so far as
    you could see or oxygen supplied by others? - A. I could
    not answer that sir.

 Q. Mr. Morton, I think you can say that Police Officers and
    indeed fans assisted as best they could and many performed
                                     P. MORTON


  very very heroically indeed? - A. Very very heroically
  sir.  I wish I had never actually worked this particular
  day's duty, but I will certainly say this:  at that time
  when I was stood working with the uniformed Officers who
  I don't know, the off-duty nurses, doctors, first aiders,
  the fans themselves, I felt proud of the work that people
  had done to assist the injured people to get out of that
  crowd.

        MR. COLLINSs   Yes, thank you.


                  Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER;

Q. Just two things. You could see people still entering
   the crowd through the tunnel at a time when there was
    plainly a disaster on your hands in the pens? - A. That
   is correct sir, yes.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers at the rear of the crowd
   in the tunnel? - A. No sir.

Q. Can I just ask you now about the radios because this is
   something which you will obviously appreciate people who
   are actually on the ground on the day knowing the technology
   will be able to explain better than we can in the quiet
   of a courtroom.
         Is this the first time that you have had experience
   in your long service of radios being ineffective? - A. I
   think in a situation like that sir, the noise was that
   loud that you could not actually hear the radio, but there
   was a situation where you could not get through because
   of the other air traffic that was on the radio.

Q. So there were two problems? - A. That is right.

Q. The first is that you could not hear and the second was you
   could not get into the line? — A. Into the system, sir.

Q. You have been at other semi-finals presumably? - A. Yes.

Q. There is a lot of noise generally, isn't there? - A. There
   is sir, yes.
Q. Now is this a problem that you have come across frequently
   that crowd noise is so great that you can't hear what is
   being said to you over your personal radio? - A. It is sir,
   yes.
Q. Have you ever seen a situation where a player is badly
   injured in the middle of the pitch and someone wants not
   the trainer but a stretcher? - A. No sir.

Q. You have never seen that.   So you have never seen signalling
   going' on? — A. Oh yes, I have seen that sir.
                                34

                                          P. MORTON


Q. They sigpal. They have got specific signals.   This signal
   means a stretcher, this signal means something else? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Has it never occurred to any Police Officer to your knowledge
   that may be signals between Police Officers on the ground
   and Police Officers in Control would overcome the problem
   of crowd noise or the system going down? ** A. I think Policemen,
   sir, will always attempt to use a different system if the
   radio is not working and part of that system is signalling.
   If you can*t get through on your radio and you have got a
   colleague 30 or 40 yards away, you would simply, he would
   know quite clearly by your actions that your radio could
   not get through and he would attempt to get through on
   his radio.That is a form of signalling system.

Q.       But you see in Control if they weren't receiving messages
        they might not know, for example, ambulances were needed or
        more Police Officers or whether riot gear was needed.     Do
        you follow?      - A. I do sir, yes.

Q.      But so far as you know in none of your training is it ever
        suggested that specific signals could be used for specific
        events and specific requests? - A. Like you say, sir, not
        in my training.


                     Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS;

Q. Just one question please, Officer.  Can you remember whether
   the Ambulance Officer to whom you spoke was wearing spectacles
   or not? - A. I can't remember that sir.


                       Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW;

Q. Just one matter. I wonder if you would look at the bundle
   that you have got there, South Yorkshire Document 1.  It
   looks like that on the outside.  Just the position of the
   advertising that you were telling us about.  Would you go
   to Photograph 13 I think may be the most helpful. - A. Yes.

Q. That shows the entrance way we are talking about, I think,
   between the North Stand and the Kop? — A. That is correct,
   sir.

q   .   Am I right in thinking that the advertising that you were
        talking about was standing on the area really very close
        to where the camera is, where the red tape is now? - A. I
        would say that the advertising boarding, sir, perhaps ran
        parallel to the concrete, as we can see there, at the
        angle, the angle of the concrete as that runs along there.
        I would say that the advertising boardings ran very close
        to that.

Q. Running underneath where the tape now is roughly? - A. No
                            35

                                       P. MORTON


     sir.  I would say it is perhaps further on running along
     the angle of the concrete.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Across there? - A. That is
     correct my Lord, yes.

Q.        MR. GLASGOW: And it is not the attached advertising
     that is nailed to the boards, it was standing on the ground
     I think? - A. It was on a board that was attached to the
     ground.

Q. But standing advertising as distinct from nailed or screwed
   to the board? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. I entirely accept that you helped, but I think it is right
   that Mr. Carsley, is his name, the Chief Steward of this
   Kop, was physically moving that out of the way when you
   came and helped him? - A. There were several people sir
   moving that advertising boarding out of the way to let
   that ambulance through, certainly.

Q. At the time when they were moving the advertising out of
   the way, the ambulance had not by that stage actually got
   to them? - A. I am not sure sir.  I think it was manoeuvring
   along the entrance/exit way.

Q. I was going to put to you that in fact if we look at where
   the photograph is pointing up to where we see the spare
   board ABC line, that when an ambulance started to back up
   there to turn down that road the Chief Steward on the Kop
   and others helping him, including yourself, started to
   move that free standing board out of the way to make a way
   for it* Does that accord with your own recollection? - A.
   I can't recollect the exact position of the ambulance
   sir.




                           /Q. At least
                                36




                                              P. MORTON



Q.    At least you could confirm that it had not   arrived right
     down on the pitch?      It was not a question of the
     ambulance sitting there, waiting for it to be moved? - A.
     I think that is the case, sir.      If it was, it was merely
     a few seconds, that is all.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Morton, you came up from the Midland Station, all the
   expected supporters having gone on their way, in a public
   service vehicle? - A. That is   correct, sir.

Q. Full of Police Officers? - A.       Correct, sir.

Q. There were no supporters on the bus? -       A. That isright.

Q. Is it right as you came along   Leppings Lane thatbus was
   approached by a number of people? - A. They were knocking
   on the side of the bus.

Q. What were they wanting these people who were banging on
   the side of the bus? - A. They were shouting "Tickets".

Q.   What was their response upon appreciating who was in       the
     vehicle? - A. They  went away, sir.

Q. Was that just one or two individuals who were banging on
   the side or... - A. There were perhaps two or three
   separate incidents of one or two individuals banging the
   windows and the side of the bus.

Q. At different points as you made the journey along the
   road? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. You were at the front of the terrace at about five past
   three? - A. Around that time, sir, perhaps a minute or
   two afterwards.

Q. At that time, are you able to say whether the game was
   still going on?    Mr. Greenwood came and stopped it.
   Did you see that happen? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Had you been in your position very long by the time that
     happened? - A. No, sir.  I was walking down the side of
     the ground.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Half way along the north
     stand.

Q.           MR. WOODWARD: I want to ask you   what you could
     see   up in the terrace and the tunnel. - A. When, sir?
                           37




                                          P. MORTON


Q. At that time. - A. That I was at the rear of the Leppings
   Lane goal?

Q. Yes.   When you looked up could you see space at the
   front of the tunnel? - A. I obviously could not see the
   bottom of the tunnel, sir, but I considered there was a
   small space around the entrance exit to the tunnel area.

Q. It was not an impression of a jam-packed crowd at the
   entrance to the tunnel? - A. The crowd was packed, sir,
   but there did appear to be room at the rear, around the
   tunnel area.

Q. In your evidence you say that one of the things you
   wanted to happen was that the people in the crowd away
   from the perimeter fence should relent and go back? - A.
   that is correct, sir.

Q. You seem to be saying that all they needed to was to turn
   round and do that? - A. Correct, sir.

Q. That was a strong impression you had at the time? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. However, notwithstanding the ability tp do that and your
   requests for them to do it, there were people who
   nevertheless came forward? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Are you saying that those people who came forward were,
   so far as you could see, not themselves embarrassed or in
   any predicament? - A. Some of them certainly weren't,
   sir.   In fact some of them were getting their clothing
   ripped and they were saying, "What is your number because
   I am going to complain about you", when you were pulling
   them over.

Q. People were coming forward, impeding what you were trying
   to do.   You had to pull them out of the way and their
   response was one of accusation because you had damaged
   their clothing? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. The advertising board, may I ask you about that?   You
   have told Mr. Glasgow about it.   Perhaps if we look at
   photograph 19 in the bundle, we have a long shot of that
   same corner, bundle "South Yorkshire 1". - A. Yes, sir.

Q. One can see the area where that advertising hoarding was?
   - A. Yes, sir.

Q. It was only a matter of moments to deal with it? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. It was not a significant obstruction to any progress? -
   A. No, sir.
                             38




                                            P. MORTON


Q.   It was just a question of moving it out of the     way? - A.
     Breaking it down, sir.

           MR. PHILLIPS:   Sergeant Gutcher please.

            DETECTIVE SERGEANT DAVID GUTCHER Called

                   Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

Q.   Detective Sergeant David Gutcher? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   You were on uniformed duty at the match on the   15th of
     April? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Which took you to the Midland Station? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You came back with your serial by about 2.30? - A. That
   is correct, sir.

Q.   At that stage you were available in the Police   Room on
     standby duties? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you receive an instruction to go from there with your
   serial? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. From whom did you get the instruction? - A. The Inspector
   at the Police Room adjacent to the gymnasium.

Q. Where were you told to go? - A. We were told to take up a
   position inside the ground at the turnstiles at the
   Leppings Lane end.

Q.   Inside which particular turnstiles did you go    to? - A. I
     believe they are numbered 1 to 16, sir.

Q. They are separate on the inside by the fence, as you see
   there, and as it is being pointed out.   You would come
   along that passageway from the north stand? - A. We came
   through the north stand, yes.

Q.   Then when you get to the back of theturnstiles you  see
     there is a fence separating the two sections, 1 to 8 and
     9 to 16? - A. Yes, sir.   Those turnstiles are for access
     to the north stand, sir.

Q.   So you were on the first half, 1 to 8 or 1 to 10? - A.
     No.  I was in a position further up. Just there, sir.

Q. Did you notice the way in which the turnstiles were
   operating? - A. In what way, sir?

Q.   Were they operating efficiently so far as you  could see?
     - A. The supporters coming through those turnstiles
     seemed to be coming through very, very slowly.
                                       D. GUTCHER



Did you notice the turnstile operators having any
particular difficulties? - A. Yes, sir.   At one point
one of the turnstile operators handed me a ticket.   He
pointed out to me that the supporter whose ticket that
was had come through the wrong turnstile, in effect.
His ticket was for the west terrace.

Can you tell us which turnstile that was? - A. It was
one of the two uppermost where the usher is pointing
now, sir.

Were those turnstiles 9 and 10 then open for the north
stand rather than the west stand? - A. I am sorry, sir?

To start with, turnstiles 1 to 8 had been used for the
north stand? - A. Yes.

Subsequently two more turnstiles are brought into use,
numbers 9 and 10, also for the north stand? - A. Yes.

At the time you are talking about, were those numbers 9
and 10 being used for the north stand? - A. Yes, sir.

Nevertheless, somebody came   through with awest stand
ticket and you... - A. That   is right, sir.

Did you see any other instances of difficulties at the
turnstiles? - A. It was clear, sir, from the supporters
coming through that had west terrace tickets in their
hands, asking where to go because of the fence.   They
could not get to where they wanted to be.

What did you did with them? - A. I instructed them   as
best I could to go through a gate in that fence.

So you got them through to the west stand area? - A. I
believe so, sir.   There were other Officers there.

Did you then give an instruction to all the turnstile
operators? - A. No.    The two turnstile operators at the
top part there, I instructed to forget about checking
tickets.   I could see clearly there was severe crowding
outside.   Supporters coming through the two turnstiles
where I was positioned were clearly distressed.    Some
either through shock, fear, panic or drink, were in a
very aggressive state, both towards myself and other
Officers present.    I could tell that quite a lot of
them had been drinking.

You effectively told these two turnstile operators just
to let everybody through? - A. Yes, sir.

Whether they had tickets or not? - A. Yes, sir.
                                      D. GUTCHER


Can you give us any idea what time that was that you did
that? - A. As I said, sir, there were severe problems
outside with people getting crushed up against the
entrance to the turnstiles outside.   I could see over
their heads what sort of situation was developing
outside.   The crowd was pushing forward to get through
the turnstiles.   At one stage there was a young boy of
about 12 held above the crowd's head.   I pulled him
through the turnstiles over the top of the gate, over
the top of the turnstiles.

Yes, Sergeant, I appreciate that.    I am asking you if
you can tell us what time it was that you gave the
instruction to the turnstile operators to let everybody
through willy-nilly? - A. We were despatched to that
area as a serial shortly after 2.30.     I understand
that gate C was opened at 2.50.   It would be between
those times.

You cannot help us any further how long you had been
there before you gave this instruction? - A. Probably
ten or fifteen minutes, sir.

That puts it at about twenty to or quarter. - A. I am
sorry, that was the full time we were there, yes, sir.

Perhaps it does not matter, but I really wanted to know
how long you had been with your serial at the turnstiles
before you gave the instruction to the two turnstile
operators to let anybody through? - A. Having seen what
I saw outside, sir, probably about five minutes.

You had been there about five minutes? - A. Yes, sir.

Had you had any instruction from any more senior Officer
to do anything like this? - A. No, that was a decision I
made, sir.

You made that of your own initiative? - A. Yes, sir.

Why did you make that decision? - A. Because of what I
could see that was happening outside, sir.

What about the other turnstiles in that block?   Do you
know if similar instructions were given to other
turnstile operators? - A. No, sir, I do not.

Were you simply taking responsibility for those two -
numbers 9 and 10? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you ask any of your own Constables to do likewise
with their turnstiles? - A. I did not, sir, no.
                                      D. GUTCHER


You had been there until you heard a message for all
Officers to go to the pitch, is that right? - A. No. At
one point prior to that, sir, I went through the
turnstile to try to relieve the crushing outside.    I
was actually outside the ground when that message came
over.

When you went outside the ground, were any of the larger
gates, the concertina gates, open? - A. I believe they
must have been open by that time, sir, because the crowd
sememed to disappear suddenly.   They certainly did not
come through the turnstiles.

When you got outside, you went through a turnstile
yourself? - A. Yes, I climbed over the gates.

Were there still people outside waiting to come in? - A.
Yes.

But not a crush? - A. Not a crush at that time, sir.

Did you put them into queues? - A. I tried to form them
into queues.   They were still pushing towards the
turnstile gate and I pushed them back.   I was able to
do that because the crowd was not so hectic at that
time.

You then heard a message to go to the pitch? - A. Yes,
sir.

And you did? - A. Yes, sir.

How did you get to the pitch? - A. I went back over the
turnstile gates and just followed Officers who were
running.   We went via the south stand.

What did you see when you got on to the pitch? - A. I
saw that the central area of the Leppings Lane terracing
was very crowded.   At that time there were Officers
already up on the perimeter fencing, pulling people over
the top.

Were there people on the pitch as well and on the
perimeter track? - A. Yes, sir.

Where did you go to? - A. I came down the steps of the
south stand and into gate 2, into pen 2.

Was that gate open at the time? - A. Yes, it was open
for me to enter.

Do you mean to say it was specially opened so that you
could enter or that it was already opened and you
                             42




                                            D. GUTCHER


     entered by it? - A. I do not know, sir.    I can only
     recall that it was open.

Q.   It was open and you went in.   Now what was the
     situation like in pen 21   Were you able to get where
     you wanted to go readily? - A. There was plenty of space
     in pen 2.

Q.   Where did you go to? - A. I went to a position at the
     bottom part of pen 2.   That is, nearest the perimeter
     fencing.

Q.   Near the railings with pen 3? - A. The railings which
     separate pen 2 from pen 3.

Q.   What did you do then? - A. I assisted in pulling people
     over from pen 3.

Q.   Where did you stand?   Did you stand actually on the
     floor of pen 2 or did you hoist yourself up on to the
     railings? - A. No.   There is a horizontal bar, probably
     about 6" from the bottom of the railings.   I stood on
     that.

Q.   Yes.   Were you able to help people over? - A. The
     railings are about 6' in height.   I placed my left hand
     on top of the   metal spikes and pulled people over in
     that fashion.    I was conscious of the metal spikes
     sticking up and I protected the under-side of each one
     that came over with that part of my arm.

Q.   Were these people who were in the corner of pen 3, the
     bottom right hand corner looking at it from the tunnel
     that you were   pulling over? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Were they on the ground or were there people laid out
     below them? - A. At that time, sir, I could not see
     anybody laid on the floor at all.   All the people were
     standing as far as I could see.

Q.   How many people did you help over in this  fashion, have
      you any idea? - A. Probably in the region of 20, sir.
      Initially there were several came over and then I was
      able to pick out the ones who were clearly in distress.

Q.   Did you get assistance from people in pen 3? - A. Yes,
      sir, I did.    At this point I would like to say that
      there has been, I understand, criticism at this Inquiry
      of Liverpool supporters in general.    It is clear, and I
      think it should be remembered, there were people in that
      pen who were genuine supporters who had arrived there
      early of their own choice.    They were the innocent
      people in that pen, sir.    They were at the front of the
      pen.   They had been there since earlier.    They were
                                      D. GUTCHER


the innocent people who suffered because of people who
arrived later, again by their own choice.

You had assistance from some of these people in pen 3 to
get people out? - A. A lot of the men at the front of
pen 3, sir, acted very, very courageously.   They had no
thought for their own safety.   When I was shouting to
them to pass me people who were clearly in distress they
had no thought for their own safety.   They turned
around and looked for whoever I was pointing to and
passed me those people.

When you had takenabout twenty or so people out, you
saw what was below on the ground? - A. That was when I
got my first view, sir, of people in a pile.

What did you do then when you saw the pile of bodies on
the ground? - A. I clearly remember a woman's face.
She was laying entangled in the pile with her head
hanging backwards.   She was on her back.   Her face was
purple and I then realised I had got to get into that
pen to get to that woman.

Can you help us about this: how far along pen 3 did
this pile of bodies extend? - A. As far as I could see,
sir, it was ten to twelve feet back up the terracing
from the perimeter fence.   It seemed to be as far as I
could see along the length of the fence.

Was it right as far as the corner against which you
were? - A. Certainly, sir, yes.

Did it extend beyond the gate in the perimeter fence? -
A. At that time I could not see the gate, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   When you said bodies were
ten to twelve feet back from the fence, do you mean in
the area of ten to twelve feet from the fence or the
pile was ten... - A. I am sorry, sir.   From the
perimeter fence backwards up the terracing.   That is
what I meant.

In that whole ten foot band, is that what you are
saying? - A. From the perimeter fencing, sir, the pile
stretched ten to twelve feet upwards up the terracing.

It did not start ten to twelve feet back?   It went up
ten to twelve feet back, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

      MR. PHILLIPS:   Did you notice at this stage
whether any part of the crush barriers were missing,
broken? - A. I did not see that at that time, sir.
                                      D. GUTCHER


What was obscuring your view of the nearest crush
barrier to your corner? - A. The crowd, sir.

There was still a crowd of people on top of, or in front
of that first crush barrier? - A. Yes, sir.   I had only
relieved some of the crowd.

Among those people you could see immediately in front of
you, in this ten to twelve foot wide strip, as it were,
did you see any who appeared to you to be alive? - A. At
that time, sir, the first person I saw was the girl's
face.   That face was purple and I just had to get over
that fence to get to her.   That is all I can recall.




              Q. You immediately reacted
                            45

                                                  D. GUTCHER


Q.   So you immediately reacted to that? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And did you in fact manage to climb over the fence? - A. Yes,
     sir.

Q. With assistance from someone in the crowd? - A. Someone to my
   right I asked to cup his hands to accommodate my foot so i
   could climb the fence.

Q.   When you were in pen 3 were you able to get a better   view of
     what the situation was? - A. Yes, there were clearly    I
     realised at that time dead bodies in that pile.

Q.   And did you see also there were people who were still alive? -
     A. There were people.   There were two people immediately as i
     went over.   It seems in hindsight now a strange thing to do to
     go for the girl that was purple.   When I got over the fence
     there were two supporters giving mouth to mouth resuscitation
     in a fashion to a supporter laid on the terracing steps.    I
     went to them.   1 got down and I tried to feel a pulse in the
     person's neck.   I couldn't feel a pulse.  They were not at
     that time giving cardiac massage.   I started cardiac massage
     on that person.   I gave him lung inflations and he did not
     respond.   In actual fact the man was sick in my mouth,   i
     turned him, over, cleared the vomit from his mouth, and as I
     did I tried to lay him laterally on the terracing steps
     because to give heart massage you have got to have something
     underneath that is solid.   I gave further heart massage and
     mouth to mouth and the youth did not respond.   1/ left him
     and went to the pile to try and find someone else.

Q.   You had seen, in other words, to start with, two young men who
     were trying their best with this person but who didn't have
     the skills to do it in the way you knew it should be done? -
     A . Yes.

Q.   Is this what you are telling us? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Did you try to do anything about the .removal of bodies and
     people from this pen when you were there on the inside? - A.
     Yes, sir.  I knew there would be a gate in the perimeter fence
     somewhere.  I looked   for it and I couldn't see it, but as far
     as I recall at that time I believe the gate was shut.

Q. Have you any idea what time this would be? - A. When I
   originally made my statement I had no recollection of times at
   all.  Subsequent to that, having viewed the video I can say it
   was 2-minutes-past-3 when I came down the steps of the South
   Stand, 3-minutes-past-3 when I went into pen 2.  Having viewed
   the video as it progresses I was probably in pen 2 for 10 to
   12 minutes, and then went into pen 3.

Q. It is clear from the  evidence we have from the video and
   elsewhere that the gate to pen 3 was very clearly open at that
   time. - A. Yes, sir, that is right.

Q. But you say you have a recollection of it being closed? - A.
I
                                   46

                                                          D. GUTCHER


         As I thought at that time I couldn't see an open gate.  That
         gate, as you are probably well aware, opens outwards.  It is
         hinged on the left-hand side, and from my position it could
         well have been open, but all I would have seen was the mesh of
         an open door.
                                                                            i
                                                                            \

    Q. It might have looked closed? - A. That is correct, sir.

    Q. I think you shouted to both a Constable and to Chief
       Superintendent Nesbit? - A. That is right, sir.

    Q. Who were both at the fence at the time? - A. Yes.

    Q. Asking them to open the gate? - A. I shouted to them to open
       the gate and to get some Policemen in to form some sort of a
       line to pull the bodies out.

    Q . Of course, the gate was o p e n . - A . Y e s .

    Q. Then did you have a line of Policemen or assistance from
       Policemen in the pen to get people out? - A. I eventually got
       to the gate because I found one in the pile that was obviously
       breathing.  My only thought at that time because of the crowd
       pushing behind was that it was ineffective attempting to give
       first-aid inside that pen at that time.  My thought was to get
       the people out on to the football field where I knew they
       would receive better assistance either from Police, ambulance,
       St. John's.  I had got one lad that was quite clearly still
       breathing from the pile, and dragged him towards where I
       thought the gate would be.  By the time I got there the gate
       was, as I saw clearly open.  Unfortunately at that time there
       was a pile of bodies directly under the gate, and it was
       necessary to remove them to get to the gate.

    Q.   And I think with Mr. Nesbit and other Officers      you did just
         that, did you? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. I think you injured your knee, did not you, in the course of
       doing this? - A. Yes, sir.  At this time I would also like to
       say there were supporters in my opinion unnecessarily still
       running forward and trying to scale the fence.  At that time
       there was no crushing.

    Q.   Was anything to stop them going back   could you see towards the
         tunnel? - A. I didn't look behind me at all, sir.    At one
         point part of what I immediately realised was the broken crush
         barrier which I viewed afterwards, at that time I knew it was
         part of a crush barrier because of the colour of it, and it
         was thrown from a couple of feet behind me over the perimeter
         fence at the Police.

    Q. And this is before all the bodies had all been taken out of
       pen 3? - A. Yes.  While the rescue effort was still going on,
       sir.  There were other supporters running forward from behind
       me trying to scale the fence, using the pile of bodies, as
       Sergeant Morton said earlier, as steps to get themselves up on
       to the fence, and in my opinion that was totally unnecessary
                           47

                                                D. GUTCHER


   at that time.   It was just hindering the effort to get people
   out.

Q. I think you did get some bodies out and yourself went out on
   to the pitch.  Is that right? - A. Yes, sir.  I had twisted or
   sprained my knee in the efforts, and did in fact go out on to
   the field.

Q. But you nevertheless continued as we see from your very full
   and helpful statement, to help to revive those people you
   could? - A. Yes, sir.  I gave heart massage to a supporter
   that was lying on the field that had been brought out.  Two
   doctors came and relieved me with that victim, and i went back
   and rejoined the line directly at gate 3.

Q. At what stage were you first aware that the crush barrier had
   gone? - A. I realised that a crush barrier had broken when i
   saw it come over the top, or part of it at least, come over
   the top of my head and over the perimeter fence on to the
   field.

Q. Before that occurred had you actually seen it? - A. I had not
   seen a broken crush barrier, but I realised what came over was
   part of a crush barrier.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:

Q. Mr. Gutcher, you refer to latecomers as a pejorative.   Can I
   just enquire into this.  Would it   be fair to say from your
   recollection that by 2.35 you were behind the turnstiles? - A.
   It would be about that time, sir, yes.

Q. And by that time the spectators coming through the turnstiles
   were in a distressed condition due to crushing outside? - A.
   As it progressed, yes, sir.

Q. By that time, when you arrived at the turnstiles, you said
   people were coming through distressed? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can we just examine that.  The people who were coming through
   the turnstiles at 2.35 were presumably those who had been
   queueing up or in the mass waiting to get through the
   turnstiles during the period before you arrived? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. So those people will have arrived at the ground something like
   at the very latest 2.20, 2.25 or even 2.15? - A. The crowd
   outside that I could see was still arriving and still pushing
   on to the crowd already trying to get through the turnstiles.

Q. Let us deal with it stage by stage,  I. am not going to be
   unfair to you.  We will deal with that later.   The ones who
   were actually coming through complaining about the Police,
   they had clearly not been latecomers, had they? - A. Well, it
   depends what you mean by latecomers. They were certainly
   there at 2.35.
A   '




                                  48

                                                       D. GUTCHER


        Q. They must have been there long before 2.35 to get into the
           ground by 2.35? - A. I don't know, sir.

        Q. Well, you saw the mass outside? - A. I was only there from
           about 2.35 onwards.

        Q. When you you looked outside, unless the whole of that mob that
           you saw packing the turnstile area had arrived all in a group
           30 seconds before, it follows that t^ose at the front must
           have been there for some considerable time? - A. I don't know.

        Q. Those who were actually arriving at 2.35 in the ordinary way,
           how long would you have expected at an ordinary Semi-Final
           they would have taken to get into the ground? - A. I don't
           know, sir.

        Q. Have you been to Semi-Finals before? - A. Not many, sir, no.

        Q. Have you done any Semi-Final work before? - A. Some good years
           ago, yes, sir.

        Q. How long would you normally have expected spectators to take
           to get into the ground once they had arrived? - A. I have
           never worked on a turnstile outside the ground, sir, so I
           would not know.

        Q. Did you know the fans had been told to be in their seats by
           quarter-to? - A. I did not know that, sir, no.

        Q. Would you have regarded somebody coming at 2.30 reckoning on
           getting into the ground in 15 minutes and being in their place
           15 minutes before kick-off as a latecomer? - A. If I gave an
           opinion on that I would only give it as a layman.

        Q. You have given an opinion, because what you have said and as
           we know from bitter experience in this Inquiry, a casual word
           spoken carelessly from where you sit tends to find its way
           into a headline which is inflammatory and upsets people.
           You have said that trouble was caused by latecomers.
           Would you like to consider that or reconsider it? Would
           you really call somebody who arrives half-an-hour before
           the kick-off a latecomer? - A. For a match of that
           importance, yes, I would.

        Q. On that footing, to encourage people to come only 15 minutes
           before, that is to get into their seats 15 minutes before, you
           would regard as rather dodgy advice? - A. I would not know
           about that advice, sir.

                         Cross-Examined bv MR. JACKSON:

        Q. On the same point, Sergeant, you were in the gymnasium about
           2.30 and were asked to go to the Leppings Lane turnstiles? -
           A. Yes, sir.

        Q. Do I assume correctly that you were told there was problems
           with the crowd outside? - A. Yes, sir.
                           49

                                                 D. GUTCHER



Q. Can you assist on this point.  How were you going to assist
   the problem of the crowd outside deputed to go inside the
   turnstiles? - A. That is were we were deputed to go, sir.
   That is where we were told to go.

Q. I d o n ’t for a moment suggest you were not. Imerely wonder
   that when the reserves were called up to the turnstiles as
   they were from all kinds of places, what were you going to do
   to speed up the flow through the turnstiles? - A. How can I
   comment on why that decision was made, sir? It was not made
   by myself.

Q. So you simply went to carry out duties inside the turnstiles.
   Those duties we understand normally meant searching people who
   came through? - A. No, sir, we were specifically told there
   was a problem with the crowd outside.

Q. But if there is a problem with the crowd outside how could
   you help on the inside? - A. I think at that time from what I
   saw it would have been impossible to help outside.

Q. So you were just taken from the gymnasium to   the area where
   there was a problem and deputed a task which   you thought would
   have no assistance to solve the problem that   existed? - A.
   That is why at the first opportunity I had I   climbed over the
   turnstile to get into that crowd.

Q. That is a point I was coming to.  When you realised the
   situation that was obvious and had been for some time, you
   tried to do something outside? - A. Yes, sir.

                   Cross-Examined by MR.   MULLER:

Q. Just one matter, Sergeant.    When you were working for a long
   time at the radial fence, about 10 minutes, taking bodies
   over from inside, would there have been any advantage if that
   radial fence had been removed at that time? - A. Again, sir,
   that would be my layman’s opinion, but if that fence had not
   been there    the crowd would have been able to move sideways,
   yes, certainly.

Q. I follow that.   If somebody had been there and been able to
   remove the fence once the disaster had occurred - do you
   follow;  that is what I am asking about - would that have been
   any advantage, because you were actually pulling people over?
   - A. Yes, I was.

Q. You may or may not realise if it would have been practically
   to remove that fence very quickly, would that have been an
   advantage? - A. Certainly, sir, yes.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Gutcher, if you have mentioned it forgive me, but in your
   evidence as you wrote your statement you made areference to
   hearing some messages come over the Tannoy system? - A . Y e s .
                             50


                                                    D. GUTCHER



Q. Whilst you were at the turnstiles did you hear anything come
   over the Tannoy system   at all? - A. No, sir.

Q. You don't recall it? -     A. No, sir.

Q.    However, when    you were on the ground did you hear some
     messages come over the Tannoy system? - A. On the ground
     where, sir?

Q.   After you had come into the ground, after you were in the
     pitch area? - A. As I recall, sir, the Tannoy message I recall
     hearing, I can't be sure it was a Tannoy message, but the
     message I recall hearing was as we were running from the
     turnstile area into the South Stand.

Q. Do you remember what the message was? - A. No, sir.        It was
   addressed to the crowd, I think, in the main.

Q.   And to the best of your recollection it    was addressed to a
     particular area of the crowd, was it? -    A. I am sorry, sir,
     y e s . It was addressed to the Leppings    Lane crowd inthose
     terraces to stop pushing. I believe it      was a message similar
     to that effect.

Q. It is very difficult to be precise. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. But you have a firm recollection of hearing something come
   over the Tannoy system? - A. Something like that, yes.

Q.   At the time you were running to do what you could, advising
     people in the Leppings Lane terraces to stop pushing and to
     relent and go back? - A. That, coupled with me seeing when I
     got inside the stadium Police on the fence pulling people over
     the fence, that coupled with what I had heard made me
     immediately realise it was not a problem with a pitch
     invasion, it was something more than that.

Q. Officer, if it is at all possible to stand back from what
   happened that day, is it right on reflection that the events
   in many instances have merged and your recollections of time
   and sequence may have become distorted? - A. The times I have
   given here today, sir, certainly are correct, because I have
   given those times having had the benefit of viewing the video.




                                      /Q. So what you have done
                           51



                                                    D. GUTCHER

Q. So what you have done is to try and reconstruct from your
   own recollection sorting it out with the assistance of
   other material, the video?.r»A.* Iffiien I made that statement
   I had not seen the video obviously.      Since that time the
   evidence I have given to the Inquiry to assist the Inquiry
   I have tried to make as accurate as possible.

Q. At the time that you were at the turnstiles you say you
   could see that people were coming through and in an answer
   to Mr. Hytner you said that as it progressed something
   occurred.  Now, as what progressed? - A. As the people
   were coming through at one stage I got into a skirmish
   with one particular youth who wanted to fight.  He was
   that aggressive he wanted to take his fury out on the
   first person he saw as he got out of that crush and that
   just happened to be myself.

Q. Were you able to see what was happening outside the turn­
   stiles? - A. Yes, I could quite clearly see what was
   happening, with restrictions.

Q. And is it your firm recollection that you saw immediately
   outside the turnstiles a lot of people wanting to come in
   but others who were not under pressure comingand joining
   them at the back? - A. They were still pushing, sir, yes.
   They were at the other side of the Police horses who were
   some distance away.  They were still coming from Leppings
   Lane and still pushing the crowd towards the turnstiles.

Q. So having come through the Police they were running on to
   the backs of those who were waiting to come through the
   turnstiles? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. You saw that, did you? - A. Yes.

        MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you, sir.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you very much, Sergeant.

        MR. COLLINS:    Police Constable Ryan^,please.

        POLICE CONSTABLE MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN Called

                   Examined by   MR. COLLINS:

Q. Mr. Ryan, your full name, please? - A. It is Michael Vincent
   Ryan.

Q. Your duties have, I think, for some time involved being
   in the control room at Hillsborough.   How long have you
   been doing those dutigfef -A. About for the last five years,
   sir.

Q. That means presumably that you have attended not only
ix
                                52


                                                       M. RYAN

        r.diifclne matches but major semi-finals too? - A. I have
        attended all the major matches in that period, yes,,sir.

     Q. You came on duty on the 15th of April of this year at
        8 o'clock in the morning, I think? -A. That is correct.

     Q. And that was with Sergeant Goddard? - A. Correct, sir.

     Q. Did you check at that time and test the public address
        system? - A. Shortly after that time, yes.

     Q. Yes.  And was it all working properly? - A. Working
        properly, yes.

     Q. I think there was one speaker which was being worked on.
        Is that right? - A. There was an engineer present at
        the ground quite near ground control.

     Q. Which speaker was that? Can you remember? - A. Yes, I
        can.  If you have been to ground control, if you look from
        Ishe front bench to the left there is the door and it
        is the speaker that was affixed to the side of the
        West Stand.

     Q. Side of the West Stand? - A. Side of the West Stand.
        The wall to the side of there.   There is a speaker
        somewhere round about that area.   It might have been -
        yes, somewhere round about there.

     Q. Facing out towards the pitch? - A. I cannot remember
        which way it was pointing, sir, but there was certainly
        a speaker there that he was working on.

     Q. Yes.  Did you also check the cameras? - A. The cameras
        were switched on at that time, yes.

     Q. There was a problem with one of them.  Is that correct?
        - A. That is correct,yes.  There was an apparent fault
        on the camera to the West Stand, West terraces.  That is
        the ....

     Q. Where is it mounted? -A. I think that is the one that is
        mounted on the electronic scoreboard.

     Q. Yes. Is that roughly where the Usher is pointing? - A.
        Yes.   I think if I can remember correctly it is on the
        right-hand side, the lower side of the scoreboard.
        Sorry.   Down.  That is it, yes.

     Q. Yes.  And it is the one that gives you a view, is it, of
        the terraces and the West Stand .... - A. That is correct.

     Q. Is that a Police or a ground camera? - A. As far as I am
        aware all the cameras there are the ground cameras.

     Q. I see.   What was the problem with that camera as you can


                       !
                                               M. RYAN

recall? - A. The picture was very distorted.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very what? - A. Distorted, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Distorted.   Thank you.

     MR. COLEINS:   Was the fault mended or not? - A. I
contacted the engineer myself.

That is Mr. Holdsworth? - A. Roger Holdsworth, yes.   He
attended and came out and worked on that camera for some
tim<e. Quite how long he was there I do not know.. He
was certainly there working on it for some considerable
time.  The picture was never satisfactory as far as I
recall that day although that was not my specific duty
to look at that.

I follow that.  When you say the picture as far as you
can see was not satisfactory what was wrong with it?
- A. It was not as clear as you would hope the picture
to be.

Did that mean the zoom facility was rendered in any way
inoperative or less adequate than normal or .... - A.
As far as I recall the zoom was operative.   It was the
quality of the picture that was the problem.

I see.  The other ones were all working all right though,
were they? - A. Apparently so, yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That camera would be able to
rove, would it? - A. Yes, sir.

Would it take in the whole of the pitch? What was it
principally directed towards? - A. It is principally
directed towards the West Stand terraces.

I see. - A. But it can rove round as well.  In actual
fact the cameras were operated during that day by
Police Constable Bichard who obviously knows the /full
capabilities of those cameras better than I do.

     MR. COLLINS:   Yes.   Well, I will ask him about
that aspect of the matter.   What in fact were your
duties during that day? - A. My duties were to deal
with telephone conversations, telephone calls coming
into the ground and also the public address.

Just dealing first of all with the telephone It is right,
I think, that there are three, three telephones? - A. Yes,
that is correct.  There is one which gives us direct
contact with the club.

That is an internal system, is it? - A. An  internal
system, yes, all the internal telephone extensions.
                                              M. RYAN

There is a Police line which gives contact to the Police
Stations, as you appreciate, the internal Police telephone
system.

Yes. - A. Also gives us an outside line if we require one
and there is also a direct outside line.

So far as the internal ground telephone is concerned
where can you 'phone from there? Where are the other
extensions? - A. There is a list we have in the control.

I see. - A. Which gives us the extensions of people within
the club.

In particular can you telephone the club's control room
where the club has its videos and more particularly the
monitoring of people coming through the turnstiles? -A.
Yes.

And I think you had a Police Officer in that room, Police
Constable Guest? - A. Correct, yes, sir.

Could you contact him directly through that telephone or
did it go to a club official first? -A. How they operate
in there I am not fully aware but certainly P.C. Guest
is available in that room at that telephone.  There are
club officials in there as well.

What I am getting at is this.  If you were asked to check
on the numbers who had come through the turnstile would
you do it by using that telephone or would you normally
use a radio? - A.We could use either, whichever is
available.  If the telephone is engaged then we also have
a club radio.

Well, which is the primary means from the control room if
you want to check with P.C. Guest for any reason? - A. If
I was to check I would use the telephone.

I see.  But there is also access through the radio, either
a Police radio or a club radio? - A. Yes.  There are a
number of radios kept within the control room.  Do you
want me to describe those, sir?

     MR. COLLINS:   I am not quite sure how much detail
you want about this, sir, because you of course have seen
the layout and so, I think, have most others.  On the
other hand, of course, the public has not.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Perhaps if you could lead
the witness on the various channels which we heard about.

S.   MR. COLLINS:   You are familiar with the radio set­
up, are you? -A. Yes.
                          55


                                                    M. RYAN

Q. Well, in that case can you give a brief indication?
   I want to concentrate on the Police radio for the
   moment. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The Police radio was operating, I think, on channel 25.
   Is that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. N o w } that was a channel which was used, was it, by all
   Officers involved at the ground? - A. That was the
   channel designated for uniform Officers engaged in
   football duties that day, yes.

Q. Would that include traffic or just Officers at and
   around the ground? - A. There are mobiles around the
   ground, not necessarily road traffic mobiles, but
   our Police mobiles around the ground would operate on
   that channel as well.

Q. That channel 25, was that designed as a talk through
   channel? - A. There is a talk through facility on
   that particular set, yes.




                               / Q. How was it
6X                                  56

                                              M. RYAN


     Q. How was it designed to be used?  I know there were problems
        later in the afternoon but what I want to get at is what
        was the system that was supposed to be in operation on
        that channel? - A. The radio can work in two wayf.  You can
        have either talk-through facility on or off.  If the talk-
        throughcfacility is off then it means that Ground Control
        can talk direct to other Officers or another Officer outside
        the ground.
     Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  That overrides anybody else?
             - A. I would not say it "overrides" sir.  I would not know
             what the technical details would be on that, quite frankly,
             but if we were to call on that radio if somebody elfce was
             talking, I don't know what would happen, but if we shout
             somebody from Ground Control on the radio everyone else
             can hear what we are saying.  When he comes to reply the
             only person that can hear the reply or the only people that
             can hear the reply is in Ground Control.

     q   .        MR. COLLINS:   If you are operating and getting in
             touch with an individual Officer, he is replying to you,
             does that mean that anyone else who may want to try to talk
             to you can't at that moment? - A. I don't know what would
             happen under those circumstances.   I have a feeling that
             we might get cut off if somebody else tries to interrupt a
             transmission.   I have a feeling that that could cause
             problems.
     q    . it may be, Mr. Ryan, that it would be better to ask some­
            body else about these details because it seems that you
            don't have a full knowledge of the technical details?
            - A. No.
     Q. Let me just ask you about what channels existed.   First of
        all there was Channel 25 which was the channel used for
        the uniformed Officers.  What other radio channels were
        available? - A. There was a VHF channel 1 which was the
        designated traffic channel for that which would be
        connected to cars.  Operations Room from headquarters
        would be monitoring that channel.  We also had a set
        directly contacting us with the Operations Room.

     Q. When you say you "had a set" was that a different channel
        or was that still with VHF 1? * A. We have a VHF set in
        the Control Room,, that monitors that Channel 1.

     Q. You have direct contact with Headqaurters through that?
        - A. Yes, Headquarter's Operation Room, yes.

      Q. I think there was also a CID channel that was in use?
         - A. Yes, that is right.  They were on Channel 19, that
         is DHF.
      Q. You also mention in your statement Channel 35 Fl control f
         What is that? - A. Yes, each Police Station has a
         designated channel to operate on. We did have a facility
         in there with a spare radio to go through to Hammerton
         Road Police Control if need be.
                                 M. RYAN


In fact Superintendent Marshall at one stage made use of
that, I think, switching from 25 to 35 to go straight to
the Station Control? - A. I don't know if he did but he
certainly would be able to given the good facilities on
his radio, yes.

I think you also, is that all the Police channels that are
relevant? - A. Yes.

There was also the Club radio system, I think? - A. That
is correct.
You had access to that, did you? - A. To a radio set in
the Control Room.

Were you aware of the Club Officials who had radios and^
whom you could contact if you wanted to? - A. No, I don't
have a list.
Is there a list in the Control Room as far as you are aware?
- A. Not as far as I was aware, no. We do know through
experience that there are certain Club Officials who do have
them.
What, you would ask for a particular individual if you wanted
to contact someone on the Club radio? - A. Yes.

You would ask for Mr. Lock or Mr. Thorpe or whoever? - A.
Yes.
Just before we go on, Mr. Ryan, can I ask you this:  y°u
say that at the early part of the day, I think round 9ish,
you spoke to Operations Room and Dl Control and checked
with them regarding any reported movement of supporters
or any problems or points of interest there may be? — A.
Yes.
What are you referring to there? - A. When we open control
we contact everybody that will have some interest in the
operation that is going on. We ring Operations Room
to let everybody know that we are operational and it is
to ask if there is anything that has happened probably
overnight or prior to us opening the Control Room, if
anything of interest to us has happened.

Dl Control would give you what sort of information? - A.
Dl Control, West Bar Control, they have information
regarding the Railway Station and perhaps monitor any
supporters that might arrive early in the Sheffield
City Centre.
 That is what that was about? - A. Yes, it also gives us
 a check on their telephone extensions that they are
 working from.
                             58

                                       M. RYAN


Q. Now during the course of the morning and up to lunchtime
   I think you received at Control a number of reports both
   from Police, and some from the public too, about individual
   incidents involving fans of one sort or another.  Is
   that right? - A. Yea, that is correct.

Q. Was there then a direct line from the public to the Control
   Room? - A. No, there is no direct public telephone.  They
   would have to go through probably Hammerton Road Police
   Station to get through to us.

Q. I was wondering why complaints from the public were fchaanelled
   through to you? - A. I don't know the answer to that, sir.
   I have included it in my statement.

Q. I see that you say that they were but I wondered ....  I
   mean that seems on the face of it to clutter up your ....
   A. Yes, it does.
Q. Can you think of any reason Why that should have been done.
   That is all I am asking? - A. Unless they were that inundated
   with calls at that particular time that they had  to pass
   the relevant ones on to us at the ground, other than that
   I don't know.  I assume they perhaps did not know who was
   on the switchboard at the time.

0. Anyway, were these complaints channelled through to you at
   a fairly early stage? - A. Yes, I did not notice any times,
   I must admit, but they came through.

Q. What I am getting at is do you know whether there were any
   such calls that came through at the time of the build-up
   towards the kick-off between quarter-past-2 and 3? - A.
   Any of those calls get through?

Q. Yes? - A. I could not recall any particular ones to be
   honest, no.
Q. I want to come forward now please to about 10, quarter-past-2,
      up to that point it was busy, I think, but not abnormally
      so, that is the traffic in the Control Room? - A. It was
      very busy but we expect to be very busy at an event of that
      size.
Q.    That is what I meant by "not abnormally".    It was what
      you expected for an event of that size? - A. Yes, it is
      comparable to my experience for my job, yes.

 Q.   Did you at about quarter-past-2 look out and appreciate
      that the Nottingham Forest Supporters seemed to be coming
      in pretty well but that the Liverpool areas were stilly
      fairly empty? - A. I would not have said "fairly empty
      but there was certainly spaces in all parts of the ground.

 Q. Sorry, that was my word.  You tell me what the position
    was at the Liverpool end? - A. That was probably the last
                                    M. RYAN


time I consciously looked around the ground due to the
build-up and volume of work, but I did notice that the
Nottingham Forest end was fuller than the Liverpool areas.

Were you aware at all of the unevenness of the build-up
on the Liverpool terraces? - A. No, I did not particularly
notice that.
Now I think you began to be aware, did you not, of the
build-up at the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Could you see the T.V. monitors? - A. The monitors are mounted
above the head of the bench where we sit. Where I am you
have got to deliberately look up to see them.  It was very
rare I actually saw them but I did notice round about 2.3u
there started to be a build-up of the crowds.

I think at about this time too, the radio transmission and
reception began to be rather poor.  Is that correct? - A.
That is correct.  How it was brought to my attention I
do not recall, but I do remember that I became aware there
was a fault on the radio.

I think you became aware of a civilian member of the
communications department, that is the Police communications
department, Mr. Sanderson, coming up to Ground Control?
- A. Yes, that is correct.

I think it may be more sensible, may it not, to ask
Sergeant Goddard about this aspect rather than yourself.
Am I right? - A. I can explain what I saw.

You were not yourself directly concerned with operating
the radio, as I understand it at this stage, or were you?
- A. Not directly.  Obviously if I received a message via
the telephone that required passing over the radio and
then rather than duplicate effort and pass the message on
to Sergeant Goddard I would pass the message over the
radio.
 Perhaps just tell us very briefly and quickly what you
 saw in relation to Mr. Sanderson's efforts? - A. Mr. Sanderson
 apparently picked up outside the ground that there was a
 fault on the radio.  He came in. He informed us of the
 situation.  He checked one or two items. We had a spare
 set located underneath the bench. . He changed the radio
 and changed the various adaptors.   The new microphone was
 subsequently tested.  That apparently did not work at the
 first try. We then changed to talk-through facility on
 that radio using another radio that we had in there.




                              /Q.      thereafter ....
                                       M. RYAN



Thereafter you were limited to talk-through? - A. Yes,
but we were on talk-through on the other radio prior to
that.

You did not have the facility which you had had to over­
ride, assuming such a facility existed? - A. We could
have switched it up as well.

Whatever the reason, from then on only talk-through was
used, is that correct? - A. As far as I recall, sir.

I suppose that has a problem that if everyone talks at
once it could be difficult to understand messages? - A.
Only one person can speak at any one time on the radio.

If people try to talk at once does that not clog up the
airways? - A. Yes.

Did that happen as time wore on, or cannot you help about
that? - A. I do know the airway channel became very
congested, yes.   There was a great volume of traffic.

Mr. Ryan, at about this time were you aware again of the
build-up at the turnstiles on the monitors? - A. Yes,
sir.   The reason why I became aware of that was I had to
move out of the way for Mr. Sanderson to get in at the
spare radio.   I literally had to move out of my seat
backwards and I think it was probably round about that
time I became aware of the great volume outside.

We know from other evidence it was about 2.40 to 2.41
that Mr. Sanderson came to mend the radios and he did it
between about 2.40 and 2.45.   I am giving very rough
times.   Does that accord with your recollection? - A.
Yes.   I have great difficulty in recalling times.
Events were such in the Control Room, the volume of work
we had to get through, calls, radio messages, time really
to me was...

You obviously have considerable experience and knowledge
of crowds of semi-finals and generally at Hillsborough.
Had you ever seen in your experience such a build-up
outside those gates? - A. Never.

Did you form any opinion about whether it was going to be
possible to get them all in before three o'clock? - A.
No, I never...   It was one thing that really never
crossed my mind.   I was busy doing what I was doing.

I think you were also aware that the turnstiles seemed to
be operating more slowly than normal? - A. Yes, I did
note that.   There was a large crowd outside and whether
I noticed it or whether somebody else pointed it out I do
                                       M. RYAN


not really know, but it seemed to me that few people
seemed to be coming through the turnstiles that I could
see.

Were you asked, or did you at any stage as this build-up
occurred, contact PC Guest to ask about numbers? - A. I
do not recall speaking to him at all, sir.

Did you use the telephone at all to contact anyone in the
ground? - A. I may well have done, but I do not recall
any specific conversations.   I must say I do not
remember speaking to anyone in Ground Control, the Club's
Control.   That is not to say I did not take any messages
from them that they were passing on to other people.

That may be, but it follows from what you have told us
that you were never instructed to get in touch with the
Club Control in order to get any information from them? -
A. No.

Or, indeed, to give them any information? - A. Not as far
as I a m ...

Let's come to the tannoy.   Up until this point, and I am
talking about the time the technician was there, had you
been asked to, or had you given any message over the
tannoy system? - A. No.   When the engineer was there the
ground was empty.

No, I mean when Mr. Sanderson was there at 2.40 or
thereabouts. - A. No doubt I passed a number of messages.
I cannot recollect all of them.   The general use of the
public address is for perhaps vehicles that are causing
obstructions, this kind of thing.   I may have passed one
or two of those.   The specific address I believe you are
referring to is one that has been drawn to my attention
that I made roundabout two o'clock or 2.15 to supporters
on the Leppings Lane terracing.

There has been considerable confusion in the evidence as
to whether any tannoy messages were made at any time.
That is why I am asking you whether you can recall making
any before 2.40 first of all.   The period up to 2.40 - I
am not interested in messages about cars blocking the way
- any tannoy message directed to fans in the ground to do
anything at all, can you recall? - A. Yes.

What message can you recall? - A. Roundabout 2.15 I was
requested to speak to supporters in the Leppings Lane
terracing to ask them to move away from entrances.

To move away from entrances? - A. Yes, the entrances into
the terracing.
                                       M. RYAN


Which entrances are those?   Do you mean the mouths of
the tunnels? - A. The mouths of the tunnels, yes.

Who asked you to send this message? - A. I have no
recollection of that.   It was somebody in Control.

What did you say, can you remember? - A. I would not like
to recall my exact words but I would think they would be
something to the effect, "A Police message to Liverpool
supporters on the Leppings Lane terraces.   Would you
please move away from the entrances.   Please move away
from the entrances to allow people in from behind.”

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Are we talking about inside
the ground? - A. Inside the ground.

      MR. COLLINS:   This was about 2.15? - A. As near as
I recall.

About the time, you told us, when you had looked at the
terraces? - A. Yes, it would be roundabout that time.

Did you look because of what you had been told to do or
did you look independently of the message? - A. I do not
know whether one followed the other to be honest.

Am I right in thinking there is a facility on the tannoy
to use only some of the speakers?   That is to say, to
direct messages to a particular part? - A. That is
correct.

Did you do that? - A. Yes.

Which speakers did you use? - A. The ones   to theLeppings
Lane terraces, the west standterraces.

How many times did you sendout this message? - A.     As I
recall, once or twice.

Did it have any apparent effect, or don't you know? - A.
Not as far as I recall, but I do not know.   I was not
asked to pass the message again.

That was a message at about 2.15.   What was the next
message you can recall sending out over the tannoy, and
again I am not interested in moving parked cars? - A. The
next was a series of messages to Liverpool supporters at
the Leppings Lane turnstiles.

When were these? - A. It was at the time when the crowd
started to build-up.   Somebody asked me to pass that
message out.
                                         M. RYAN


Who is "somebody"? - A. It would be an Officer within
Control.

Was this before, during or after the presence of
Mr. Sanderson? - A. I think that would be after.

What was the message you sent out? - A. I announced "A
Police message to the Liverpool supporters at the
Leppings Lane turnstiles.    Would you please stop
pushing.    There are supporters being crushed at the
turnstiles.    Would you please stop pushing."

How many times did you send out that message? - A. A
large number of times I passed that message over the
public address.   Several times.   Many times.

Are we talking about 5, 10, 20, 50? - A. Five to ten.

Did you limit that to the speakers at the turnstiles
themselves? - A. Yes, to the turnstiles outside.

You can limit to the Leppings Lane turnstiles, can you? -
A. You can speak to any section of the ground
independently.   The facility will split into the four
sections of the ground, north, south, east or west.

That I can follow, but is there also a split for outside
as well? - A. Yes.

Did you gather whether your message appeared to have had
any effect? - A. I can only say no, it did not have any
effect.

Were you aware of a request to open the gates?   Did you
hear that? - A. Yes, in between passing the public
address messages and obviously the other things that came
up.   I was aware that a request had come over to open
the gates.

You were aware I imagine - and I am not going to ask you
this in detail because we have gone through it with
others - of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield eventually
agreeing to open the gates? - A. Yes.

Can you remember the way in which he made that request,
or gave that order? - A. No.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   If you moving on to
something else we will adjourn and resume at one-fifteen.

                (Luncheon adjournment)
