360                                      QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                [m i j



      1891
                                         [CROW N CASES R E SER V ED .]
 Jan.    24.
                                           T H E Q U E E N v. VREONES.
                C rim in al L a w — Indictable Misdemeanour— A ttem pt to pervert I.U Course of
                           Justice— Preparing False Evidence to be used in A rbitration
                   T h e defendant was tried and convicted upon a count of an indictment
                a leging, in substance, th a t by the terms of a contract for the purchase of a
                cargo of wheat, to be shipped by the sellers from a port in the Black Sea to the
                buyer a t the port of Bristol, it was provided th a t any dispute arising under the
                contract should be referred to two arbitrators, whose award should be 8nal and
                conclusive, and m ight, upon the application of either contracting party be
                m a e a rule of Court in E n g la n d ; th a t the defendant was appointed by the
                sellers to take samples of the cargo upon the arrival of the ship at Bristol; that
                such samples were then taken, and placed in bags sealed with the seals of the
                buyer and seller of the cargo, in accordance with the custom of merchants at
               th e port, and for the purpose of being used as evidence before the arbitrators in
               case an y arbitration was had under th e co n tra c t; th a t the defendant afterwards,
               inten ding to deceive the arbitrators to be appointed under the contract, and
               wrongfully to m ake it appear to them th a t the bulk of the cargo was of better
               qu ality than it really was, so as to pervert the due course of law and justice,
               unlaw fully and designedly removed th e contents of the sealed bags and altered
               their character, and returned to the bags a q u an tity of wheat in a different con­
               dition, and altered in character and value, with intent thereby to pass the same
               off as true and genuine samples of the bulk of the cargo, and th a t afterwards
               th e defendant forwarded the samples so altered to the London Com Trade
               Association, w ith intent that the same should be used as evidence before such
               arbitrators, and thereby to injure and prejudice the buyer, and to pervert the
               due course of law and ju s tic e :—
                  Held, th a t the count stated an indictable misdemeanour at common law.

                   C a s e stated by Denman, J., for th e opinion of the Court for
               th e C onsideration of Crown Cases Reserved.
                  A t th e Bristol A utum n Assizes, 1890, the defendant, Anasta-
               sios Vreones, and his wife, Blanche Vreones, were tried before
               D enm an, J., upon an indictm ent containing four counts. The
               defend an t was found g u ilty upon each count, and his wife was
               acq u itted .
                   T h e first count of the indictm ent alleged that, before the com­
               m encem ent of the offence thereinafter m entioned, one Sidnian
               T hom as Stephens, on behalf of him self and others, trad in g under
               th e nam e, style, and firm of W ait & Jam es, a t Bristol, had e n te re d
               into a contract with certain persons carry in g on business under
    IQ. B.              QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.
                                                                                  361
         ?*“ '          “ d fi™ °> » • S. Sevastopulo 4 Co., f „ , a .
    t‘       “    * ° “ * ° of ” h“ ‘ >>‘™ shipped, or about to l,e - j r - „ -----
   shipped , on b o a r d a vessel d i e d tie WhinfiM, from N o v o ™ .    ?” *
   sislyn the Black Sea to t i e port of Bristol, which said c o n te n t    T“ “ “
   t.               a provision ,h „ , in , h ,,mtof , dl          m-
   oiit of sack contract, tile same should be referred to two a rb itr,
   tors, .h o se award shonld be o.nclnsive .n d binding up„»
   disputing parties, and m ight, o p m a p p ,ic .tio „ of eith er con
   tract, g party, be made , , nIe ot       of         djv].          »

   w                     ‘    J u sli“ in E ” e ,»“ d ;     «•» » < ! »h,p
   lL r L 'ffl, th “ 7       “      " d P° rt ° f B risW " M*rct I5 >
      90, with th e said cargo of wheat, and i t th e n becam e and was
       custom Of m erchants using th e said po rt to t a t . from the
   said cargo sam ple, of the wheat as com posing th e bulk of h ,
  ™ . cargo and, f„ , th e purpose of using th e s lid sam p le, Z ! h ,
  event of a dispute between the buyer an d the seller th e re o f as
  evidence as to th e q u ality of the bulk of th e said car^o in any
  arbitration which m ig h t be taken under th e term s o A h e said

 sen     /    T    SUCh Sampl6S WUh the SeaIs of th e b u y e r and
  eller of such cargo, and forward the same so sealed and secured
 t the offices of the London Corn T rade Association, in ^ L i m e

  .» “ « r ? ’ " ■„ t h y      i o “ d° “ ^ *«d- " p »        .» .h
 afo’ A     h 0r6Sai ’    Sald Samples so seaIed and secured as
 t r l #       T ,6 T i W6re 6VidenCe t0 be Used bef- ^ e arbi-
! ; e ^ S        : 0 ° T     the questi0n “                between the
 sion of th “ ff     , SU Carg° ; th a t a t th e tim e 0f th e com m >s-
   on the offence thereinafter m entioned, one A nastasios Vreones

& Co. to t! k e     T    aP/ ? nted h? the said D • S. Sevastopulo
custom in this^™ 15 T w      %6 ^      Carg°’ in accordance n'ith the
and o T        T              ® m entioned> and on M arch 17 1S90
Li: ;vr other.days bet— that                              ^ -0 « !’
a tn f ° ,     S 1,DqU1Siti0n’ did S° tak e « e h samples, to      hLh
-amples the seals of the buyer and seller were L v                 7
- r d a n c e with the said custom, an d the I S 1 1 ^

■   e S   7
»d t a L e ™ 1
              "b    T“    ” P° ”
                                  10 be ^
                                     S" Cl           as aforesaid ;
. t , r i t " J A^ ‘“ “             “ J                    havin g
  their possession divers, to wit, n inety bags, eaeh c o n t a i n ^
f t Mi




til                                             QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                  [1891]
         362

                 1S91         samples of the said cargo so taken from the said ship W U nfield,
                            ' as aforesaid, and duly sealed as aforesaid, afterwards, to wit, on
         T   he    Q ueen
                   v.         the said 17th day of March, in the year aforesaid, and on divers
             Y   eeo nes.
                              other days and times between that day and the day of the taking
                              of this inquisition, contriving and intending to deceive the said
                              arbitrators so to be appointed as aforesaid, and wrongfully to
                              make it appear to the said arbitrators, and to cause and induce
                              such arbitrators to believe, that the bulk of the said cargo was of
                              better quality than it in fact was, and by fraudulent and deceitful
                               means to cause and induce such arbitrators to give their award
                               in favour of the said D. S. Sevastopulo & Co., so as to pervert
                               the due course of law and justice, unlawfully, knowingly, and
                               designedly did take and remove from the said ninety sealed
                               sample bags the contents thereof, and unlawfully, knowingly,
                               and designedly did alter the character of such contents, and
                               return to such sample bags a quantity of wheat in a different
                               condition, and altered in character and value, with intent thereby
                                to pass the same off as true and genuine samples of the bulk of
                                the said cargo; and, having so altered the character of such
                                samples, did forward the same to the said London Corn Trade
                                Association in such altered condition, with the intent that the
                                same should be used before such arbitrators as aforesaid as such
                                evidence as aforesaid, and thereby to injure and prejudice the
                                said Sidman Thomas Stephens and others, and by the means
                                aforesaid to pervert the due course of law and justice, against
                                the peace of our Lady the Queen, her crown and dignity.
                                      The other three counts charged the defendants with unlaw­
                                 f u l l y uttering the samples as false tokens, whereby Stephens

                                 and others were defrauded and deprived of their just rights, and
                                 with unlawfully uttering them as false tokens, with intent to
                                  defraud Stephens and others, and the arbitrators; but. as no
                                 judgm ent was given upon the second, third, and fourth counts,
                              it is unnecessary to set them out.
                                 The following facts were proved at the trial, and stated in the
                              c a s e :—
                                  On December 11, 18S9, one Stephens, a corn merchant at
                              Bristol, entered into a contract with one Sevastopulo for the
                              purchase of a cargo of wheat, to arrive by SS. Whinfield, consist-
                [1891]      1 Q. B.            QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                       363

I ship W hinfield,          ing in part of “ Azina wheat about as per sample No. 10,” and in          1591
 wards, to wit, on          part of “ Azina wheat about as per sample ‘ Rugby,’ both samples        the Qdeest

 id, and on divers          old crop sealed and in our possession.*’ About half the cargo            v keones.
lay- of the taking          was to consist of each quality. The samples referred to in the
  deceive the said          contract were called the “ standard ” samples.
id wrongfully to               The contract contained the following clauses:—
:ause and induce               “.Difference in quality shall not entitle the buyer to reject
 said cargo was of           except under the award of arbitrators, or the committee of appeal,
ent and deceitful            as the case may be. A ll disputes arising out of this contract,
  give their award           whether between the parties hereto, or between one of them and
  so as to pervert           the trustee in bankruptcy of the other, shall be referred accord­
, knowingly, and             ing to the rule endorsed. Power to either party to make this
 id n b ^ ty sealed          stipulation a rule of Court. Neither party, nor any one claiming
‘u llj ^ P io w in g ly ,    under them, to bring any action until dispute settled by arbitra­
ch contents, and             tion, and it is expressly agreed that the obtaining an award from
:at in a different           either tribunal, as the case may be, shall be a condition precedent
 th intent thereby           to the right of either contracting party to sue the other in respect
 es of the bulk of           of any claim arising out of this contract.”
iharacter of such               B y rule 9, endorsed on the contract: “ W hen buyer requires
adon Corn Trade              arbitration on quality        condition upon samples previously
e intent that the            drawn and sealed, he shall make his claim and nominate his arbi­
  aforesaid as such          trator within fourteen clear days of the final discharge of the
,nd prejudice the            shipment.”
id by the means                E u le 10 provided that “ all disputes arising out of this contract
d justice, against           shall be from time to tim e referred to two arbitrators, one to be
 d dignity,                  chosen by each party in difference, the two arbitrators having
lants with unlaw-            power to call in a third in case th ey shall deem' it necessary.”
rhereby Stephens             The rules further provided for the appointment of arbitrators in
ir just rights, and          the cases of the neglect or refusal of one party to appoint an
 s, w 'li^ in ten t to       arbitrator, or of the death, refusal to act, or incapacity of any one
itor, ^ c u t , as no        or more of the arbitrators, and in other contingencies. A right
nd fourth counts,            of appeal was given to a committee of appeal appointed under
                             the rules of the London Com Trade Association, and various con­
and stated in the            ditions had to be performed by the parties to the contract in
                             order to obtain an arbitration, or to appeal to the committee of
corn merchant at             appeal from the decision of the arbitrators.
rastopulo for the               The standard samples were in this case as usual sealed by the
W hin field, consist-        sellers’ broker in the presence of the buyer’s broker, and kept by •
                   QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                      [1891]

h im ; and on that b eing done, the money provided for by the
contract was paid.
    The W liinfield arrived on March 15, 1890, when, in accordance
with the usual practice, a superintendent (in this case the defend­
ant, A. Yreones) was appointed by the seller, and one Brockman,
the buyer’s under-foreman, by the buyer, to take samples of the
wheat as it came up from the holds. It is unnecessary to describe
the mode in which these samples are ta k e n ; but they are taken
 for the purpose of b eing used as evidence in case any arbitration
 s h o u l d take place as to the quality of the cargo, and are called

the “ arbitration samples.”
   In the present case ninety of these samples were taken— forty-
five of each kind of wheat—and, in the ordinary course, sealed
by the defendant, as superintendent of the seller, and by the
 under-foreman of the buyer in the usual way, and at the same
 time the buyer’s under-foreman, Brockman, took samples for the
 buyer’s use from the same bulk sample from which the samples
 in these ninety bags were taken.
    The fraud alleged in the indictment consisted in the fraudulent
 tampering with these arbitration samples after they were sealed
 by both parties. I t was proved at the trial that the whole of
 these ninety arbitration samples were taken to the house in which
  the Yreones lodged before being sent to London to be kept by
  the London Corn Trade Association in order to be used in evi­
  dence in case of a dispute arising which should be referred to
 arbitration.
    I t was proved that the prisoner Anastasios Yreones, sometimes
 when his wife was present, sometimes when alone, sometimes
 through his wife, whom the jury acquitted as not being aware of
 any intention to defraud, tampered with these arbitration samples
 by pulling down a portion of the tops of the bags through the
 string on the side opposite to the seal, then cleaning the contents
  from°cockles, rye, and small wheat by sifting, picking, and using
  flannel to which the cockles adhered, and in replacing the wheat
  so cleaned in the bags without breaking the seals, so as to pro­
  duce a very much better sample than the standard samples, and
  than any of the other samples taken from the bulk. The motive
  suggested for this conduct was that in case of any dispute arising
                  QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                   365
IQ- B.
ag to the quality of the cargo the purchaser m igh t be defeated 1891
by the production of the samples before any arbitrators who Tbb Queen
might be appointed.                                                   Y bkones.
  No arbitrators were in fact appointed, nor did the purchaser
take any steps in that direction, the reason assigned being that
the arbitration samples as altered having been found on com­
parison superior to the standard sample, and to all the samples
fairly taken by either or both parties, it would have been hopeless
to proceed to arbitration.
   T ie evidence shewed that there was no substantial difference
k ^ ^ n the cargo and the standard sample so far as the wheat
No. 10 was concerned; but as regards the “ R u g b y ” wheat it
was proved that there was an inferiority which would amount
to 112Z. in value in that portion of the cargo as compared with
the standard samples. The arbitration samples, as altered,
shewed wheat of a very superior quality to either the bulk or
 the standard samples of this portion of the cargo, and also, but
 not to the same extent, as regards the wheat of quality No. 10.
   At the end of the case for the prosecution it was urged by the
 counsel for Anastasios that the indictment ought to be quashed
 upon the ground that it contained no charge for which an indict­
 ment for misdemeanour could be supported.
   Denman, J., left the case to the jury, and, upon their finding
 a verdict of guilty against Anastasios Yreones, bound the
 defendant over to come up for judgm ent when called upon.
   The defendant’s counsel moved in arrest of judgm ent in case
 thf^tfhould be necessary.
         questions for the opinion of the Court were, with respect
 to the first count, whether it contained a statement of an indict­
 able misdemeanour, and whether there was evidence in support
 of it.

   C. W . Mathews, for the defendant. The first count of the
 indictment states no criminal offence. There is no averment
 that the evidence was ever tendered or used in any proceeding;
 nor that any legal proceeding was ever in existence in which it
 could be used ; nor that any Court or legal officer was in exist­
 ence before whom it could be used. The averments shew
366                                     QOEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                             [139^

      1891    n o th in g m ore th a n an in te n tio n b y th e d efen d a n t to d e c e iv e in
T he Q ceey   future proceedings, if they should ever be had. There is no act
 Vkeoxe3      stated, which is sufficiently proximate to the offence to make what
              the defendant did criminal. The defendant has done no more
              than put him self in a position to commit a fraud upon the
              contingency occurring of a reference to arbitration as provided
              by the contract. Under the rules endorsed upon the contract
              with respect to arbitration, various steps must be taken by the
              parties in order that the right to refer may occur, and various
              things could be done by either party which would prevent the
              arbitration being heard. In all the cases of indictments
              charging the manufacture or preferring of false evidence, the
              evidence has, in fact, been used before a properly constituted
               Court. I t is conceded that, if the tampering with the samples
              had been done by two or more persons, an indictment against
              them for conspiracy would lie ; but then the criminal offence is
              the agreement to bring about an unlawful result by unlawful
              means. So in indictments for subornation of perjury, it is the
              act of suborning the other person which is criminal. Rex v.
              Crossley ( 1 ) is not against m y contention, because a false oath
              was in fact taken, though the affidavit was never used. The
              offence was in taking the false oath. R ex v. Heath (2) was
              decided on th e same principle. The evidence given at the
              trial was not sufficient to support the first count of the in­
              dictment.
                 Poole, Q.C., ( B ernard Coleridge, with him), for the Crown, was
              not heard.


                 L o k d C o l e r i d g e , C.J.
                                           The first count of the indictment in
              substance charges the defendant with the misdemeanour of
              attempting, by the manufacture of false evidence, to mislead a
              judicial tribunal which m ight come into existence. I f the act
              itself of the defendant was completed, I cannot doubt that to
              manufacture false evidence for the purpose of misleading a
              j udicial tribunal is a misdemeanour. Here, in point of fact, no
              tribunal was misled, because the piece of evidence was not used ;

                     (1) 7 T. E. 315.                                (2) Euss. & By. 184.
j q B             QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                dbl

but I am of opinion that that fact makes no difference; it is           3891
none the less a misdemeanour although the evidence was not th e Qdeks
used. A ll that the defendant could do to commit the offence v BKOne3.
he did. There was a contract for the sale of a cargo of wheat, Lorf
and it provided a mode of settling by arbitration possible dis-          CJ'
 putes which m ight arise. The particular piece of evidence,
 namely, the samples of wheat placed in sealed bags, would be,
 if not absolutely conclusive, of the greatest possible weight in
 determining any dispute as to the quality of the wheat sold.
        contract provided that difference in quality should not
 ^ R itle the buyer to reject except under the award of arbitrators,
  or the committee of appeal, as the case m ight b e; that all
  disputes arising out of the contract should be referred to arbi­
  tration, and that where the buyer required arbitration on
  quality or condition upon samples previously drawn and sealed,
  he should make his claim and nominate his arbitrator within
  fourteen days of the final discharge of the shipment. In accord­
  ance with that stipulation samples were obtained, according to
  the usage, on behalf both of buyer and seller, a n d placed in sealed
   bags, to be sent to London for the purpose of being used by the
  tribunal appointed, if the case went to arbitration, under the
   contract. I t was conceded by counsel for the defendant, and it
   is found in the case, that all that the defendant could do to
  tamper with those samples and corrupt the evidence upon which
   the tribunal was to act he did. H e interfered with the perfec­
  tion of the samples as samples, by making them shew a higher
  ^ fc lity or condition of grain ; and having done this in a most
  ^ R 'er and fraudulent manner, without breaking the seals of the
   bags. the samples were transmitted to the Corn Trade Associa­
   tion in London, to be kept there, and used as evidence in the
  arbitration, in case an arbitration was held, l h e v were not in
   fact so used ; but I am of opinion that the defendant was none
   the less guilty of a punishable offence. I think that an attempt
   to pervert the course of justice is in itselt a punishable misde­
   meanour; and though I should m yself have thought so on the
   grounds of sense and reason, there is also plenty of authority to
   shew that it is a misdemeanour in point of law. There is, of
   course, no case in which the facts are exactly like th ese; hut in
368                                  QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                   [1891]

      1S91        Beg. v. Crossley (1) the principle which applies here was clearly
T he Q ueen
                  laid down.      The defendant in that case was charged with
       r.         making a false affidavit. Lawrence, J., pointed out that it would
  V reones.
                  be absurd to make the g u ilt of the defendant depend upon
Lord Coleridge,
     C.J.         the subsequent use of the false affidavit, the defendant being
                  equally gu ilty of perjury though no use had been afterwards
                  made of it. I agree that this case is not exactly the same. In
                  Beg. v. Crossley (1), when the false affidavit had been made, the
                  defendant no doubt had completed the act which constituted
                  the offence. E xactly the same principle applies here, because
                   the offence of the defendant was completed, so far as his act
                   could complete it, when he sent to London the samples which
                   m ight or m ight not be used in the arbitration. I am, there­
                   fore, of opinion that the first count of the indictment contains a
                   perfectly good statement of an offence at law, and that there was
                   ample evidence to support the charge. I t is not necessary to
                   give any opinion upon the questions which are said to arise upon
                    the other counts of the indictment. I am of opinion, for the
                    reasons which I have given, that the conviction should bs
                  affirmed.

                      P o llo c k , B. I have come to the same conclusion. This is an
                   indictm ent for a fraud or cheat at common law. If it had beea
                   charged as a cheat against a private individual, I should have
                   felt bound to give effect to the argument of the defendant’s
                   counsel. In cases where a cheat or fraud against private indi­
                   viduals is charged, the two conditions— ( 1 ) that the act has been
                   completed, and ( 2 ), that there has been injury to the individual
                   — are conditions precedent to the offence. But this is not the
                    case of a private fraud. I t is an offence which conies within the
                    description in East’s Pleas of the Crown, c. 18, s. 4 : “ There is
                    also another head of public cheats indictable at common law,
                    which are levelled against the public justice of the kingdom,
                    such as the doing of judicial acts without authority in the name
                    of an oth er” ; and the author goes on to say: “ There is a
                    precedent of an indictment against a married woman for pre­
                    tending to be a widow, and as such executing a bail bond to the
                                              (1) 7 T. R. 315.
                      QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                      369

eriff for one arrested on a bailable writ. This perhaps was                  1891
nsidered as a fraud upon a public officer in the course of               T h i Q ueen
                                                                              v.
stice.” I am quite clear that the condition precedent that                V beones.
ere must be injury to the individual does not apply in the                Pollock, B.
esen t case.   I t applies in cases of cheating or defrauding
ivate individuals, because otherwise a mere naked lie m igh t
nstitute an offence. B ut very different considerations apply
 the class of cases in which the present is included. The real
fence here is the doing of some act which has a tendency and
 intended to pervert the administration of public justice. The
lestflfcis, whether the sending of these adulterated samples,
lic h ^ y previous arrangement were to be sent to the associa-
jn in London to be used by the arbitrators, is such an act as I
ive described. I think that it was. I think that the arbitrators
e to be considered as a tribunal administering public justice,
ich a tribunal is one specially sanctioned by Courts of law, and
3 decisions are enforced and carried out by the Courts of law.
am of opinion that by tampering with the evidence which was
 be laid before that tribunal the defendant was interfering with
e course of justice. I agree with my Lord that his act was
mpleted.

Stephen,  J. I am of opinion that the conviction should be
firmed on the grounds stated by the Lord Chief Justice.

C h a r l e s , J.   I am of the same opinion.

L atvrance ,' J.       I entirely
                                m
                                  agree.
                                   O

                                                 Conviction affirmed-,
Solicitor for the Crown : The Solicitor to the Treasury.
Solicitor for defendant: W illiam Webb.
                                                              W. A.
