                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Jo hnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                                    P .O . B ox 37
C lerk and Financial O fficer                                                                  R egent Street
                                                                                                     B arnsley
                                                                                     South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
                                                                            T ele p h o n e Barnsley (0226) 733222

Our Ref:       P 0L ET49/SW/MR                         POL/89 850/4/30              Date:23    A ug us t 1989

This matter is being dealt with by    Mr S Walker                                  Telephone   ejtf:S20

           Dear Mr Addison
           RE HIL LS B OR OU G H - COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY W ES T M I D L A N D S POLICE
           Having spoken to Mr Waghorn of your department yesterday, it is appropriate that
           I further clarify the offer made in my letter of 21 August to ensure there is no
           doubt as to the terms of any agreement between us regarding the payment of
           expenditure incurred by West Midlands Pol ice.
           The Aut ho r it y agrees subject to their financial c ontribution being absolutely
           limited to the amount set out in Lord Ferrers letter dated 27 June 1989 whereby
           the total payment should not exceed the product of t h e ^ , p e n n y rate estimated at
           £975,000, as a matter of practical expediency to reimburse West Midlands Pol ice
           Aut ho r it y their total costs.
           This is agreed on the clear understanding that the total costs of West Midlands
           Pol ice will cover their w or k in connection with:-
           1     Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s Inquiry
           2    The preparation of evidence for the inquests in South Yorkshire
           3    The criminal investigation advised by the Dir ec t or of Public Prosecutions
           4    Cases taken to the criminal or civil courts and;
           5 Any related matter of disci piine or complaint.
           This agreement is conditional upon y o u r confirmation that all the above
           expenditure, together with any interest charged by the West Midlands Pol ice
           Aut ho r it y and any interest incurred by the South Yorkshire Pol ice Authority
           arising from any delay between the rendering of accounts by that A ut hority and
           receipt of payment from the Home Office will be subject to the level of
           assistance and contribution 1 imit payable by the South Yorkshire Pol ice
           A ut hority detailed in Lord Ferrers letter of 27 June.
           The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has let me have sight of a letter of 17
           Aug us t from Mr G eoffrey Dear in which he confirms that it would be logical for
           his Force to take on the added responsibility for any criminal aspect and any
           discip li na r y matters which may emerge. That Force will w i l li n gl y take on these
           added r es ponsibilities to its current investigation but Mr Dear points out that
           his Pol ice Aut ho r it y have asked him to seek a written assurance that expenditure
    r      Mr M J Addison
           Home Office
           Queen A n n e ’s Gate
           LONDON
           SW1H 9AT

    L
incurred by his Force will be met in full by the South Yorkshire Police with or
without Home Office assistance. Obviously I cannot give this assurance at the
present time and certainly the South Yorkshire Police cannot, but I am sure none
of us would wish the criminal inquiry to be held up whilst the Home Office and
the South Yorkshire Police Authority negotiate responsibility for the
expenditure referred to earlier in this letter. I mention this because it does
highlight the need for an urgent resolution of the expenditure issue.

Yours sincerely




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
