                                                           Parly No. I 07168




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR WRITTEN ANSWER ON THURSDAY
29 OCTOBER 1998


Maria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston):

To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department, if South
Yorkshire Police hold the (a) statements, (b) amended statements and
(c) other documentation collected by West Midlands Police during the
investigation of the Hillsborough disaster on computer disk.




DRAFT REPLY


All statements collected by West Midlands Police during the investigation into
the Hillsborough disaster, including the amended statements by South
Yorkshire Police officers, are held by South Yorkshire Police in their original
paper form, and also on the HOLMES computer. Other documents collected
by West Midlands Police are also held by South Yorkshire Police in their
original form, but were not entered on the HOLMES computer.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90188# 1
BACKGROUND NOTE


West Midlands Police conducted the original investigation into the Hillsborough
disaster in 1989 on behalf of the Taylor Inquiry.


2.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was appointed by the Home Secretary to carry out a
scrutiny to establish whether there existed any new evidence, which would justify a
further public inquiry into the disaster.


3.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found there were no grounds for such an inquiry,
and in announcing the judge’s findings to the House in February, the Home Secretary
gave an undertaking to make public the material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith in the course of his scrutiny, other than that already in the public domain, by
placing copies in the House Library. This has been done.


4.     One area of controversy concerned amendments made to police statements,
ostensibly to remove statements of opinion. In a few cases, the judge found that
statements of fact had been excluded, but he declared himself satisfied that their
exclusion did not inhibit either the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquests. As a consequence,
copies of all original and amended police statements have been sent to the Family
Support Group in Liverpool, as well as being placed in the House Library.


5.     The original copies of the police statements remain the property of the South
Yorkshire Police archive, to where they have been returned. All the material collected
by West Midlands Police in the course of their investigation into the disaster is also
held in the South Yorkshire archive. The Home Office holds, on file, hard copies of
all other documentation arising from the scrutiny.


6.     Statements collected by West Midlands Police in the course of their original
investigation into the disaster were entered on the HOLMES (Home Office Large
Major Enquiry System) computer. This included copies of both original and amended
statements.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90188# 1
7.      This is one of four questions raised by Ms Eagle relating to the location and
availability of documentation relating to the disaster, and follows an oral question on
26 October (copy enclosed) at which the same issue was raised.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90188# 1
