                                                                         c/e        M 'CVvcwi
                                    H ouse o f Commons                          P         <?   C   /o   j s
                                    London SW 1A OAA
                                      0171 219 3000

                           LOUISE ELLMAN M.P.                                          Vsjcyne^"
                MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR LIVERPOOL RIVERSIDE                    ^         >
                          LABOUR AND CO-OPERATIVE                                           ^
16 February 199.8
                                          h r ?\       L
The Rt. Hon. Jack Straw MP
Secretary o f State for the Home Department
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
                                           —r ' VJa
                                                           C'-J~<y~C.1
                                               'f o / W ) /) '' o u
                                                                           O^
                                                                                      r
SW1H 9AT
                                              rcj)L^


Dear Jack                                             irC.. cJm
RE: Hillsborough Scrutiny
                                                       iV
Thank you for your recent letter.

I have since received the enclosed letter from Colin Moneypenny at Liverpool City
Council and thought you should see it.

I would be interested in any further comments.

Best wishes.




Louise Ellman

enc

                                           RECEIVED BY
                                                 17 f£8 1933
                                           H0MESECRETA!
                                The City of Liverpool
                                Personnel & Administration Directorate
                                Peter Rhodes, Head o f Law & Committee Services
                                Solicitor to the Council
                                PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                Tel: 0151-225 2404 Fax: 0151-225 2427




                                              Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                              Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                              Your Ref:
                                              Our R e f : MFCDA/CM


T o : Louise Ellman MP                        9th February,             1998




Dear M s . Ellman

Hillsborough Scrutiny

Thank you for your letter of 29th January 1998, concerning the
above matter, and for the assistance you have so far given. As you
requested to be kept informed of developments I now attach a copy
of a second letter which I have sent to Jack Straw on behalf of
the City Council which I would ask you to support in whatever way
possible. The letter details continuing concerns about the
Scrutiny. I also enclose a copy of the response of Mr. Straw to my
original letter and should say that I am writing to all Merseyside
M.P.'s in similar terms.

You should be aware, as the announcement of the decision of the
Home Secretary about the Scrutiny is apparently imminent, that
there continues to be speculation amongst families and other
interested parties that the decision which is to be made may not
satisfy their continuing demands for justice.

The Members of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party, while
sharing the anxiety of the families, particularly in the light of
past experience, continue to hope for a satisfactory outcome and
will of course await the decision of Mr. Straw before making any
comment. However at this stage they have felt it sufficiently
important to emphasise, on the record to the Home Secretary, that
notwithstanding his previous comments, there remain legitimate
concerns about the terms of reference of the investigation and
about the neutrality of the appointed judge given his public
remarks about Liverpool supporters.

Most importantly though the concern of the Working Party has been
submitted to Mr. Straw that while, as he indicates Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith may consider he has received sufficient information
from South Yorkshire Police, the Hillsborough families continue to
feel that documentation which may have assisted the presentation
of their submissions, has been withheld from them by the Police.



                    Director o f Personnel & Administration: Ian Jones
                  Administration & Com mercial Services; Human Resource Service;
        Information Technology Services: Law & Committee Services; Legal Services Agency:
                              Public Relations < £ Information Service.
The view of the City Council remains that even before a Scrutiny
of "new" evidence, the case for a full new Inquiry and the severe
doubts about the adequacy of the previous judicial proceedings had
been more than adequately demonstrated. As all of the Merseyside
Councils ar€ backing the City Council in its unanimous support for
the campaign of the Hillsborough families, I am sure any
assistance you can give whatsoever at this stage will be sincerely
appreciated by all concerned.

Yours faithfully



Coxxn moneypenny
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
                            Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                            Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                            Your Ref:
                            Our Ref: MFCDA/CM



                                             3rd February,   1998


R t . Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
5 0 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT


Dear Mr. Straw

HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

I write further to my letter dated 14th November, 1997 concerning
the above matter and your response of 4th December.

Our correspondence was reported to a meeting of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party of Liverpool City Council, held last week
at which various Members of the Hillsborough Family Support Group
were in attendance. Many of the people present expressed concern
about some of the content of your response and I was therefore
asked to write to you again to place this concern on record prior
to any announcement which may be made about the outcome of the
Scrutiny.

The overwhelming view which emerged from the meeting is that ther
is continuing dissatisfaction with the terms of reference of the
investigation and indeed with the disparaging comments about
Liverpool supporters made previously by the judge. However even
more importantly there was also considerable disquiet expressed
about the inference taken from your letter to me, that the
decision not to extend the timetable of the Scrutiny was taken by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith with reference only to the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire Police. The Working Party support th
contention of the Families that while the Lord Chief Justice may
have been satisfied that the information received from-the South
Yorkshire Force was adequate, nonetheless much potentially
valuable documentation which may have aided their submissions was
withheld from them by the Police .
In conclusion I would ask that as you reach your decision on this
matter you take the above comments into account. Would you also
please note that Liverpool City Council by way of its Hillsboro;;
Disaster Working Party has re-affirmed its earlier view
chat even prior to the Stuart Smith scrutiny, sufficient evident:-.:
had already been fulsomely demonstrated to cast overwhelming dcub
on previous judicial proceedings and to therefore justify the
establishment of a full new Inquiry into the Disaster.



Yours sincerely



Colin Moneypenny
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
