                          Laelxafp            r4                 ^c/hu ^    k)^v( H P ~ S Q

         HILLSBOROUGH               ST E ER IN G           COM M ITTEE               WJ

                   c/o Castle Chambers, C oo^Strut, LiverpoolL2 9S0{
                     Tel: 051 2550628 Jo*: 051 236 0047 'D X14100



Mr Popper                                                      5 February   1990
H M Coroner                                                    EMS.PM
Medico Legal Centre                                          '   —    -
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD




Dear Mr Popper,

Hillsborough 15 April 1989

I enclose herewith copy letter I have today sent to the
Director of Public Prosecutions dealing with the release
of statements and information by the West Mid land s Police
to cur Members.

I trust the letter is self explanatory.   In the particular
case of information gathered by the West Midlands Police as
to the movements of those who died I appreciate that this is
alsc” within your control.

Therefore I would be grateful if you would consider the
matter and if you agree (subject to the agreement of the DPP)
would be grateful to hear from you.

I know that you have been in very regular contact with Doug
Fraser (a fellow member of the Steering Committee) and if there
is any further information which you need on which either Doug or
I can help please do not hesitate to get in touch.

All good wishes.

Yours sincerely,




Miss   E M Steel




/Encl.
             HILLSBOROUGH               STE ER IN G              COMMITTEE

                      c/o Castle Chambers, Coo/^Strcet, Liverpool L 2 9S9f
                        Tel: 051 2550628 J coq 051 236 0047 *DX 14100




     The Director of Public Prosecutions                              5 February,   1990
     4-12 Queen Anne's Gate                                           EMS.PM
     LONDON
     SV1H   9AZ

         %




     Dear Sir,

^   Hillsborough 15 April 1989

    X write on behalf of the Hillsborough Steering Committee who are
    in turn co-ordinating the Hillsborough Group of Solicitors
    instructed by those injured and bereaved as a result of the
    incidents at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Stadium at
    Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989.

    The matter has been under investigation by the West Midlands
    Police under their Assistant Chief Constable Mr J Mervyn Jones
    who was initially working to Lord Justice Taylor in respect of
    the Inquiry ar.d subsequently to H M Coroner at Sheffield.

    We appreciate that following the publication of the interim
    report the matter was referred to your office for consideration
    of any possible criminal charges and that whereas the West  Midlands
    Police continued with the investigation they were now working to
    your directions.

    Whilst matters were under the control of Lord Justice Taylor
    we made a request that copies of statements made by individuals
    at the ground (the majority of whom had. themselves suffered
    injury -"physical or psychological - or were the relatives of those
    who had died should be supplied to the Solicitors acting for those
    indivi d u a l s .

    That request was granted and it has saved a very considerable amount
    of trauma for the individuals concerned.

    Over recent months the policy has, however, been reversed and
    such statements are no longer being given to the Solicitors on
    request.   I understand that this is at your direction and that
    the West Midlands Police have been instructed not to provide copies
    of the statements until the investigation is complete and you
    authorise such statements to be provided.

    This change of policy is causing difficulties for those handling
    claims on behalf of the injured and bereaved and considerable
    trauma on the part of the individual Plaintiffs.

                                     / Cont' d
       HILLSBOROUGH                 ST E E R IN G          COMMITTEE

                   c/o CostCt Chambers, Coo^Strcet, LiverpoolL2 3S9{
                     ref: 0512550628 Jo*; 051236 0047 T>X 14100
                        Continuation No.              1.

 The Director of Public Prosections                             5 February   1990
                                                                EMS.PM




 As you may know the test actions on liability have been stayed
 on terms as an agreement has been reached with the Insurers for
• the South Yorkshire Police that they will meet all claims within
[certain specified categories which cover approximately 90% of
Ijthe totality of the claims although with no admission of l i a bility.

In order to process such claims the Insurers very reasonably
require details of precisely' where the individual was in Pen 3,
or 4 and a medical report dealing with the injuries sustained.
                                                                                L



We have been arranging medical appointments with a team of
Clinical Psychologists for clients of the Group from last
November onwards and at that stage the Solicitor has to update
and clarify with the client precisely what happened.   In many
cases clients were very shocked and initial statements to their
Solicitors were in broad terms rather than with the detail which
was necessary.   The re-opening of the events of the 15 April is
causing considerable distress to clients which is minimised in
those cases where copies of the statements they made to the Vest
Midlands Police have already been supplied (prior to the reference
to yourselves).

We would be grateful, in the circumstances, if the ban on
supplying copy statements could be reconsidered.         We
appreciate that the Inquiry is "open ended" and not confined
to possible criminal charges against any one or more parties
to the civil action and .extends effectively to every individual
who was at the ground.   "     "      -------- -------- *—  ------- -

However, in practical terms unless in a particular case it is
likely thjat the individual will have further questions to answer
it would be extremely helpful if statements could be released
to Jb-£— u sed for the purpose of the settlement of their civil
claim.                          '                          '

In addition - although in this respect the matter must still
be covered by the Coroner as well asby  yourselves - in the case
of, those  who died the same questions  are being asked bythe
Insurers   ie where was the individual  atthe particular time.

The West   Midlands Police were preparing for the Coroner files
in each individual case which traced the m o v ement a of everyone
who died form the time they entered the Stadium untTT they         ”
were identified and death confirmed.

The information in those files would be extremely helpful to
answer the points made and to enable those claims to be settled

                                        / Cont' d
        HILLSBOROUGH                  S T E E R IN G          COMMITTEE


                     c/o CastCc Chambers, Cool^Street, LiverpoolLZ 9S0{
                       Tcf: 051255 0628 Ja^: 051 236 0047 (DX14100
                        Continuation No.               2



The Director of Public Prosuections                                5 February 1990
                                                                   EMS.PM




expeditiously.

Again we would be glad if you would consider authorising the
release of that information (subject in that case to the further
authorisation of H M Coroner).

I look forward to hearing from you and trust you appreciate
the reason for this letter.

Yours   sincerely,




Miss E M Steel
                            OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR   MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE.
                                                         WATERY STREET
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE        SHEFFIELD
                                       (West District)
                                                         S3 7ET
  STEFAN L- POPPEH, U-B_ aMEOSrt. B Jtf, ELS. VLRCOP.
                                         : CORONER
                                                         15th. Pehroary    ^JJO.
                        T»l«phengSHEfflai)(07«a)7387ZI
^TSLP/JE*-


 fir. C.F.P. Sewell*
 UJBJ?.
 ULrectar of Headquarters Case Work,
 Headquartersr
-4/12. Queen Anne's Gate,
 London. SW1E 9AZ.

 Dear Mr. Sewell,
 He: HTTiIffBOBQUGK - 15th of April 1989.

 I refer to Mias. Steel's letter to you of the 5th of February 1990.
 I have discussed-'the contents of this letter with Hr. Hsrvyn Jones
 Assistant Chief Constable, ¥est M-thi awflg Police who is in full
 agreement-.
.I also had a meeting with Counsel (prior to the receipt of Kiss.
 Steel's letter) in which Z discussed, some of the procedural
 aspects relating to this natter.
 On the whole* X think, that Hiss. Steel's suggestions may1have some .
 merit* in. them and in particular as far- as X am concerned, X
 think that it might be both helpful and advantageous if I were
 to resnme the Inquests in early Spring far the purposes of taking
 thft qipfl-fr.nl aryfdence, together with non-K^ontravaraial evidence ‘
 suchasto the location of -Hie deceased, either aLive or dead
 or both, within the groundl
 IT X were to do this, it would be on the. basis that the evidence
being taken at that stage would be restricted to these matters.
Obviously a degree of control of the proceedings would be required*
but X expect this could be achieved. :“'*
We think that it would be useful if you agree, for Mr. Jones and
myself to meet with you. to discuss this aspect of the matter as soon
as.possible so that if we were minded to.,deal with it along 1hese
lines, the appropriate arrangements can be made as soon as possible.
Hr. Jones and X would be available on the following dates
         20th (a*m. only), 21st, 22nd, 23rd February 1990
         or other, after discussion.
Please /let me hear from you. as soon as possible.
                   Director of Public Prosecutions   vjv            Deputy Director and ChiefExecutive
                                  Allan Green Q.C. y / \            D. S. Gandy CBOBE




                                         Director o f Headquarters Casework
                                                    C. W . P. Newell



                                                                          Crown Prosecution Service
        Dr S L Popper
        H M Coroner for South Yorkshire                                  Headquarters
        Medico-Legal Centre
        Watery Street                                                    4/12 Queen Annes Gafi
        Sheffield                                                        London
        S3 ?ET                                                           SW1H9AZ
                                                                         Telephone 01 -222-7944
                                                                                   Ext.




YourRef:    '                          OurRef:                                     Date:
^       SLP/JT                               PGK.3341.89                           16 February 1990



        Dear Dr Popper
        RE; HILLSBOROUGH
        Thank you for your letter of the 15th February 1990.
        I note what you say in connection with the disclosure of
        information to the Steering Committee by means of resuming the
        inquests.

       We have considerable sympathy for the relatives of the ,
       deceased and we are anxious to assist but we must ensure that
       the criminal investigation and any criminal prosecution is not
       prejudiced in any way by such disclosure.
       I have today sent papers to Mr Gareth Williams QC and
       Mr Peter Birts of Counsel who have been advising the Director
       of Public Prosecutions in connection with matters arising from
       the events at Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989.
       I hope very shortly to receive their Opinion and thereafter I
       will contact you to discuss the possibility of a meeting.
       We have spoken with Mr Jones to keep him appraised of our
       feelings on this delicate point.
       Yours sincerely




       C J Cleugh
       Head of Police Complaints Division



Fax 01 -222-4751                             Telex 945310 CPS HO                                  Britdoc DX2328 Victoric
                   Director ofPublic Prosecutions                   Deputy Director and ChiefExecutive
                                 Allan Green Q.C.                   D. S. Gandy CB OBE




                                         Director o f Headquarters Casework
                                                    C .W . P. Newell



                                                                         Crown Prosecution Service
     Dr S L Popper
     H.M. Coroner                                                        Headquarters
     for South Yorkshire
     Medico-Legal Centre                                                 4/12Queen Annes GafeT
     Wateru Lane                                                         London
     Sheffield S3 7ET                                                    SW1H9AZ
                                                                         Telephone 01 -222-7944
                                                                                   Ext




YourRef:                               OurRef:                                     Date:

                                     PGK/3341/89                                 20 February 1990

•    Dear Dr Popper
     HILLSBOROUGH
     I write further to your letter of the 15th February 1990 and my
     reply of the 16th February.
     I have now received Counsel's opinion and considered fully the
     request made by the Steering Committee in their letter of the 5th
     February.
     The matter has been fully discussed at some length with
     Mr J Mervyn Jones and I am satisfied that evidence can be given
     formally at the adjourned inquest within strict parameters and
     that provided the evidence is given in this way there will be no
     prejudice either to the current criminal investigation or to any
     subsequent prosecution.
     Such evidence should relate only to the movements on April 15th
     1989 of those who died, evidence of identification and medical
     evidence of the caiise of deatli.   Any requests for ^evidence /j
     exceeding those restrictiBns^should be refused as it is likely I
     to impinge upon matters which are currently the subject of the '{
     criminal investigation and which will be considered when a
     decision is made about the initiation of any criminal
     proceedings.
     I enclose a copy of a letter which I have sent to the Steering
     Committee and I confirm I have sent a copy of this letter to
     Mr Jones.




Fax 01 -222-4751                             Telex 945310 CPS HO                                  Britdoc DX2328 Victoric
  X should be pleased to attend any meeting which you may wish to
  hold to discuss the practicalities of the adjourned inquest
  hearing.

  Should you wish to discuss the matter on the telephone please do
  not hesitate to contact me.
  Yours faithfully




 C J Cleugh
 Head of Police Complaints Division




BMKE0220.B04
                     Director of Public Prosecutions                   D eputy Director and Chief Executive
                                    Allan Green Q.C.                   0 . S. GandyCBOBE




                                            Director of Headquarters Casework
                                                      C. W. P. Newell




         Miss E M Steele                                                    Crown Prosecution Service
         Hillsborough Steering Committee
         c/o Castle Chambers                                               Headquarters
         Cook Street                                                       4/12 Queen Annes Gate _ -r
         Liverpool                                                         London                     ae*’" -
         DX 141*00                                                         SW1H9AZ
                                                                           Telephone 01 -222-7944
                                                                                     Ext




   YourRef:                              OurRef:                                      Date:

                                       PGK/3341/89                                   20 February 1990


        Dear Madam
        HILLSBOROUGH

        Thank you for your letter of the 5th February 1990 addressed to
        the Director of Public Prosecutions. I have been asked to reply.
       Following receipt of your letter X have been in correspondence
       with the coroner, Dr Popper, and your request for information
       has been discussed in detail with the Assistant Chief Constable
       Mr J Mervyn Jones. We have a great deal of sympathy with your
       request and I have recently received Counsel's opinion on this
       unusual point.      I am sure you will understand that the
       prosecuting authorities are under a duty to ensure that they ’ -do
       not conduct themselves in such a way as to prejudice either .the
       crim inal investigation or any subsequent criminal proceedings.
       Generally,none^ of the information which is collected by criminal
       investigation is released •until the later time either of a
       decisioh not to prosecute being reached or the conclusion of any
       crim inal proceedings.

  if However,  I have considered the matter fully and whilst I am not /,
   ; prepared  to disclose all the copies of the statements direct to //
  / you I feel that your request can be dealt with by a more formal ‘I
     disclosure in the arena of the coroner's court. I have written
     to Dr Popper confirming that the inquests could be resumed to
     hear evidence on a restricted basis providing only that
     information requested by you relating to the movements on the
     15th April 1989 of those who died, evidence of identification and
   • medical evidence of the cause of death.



      BMKE0220.B04




Fax 01 -222-4751
                                            Telex 9 4 5310 CPS HQ                                  Britdoc DX2328 Victoria
                     e       the release °f such evidence in this way will
            *rn_ f?y y°?r request and Provide the necessary formal framework
                n       5
                     release of that information. I have copied this letter
            to Dr Popper and to Mr J Mervyn Jones.                  '._r

                               discuss t1118 letter please do not hesitate to
            telephone Michael^Kennedy m this office who is dealing with the
            C aS e •            —------ -—*                        3


            Yours faithfully



     •          s . / A     —


           C J Cleugh
           Head of Police Complaints Division




V.




         BMKE0220.B04
       MEETING WITH MERVYN JONES, MR METCALFE AND MR FRASER TO DISCUSS THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
       DISASTER INQUESTS HELD ON 26TH FEBRUARY 1990                        nnjbaBUKOUGH FOOTBALL

      The reason why I wanted to meet today, Mr Jones and I have been discussine it anrf
      thought it would be helpful if we had an informal discussion between oursfIves as the
      people with whom I have corresponded as opposed to other firms of solicitors that mav
      have interests, but who at this stage, haven't yet had occasion to write in a substantial
      W3y •

      You will recollect that both of you are anxious to obtain data because you need it for
      various civil matters which are of no concern of mine.

      The original intention was that once the public enquiry had been completed                             that I would
              w         Inq“ests.reasr ably P romPtly.      It was fixed for the 15th January but i n t h e
      yvent, because a criminal investigation was initiated, I changed my mind about that
      depending^n'that                                             ^          h“    ~

k^ J L V o f leS   rm.£n : A 1Sr Stee^ Saying She underst00d the d i«iculty with                          the criminal
           and     m h    ! bu‘ could we at least help her with regard to where                           the deceased
           and the medical evidence. I reflected on that and *rote to the DPP                             and th««h* n..*
      this might be a way forward so that we could have a r e s u m ^ I ^ es£-.0n a                       limited basis
   oresent1^ 7      • rU.
                        leS.aS         t0 what *lnd of evidence we would hear and how we would
   lone wav down t-h1** I                 n0t giV6 y°U 311 the answers y°u want but it would go a
   di*rf Tnrf h   £ A °as ' ?          at we WOUld be dealing with is who the deceased was, when he
   wiv                 16d ^           W T°“ld StriCtly n0t be dealin8 with the Question if      £
                 course could          prejudice the criminal part. The DPP has specifically aclreri
  Sijotto.           Certainly, if     l„„k mt it         f[om
                                                       the L r e a v e d ' ^ p o W o f ^!ew it ^ u T O T
    gainst their interests assuming there are bereaved people              who wish to have the
 p r os e c ut i o n and certainly Mr Hytner indicated that in his          .... s m a r t s . ” u   not
  an extent^hat*anv c C 'c? rt* ln1^ the bereaved would not want me to muddy the water to su
      n extent that any criminal prosecution, assuming that there was one, fell to the groun

  Oo you feel that it would be helpful if we arranged to h a v e ........ the Inquests for
  the end             ? evidence in that limited way.  We will then have to reiterate at
  the end of that particular evidence and I will come to the question of what will hanoen
  T                      beCaU!e that Wil1 de» ™ <1       «» W *       ‘° a certain extent          1 « e   I LSe"


                  " SpeakinS fr°"» the point of view of the SY Police, I am one day awav from
  f o r Mr iis et i c e SS u I n e« e r h - t hV° h ld • ' T * * " 1 ° C n 0 t beCaUSe " e have a h“ c in » t L r r o w
 n r L .L I?           f J!       a t WhlCh ” h a t l s in i n f l i c t i s w h e th e r th e p re s e n t c i v i l
 p ro c e e d in g s s t a r f d T 11" 1? , " w h e th e r. th e >' ^ o u l d c e a s e to be r e s t a r t e d o r new
 the conclusion tamo ” en.a                    D,att®rs’ including the Inquests have been completed. Now if |
 h e a r d i n O c to b er^ Jr la tte r* t j f r        P reS ent P™ =*«1^ » . h « e « go ahead, w hether t h e , be !
 I n q u e s ts could nrnre.H .v                ”     v8” Say s c r 6 away i t would be extremely h e lp fu l i f
 d is c o n tin u e d th jn ih         ?? “ “ b6                ° f a11 d« * « < « > t s . I f th e proceedings are
 e x c e p t w ith iny i n f o r m a U ^ h T s ^ r £                                      ^         ^       ° f SY P° U ~


 s ^ i r m ; „ 5 : ” Lin Ly„ sd id a„r y aL s L db eor r i : ' d L v s r e a n ? ; ° nL       i ^ \ maT
 about him? I think anything that can be done to ge/tha"



            in ia a f
                                                - 2 -

                               1   a   s* warmly welcomed by them. The proceedings of which Mr


       •
       serial way, wou
alf speaks, don t di                   y
                                         involve the bereaved because they are, correct me if I'm
                                              ..   between the vari o u s defendants, the insurers of
g. lt?. the c e n t r i s t o n ^ p r o c e , s d i n g s ^ t w e e n y ^ ^
olice have a g r e e d tha   J      certainly in terms of the bereaved, those
                                                                                  ^         aU   ^           clailns a„d


6 dingJSareSnot a ^ c t o r and I’am sure they would all welcome as much information as
ossible to get.
            think there’s a further point which again I don’t ^ppose affects us
tetcalf - I
 ctly. which I perhaps ought_to make on that, nobody U b e i n g k J P J ” ^ ^
 ensations INAUDIBLE so that s no a iv         .         is something known as pre



:hor “ c ^ e n a ^ n : n ^ : s ^ « i ^ e « ^ r r : ' o ^ ; ^ a t tIL t e t h e y . r e in or


                                                                                  is             tin? cases being    y
'led at the moment.



^      A    been bombarded with all these letters from people,




 reason for it.

Fraser -Thera will ba one or two people who you will ^                                ^     "     a      H i * ^Thave
 find those restrictions difficult to                                                                 advance, it's an
 * Z T y emotiona^situatio^particularly for ^ -                         ^ o vere there with people who^ied,

                                                                              -           ' o - b f a problem I think.


    . tfe hava thought about thls. it is d i f f i c u U                      f                        ^   “ present tha

Z £ UJ 1            “ ai   ”                            si m i c e     Officers to give oral evidence at                   I

s hearing.
Me     alfe - I can't think that any of them could give an, information about this,                                 the,
      give general information about body positions and so on.

r. There are a lot who participated in tha ' - - ' ^ . “                                     en^tried T r / Z T



: r i £ « li? t h a t ^ i ^ ^         ”     f officers from W
'summary of the evidence and will present that summary of                        As
. ground and the events which took place at Hillsborough, basica *               h
;„8as the summaries are available, the, will be circulated to the solicitors of t
Bering Committee. If ,ou felt that that was acceptable as it stands, then



           INIAAF
 /
                                                           - 3 -

      •      t to call any other evidence.                      The                                         SS'SI "
 .^Officers     r ^           elTu.ny          f n d ^ u V i U S . . *now the na.es of the witnesses hut you

 “ r s e e ' t h r w u n e t s e s in person.


 *« *      t0 “
              d”   Thi's'T                                                                    tfis^icuur^r'son.s
 •^tory.'C0nU the opening day. someone .ill explain the diagrams.

 r Jones - Running parallel to thi.. i. the ^ ^ ^ ' ^ " ' ^ ^ ^ t i s u a r e v l S c e and you
 ompare It S        t     W       a“       ^           M         ’t   ^ e ^ e d         and didn’t and indeed the

 imes.
 MC - We intend to have this for ever, deceased                             plus the su—     r,.

 lt Fraser - Plus any video or still photographs                            that are available as v e i n

 MC       We don't want to use the videos at this *ta|*ab*“ “b* Jf f l e e r s ^ are going toJ>e
 f          have already seen the videos and stlll        identifications have been confirmed




-     1 ; - “.;: s t - a s             =       £   •       s     —                                      m     _     ,

 Mr Fraser - The only comment I have about the                                    J*dy.s approach to the problem. I
 nave a Liverpool background, but any s^     ry                                   it is possible or even practicable to
 •Innder whether in addition being given the                                        ” Jcted so that when the



          ? W                 «        ,5 S            “       £ =    —       -     ~         ~       is bound “    be
 subjective.
                                                               «     r a n 9t easily D6 oonet
 HMC - We’ve thought about this at ^°nslde^ b*f ^ f i c e officers because it may contain
 o T icularly with regard to the .Vi d « c e °f ‘h. P o U c . o t i ^ ^ ^        stateinents. Quite
^ h e i r statements, there really is a         sensitive information. We have            ab°“*
•     art from that, statements ma^ ^ f ^ ^ / L a ^ o t h task, and scoring out al the bits
  going through the statements, which wo                than dQing vhat we are doing. Tha
  but on balance, we thought that would be even            w e .ve heard what you've said but
   doesn't of course preclude at the Xl^ u    be that we would want to hear it in mor*
   if the Inquest were to be res^ ed* ^ "^ysubject to resumption. I would consider it as
   detail. I could make a note of that and subject
    possiblility*                                                                                     could call
    It ma, be when I read through the                                               ev“    e v « e n « f^Pollce°0«lcers
    or it may be that I can read “                                        under the rules, and I would sa, that,
    because I only need to read what is reievan




              INIAAF
  /                                        - 4 -

  Mr Fraser - There will be some families who want their, someone said, their 15 minutes of
  fame. I suppose to some extent they are going to have to be given that opportunity
  aren’t they. I think the vast majority will go through very smoothly but I think that
  there are going to be one or two who are going problems.

  HMC - We recognise that, but we want the Inquests to be meaningful.

  Mr Fraser - Yes, it’s serving the two points particularly, getting information and also
  dealing with our problems on the civil front.

  Mr Jones - The summary is not only one of my Police Officers’s summary but      that is
  reviewed by me and my people, it’s actually going to go to Dr Popper so he      gets actual]
  the full file with all the statements and including matters which could be      considered
 prejudicial. He can actually read those matters which relate to the death        and look at
  that in terms of how it compares with the summary. The summaries come out       from the
  Coroner as opposed to come out from me.

  M    Fraser - No disrespect to W Midlands’ Officers, I think that if that point is made,
         clearly made,      I think some of the “oh it’s another policeman and another    policeman’s
 S h ^ f e e n t * sort of comment, then if a statement comes from your office, it’s going to be
  m u d K a s i e r to swallow.

  HMC - Would you want to see the summaries Mr Kennedy7      I would prefer not to send the
  summaries to dozens of parties.          --------- '

  Mr Fraser - One of the points at issue is that at the moment a broad swipe has been taken
  at this pre-death payment and suffering, those summaries are almost bound to contain
  information which   will benefit us and   I certainly would have noobjection to    the oterh
  side seeing them,   I don’t know whether they would want to.

  Mr Metcalf - I think the distinction that can be drawn between us and the other
  defendents is that we are doing the paying out, so we have a legitimate interest.
 Q
  HMC - I’m quite happy is you say it would be helpful to see them before we begin.

  Mr Jones - There’s no problem.    The first thing was to clear with Mr Fraser in terms of
    i t side of things.

^ * r Fraser - We have to work together, if the document became available and the plaintiff
   relied upon it, I would have to disclose it any way, so you might as well see it at the
   beginning rather than. It will be a matter of public record after the hearing because ti
   will be part of the deposition.

  Mr Metcalf - Returning to the beginning of this, there is I think a line to be drawn in
  making clear what these preliminary hearings are intended to deal with between saying,
  well look w e ’re doing this to prevent any possible risk of prosecution, but not actual y
  giving the idea that a prosecution is certainly going to follow.

  Mr Fraser - That has occurred to me and will occur to others.

  HMC - We thought about doing this a while ago but I turned it down because I thought that



           INIAAF
if I held a limited Inquest as this stage, everybody would assume that I knew what the
DPP was going to do. The reason why I feel we can do it now is because of Miss Steel s
letter. She requested the information, what we are doing is trying to comply with her
wish. It would be made clear, if necessary 95 times, that under no circumstances an
be construed as a preliminary. Do we say that because somebody won t believe it. we
don’t do anything at all7

 Mr Fraser - that’s right, there will be one or two hotheads who will look for the
 ulterior motive behind this. The vast majority will accept it in the spirit which
 done. The press will do the same.

HMC - I am quite satisfied in my own mind that we are not doing it for that reason.
  here are three scenarios which are worth mentioning. One, that the DPP decies to
prosecute somebody or several people for manslaughter. If that were to happen, then
 Section 16 of the Coroner’s Act would apply and I would adjourn the Inquests on
 provisions
 DrovislOuS ofOl that
                 inau Section.
                      ocutiuu. Whether
                                n***-*-***-- I
                                             - resume
                                                -~      or not,
                                                           ---* I
                                                                - will decide at the end of      _, _
 »
 prosecutioh,                     « ____
                but it is my normal          t •__ not
                                       practice      *. to resume «.«kan nrneortif
                                                                  when             \ nns for
                                                                         prosecutions    for fflUlTQ6
                                                                                             mur    eITi
                                                                                                       ,
 it>»nslaughter or ......... take place. Secondly, that he decides not to prosecute fo
 . ^slaughter or a charge that falls within that Section. In that case, I will have o
— J ^ d e on a resumption then I will make up my mind how much further evidence I will
 t ^ a l l . Thirdly, he decides not to prosecute but that somebody brings a P“ vaJe
 prosecution. Again, I ’m not saying it will happen but it is a possibility, Mr Hytn
 think hinted at that possibility.

 Mr Metcalf - I would take his remarks very carefully, he at no stage gave the idea that
 he or his colleague, King, thought that there was anything in which they were putting
 forward. What they were saying was, ’some of my clients believe*. He was very carefu
 in his wording.

 HMC - I wasn’t suggesting that he thought that one should be brought, I was just saying
 that he recognised that there were some people who might wish to do so. Assuming      a
 ..someone brought a private prosection, then you’re back in the Section 16 situation.

  Those are the three scenarios. If the DPP were to prosecute, then if I hadn’t done the
  resumptions at this stage, I would have had to resume on a limited basis to at least taKe
  the medical evidence. Bearing mind even if the DPP does prosecute, he may not actually
   -osecute 95, he may select. It might be that it would be unfair not to at least take
  „,e sort of evidence we have been talking about for the other x number who aren *
~mentioned on the charge sheet, but it would be covered under Section 16. So I might be
" faced with having to do all this anyway after the DPP has decided. A s s u m i n g that we do
  it now, that work will have been done if the DPP decides to prosecute, I will resume tne
  Inquests for the purposes 'of adjourning under Section 16 and then I wi     ma e up my mi
  when it is over.

 Mr Fraser - It’s going to take a lot of heat out of the situation. There is a need to
 know, I think so far as it’s possible to give that information, I think it’s an excellen
 idea.

 Mr Jones - Humanely, if you look at it in terms of not doing anything at this stage, it
 could be quite a while, and the psychologists tell us that the grieving process needs
 this in order to work through. The vast majority of families want to settle down an



           INIAAF
start rebuilding their lives but they can't do it.

HHC - I don't Jnow what the DPP is    going to do any mote than you do.    When I mention it,
that’s got to be put as part of the scenario.

Mr Jones - To help you on that, ifthis goes ahead at the time we are talking about, the
final submission to the DPP won't have been made whilst this is going on.

Mr Fraser - What sort of dates are we talking about?

 HMC - What we want to do as soon as you 3        ’e h a n c e " ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ! ^ what's    going
 you next week because we want to                  d start actually taking evidence      on
 on, and resume the Inquests on the 18th April, f 1*                  ^    c!n you do    it
individual cases on the 19th. When we first set it :   l*              obviously very
“ round the anniversary. I f * certainly a point. The people wi                 y
 emotionally involved on the 15th anyway, and it may                          and then   lift
 they are already upset, quite naturally, instead of letting tnem go

   •
Mr Fraser - How long do you anticipate this is going to take7

HHC - I ’d be interested to hear what you think7

 Mr Metcalf - A week or two weeks came into mind straightaway. ||

 HMC - I think the minimum is two weeks. What we want to do is          day
 that would take us 12 days. The first day we don't want to take eight.

 Mr Fraser - Timetabling is a problem. Eight a day is eight families in andout,          it can
 be done if the Social Services support and everybody gets their ac   g

 Mr Jones - What I intended to do with Summary Officers, that each one
 ler day, so he’d actually chaperone them in and out, so they w
 sausage machine.
 Mr Fraser - I know that the Social Services in Sheffield are keen to help if that's a
   jsibility.•

1MC - The Zeebrugge Disaster managed 18 a day but I think                    ^nd^hft^he
Although they dealt with where the people were found, it was beari g                             ^
 ship wasn’t lifted until six weeks or whate*®' a^ r. ^ ® ^   have the problem of trying
 people had been because the water had gone into the     •              will nrobably take
 lo find 95 people in thousands, out of thousands of Photographs. So^
 a bit longer to present the evidence. I don’t want this rushed I want eachfamily
 feel that they have been treated with courtesy, it’s been dignified.

 Mr Metcalf - I can’t see us and the others really having any questions to raise. I can't
 see us being more than present hearing the evidence.

 Mr Fraser - Would you attach to the summary the PM report or would you include it in it?




          INIAAF
                                          - 7 -

 HMC - The PM report would be separate.     I might call the Pathologist to every Inquest and
 I’d value your comments.

 Mr Jones - It’s a question what the family want to some extent. I know there are one or
 two PM reports which talk of fractures and what the family want to know is whether that
 fracture caused any distress. In the majority of cases, they are v e r y sympathetic
 reports. I can’t see very many families wanting to put questions to the Pathologist.
  One or two certainly.

 HMC - There are one or two where there were queries. I want the families to be able to
 hear what was what, it’s better if it’s dealt with in Court. Vhat I had in mind, and I
 haven’t yet spoken to Prof Usher,    ison the opening day, to take ev;de"c« f ^ . ^ . ^ v e
 who did the alcohols, otherwise he’s got to sit here for 12 days, about half didn t have
£Bny alcohol at all, another large batch only had relatively low levels, there may be a
  few where the alcohol level is a bit high. I thought that we could call Prof Usher or
  some other suitable Pathologist, so that he could give us a general dissertation on
  traumatic asphyxia death. The families wouldn’t have heard it but the solicitors would.
     may be that if we do that, we could then take as documentary at least a proportion of
  tApMs.    But if you say this family won’t be happy unless they hear from the
   apologist, then I will consider that.

  The Jurv initially I was going to do without but I have changed my mind. There will be
  f ! u r “ U e n at tils preliminary stage, though the Jury will have nothing to do because
  there will be no verdict as such at this stage. Bearing in mind that one of the
  scenarios is that a prosecution may take place and that I may adjourn under Section 16
  and at the end of the day, may not resume, if we do this wlthout a Jury then none o 1
  been heard with a Jury and I think technically it’s better if the Inquests were hear
  with a Jury.

  Mr Metcalf - I can’t fault your logic but it would be    nice for them if there was a way
  round it but I can’t think of any.

•^MC - Initially I was going to dowithout, but assuming I did resume in six months time,
 we ’d have to repeat a fair bit of it anyway, even if I can get the same Jury ro we d ha
  to start with a new one, and do the whole job again. I felt it woul    e unwise
  proceed without them from a legal point of view.

 -Mr Metcalf - It’s case where you would automatically have had a Jury had their been no
 -.possible element of prosecution.

  HMC - That’s the problem. .The Act says that if, a Coroner s h a l l proceed .. .... I
  think its wiser. The Jury is going to cause a bit of a problem because I know fr m some
  of the, at least one, a bereaved representative that they are worried about how you can
  get an impartial Jury. Bearing in mind that this is an Inquest not a trial, I m not
  really worried about selecting.

  Mr Jones - For this purpose, as, they are not going to come to a verdict, it doesn’t
  really matter.
  HMC - We will probably exclude anybody who is related to any of the deceased, I t h i n k ^
' that is something vh^tTvTlhould discuss and decide whether we want to have any criteria




          INIAAF
   for exclusions on the Jury. We don’t want to pick and choose but we don’t want to have
   people who by definition are involved in some way. I have to think about this.

   We are inclined to hold it here and I will show you around the building later. As we are
   going to be dealing with 95 Inquests and provided we can get the summonsing right, we
   shouldn’t have too manypeople in the building at any one time.    Except on Day One when
   the press will be here,   then I think they will go away. We want to try and arrange for
   coffee and the WRVS, and we want to inform the Hillsborough Support Group. I don’t want
   to get involved in the running of that side because it’s more for Hr Fraser. What Ihave
   in mind, is when we warn the family of attendance, we would at the sametime warn the
   Support Group. We will then expect you to co-ordinate them, the Social Services etc.

   ^lr Metcalf - Are they all   represented, all 957

   Mr Fraser - There’s about two or three that aren’t, this is something that your Officers
   and I can check. Representation has changed.

   "MC - Can you let me have you updated list7

 t^fc^feraser - Yes, I can let you have that by the end of the week. Our difficulty is one
 ^ t ^ m I have no wish to embarrass my friend about, but we as a Steering Committee, may not
     be here because we have a problem with the Insurersabout being here.    Our original, if
     I’m treading on difficult territory, please say so. Ouroriginal approach to your
     Inquest was this; we have already sent out a questionnaire to all solicitors who
     represent the bereaved and with very few exceptions, they have all returned them saying
     they want block representation. This means you would have one individual or a team of
     two or three working on a rota basis appearing before you. It had originally been our
     intention to match representation with our protagonists, but in view of what you have
     said today, my view, subject to the view of my Committee, would be, that it would be a
i/T solicitor level only and probably me because I have 22 personal bereaved families and
111 I lead the team for the   Inquests, I would probably be Defore you. That was on the bas
' r£hat the Insurers would fund that en bloc. They have declined our invitation to pay f
   ‘■Representation for the bereaved at the Inquests at all. Not either en bloc or as
     solicitors or for each individual family. So the present position is that we either h
     to persuade them to see the error of their ways and there is a meeting on Wednesday of
     this week at which an attempt will be made, or, we have to tell the families they cannot
     *    a represented unless they pay for individual solicitors themselves and the prospect
^    therefore is that you have a different solicitor for each bereaved, or in some cases, no
W    solicitor at all. The third possibility is that there is funding available from another
 ^ source. I can tell you that as I speak there is no other source available. It has been
     suggested that we approach the Legal Aid Board, it is not possible. It’s been suggested
/ / that we approach the Disaster Fund, and they have declined, so there are only two
  ' possibilities, either' we can persuade the Insurers i In fairness to the Insurers, their
     stance was taken before this information came available to us, but either we can persuade
     them to change their minds and agree to fund block representation or fund individual
     solicitors representing their clients and those solicitors instructing us as agents. Or,
     secondly, you have a team of different solicitors, you have a different solicitor for
     each bereaved in front of you with my exception. Some have blocks of three, four and
     five solicitors, but there are quite a lot with one. The present situation is that you
     could end up with up to 40 solicitors in front of you and that is a problem for which I
     TAPE ENDS



           INIAAF
  That’s the situation as we talk at 3.30 today.

   Mr Metcalf - Ithink the particularproblem is that for two reasons my clients, and it
   isn’t just the MMI in this instance, don’t wish to go beyond that which they are legally
   liable for andthe two reasons are, firstly, we are pursuing the others, the Club,
   Eastwoods, the City Council, and if we pay out for something for which we are not liable
   legally, then we won’t get any of it back. Secondly, without giving any details of cover
   involved, it has been a matterof comment and it is partly correct, that if the amount to
   be paid out goes over a certain limit, it will be the ratepayers of S Yorkshire, whatever
   Treasury support they may get, who will be paying out compensation. In those
   circumstances, nobody wants to take a decision which could lead them to being surcharged
   at a later date for having willfully given away what turns out later to be public money.
   They present quite serious obstacles, whether there is anything that can be done I’m not
 ^^ure. There is a meeting on Wednesday where this will be discussed again. Mr Fraser is
   quite correct in saying it’s not me that takes decisions.

    UMC - From my point of view it would be better if we didn’t have, we do have many cases
        e people are not represented and there is no objection, but given the emotivenes of

   f     case and the limitations, legal representation might be helpful and desirable for me
        the. In a sense I ’m in your hands, assuming for a moment that I were making a claim,
//[ then I would include in my claim, the expenses and that would include legal, then I would
/^fhave to argue whether it was legitimate expense.

 1 Mr Metcalf - The difficulty is that it comes back to the question of civil action, the
  moving on at speed. In general terms, an Inquest takes place before a civil action and
  it’s always legitimate expense to go and be represented at the Inquest because something
  might come out that will be relevant to the civil action.

  HMC - In a sense we are doing that, we    have brought the Inquest forward.

  Mr Metcalf - Except that we are talking about representation here, the trouble is the
  .agreement has been made to pay out so there’s nothing for them to gain in that sense.

  Mr Fraser - Our argument is one of the issues that you are going to clarify is the extent
  of suffering before death and therefore we are here to get that information, and          /
  "herefore we think that we should be paid. If we get the papers in advance, we don t
  „ave to come. It is my wish that the Steering Committee is here and will represent as
  many as possible,. I will be here in any event and it is my view that as many as possible
  should be done, because although like you I have no wish to do it any more quickly that
  is necessary, if we have done the first day’s worth at eight, then we should be able to,
  if we can establish a pattern, without it being too obvious, then it will be easier for
  everybody.

  M r ..... - Can I just clarify here INAUDIBLE If a decision was that it wasn’t going to
  be forthcoming, the costs, where would   that leave us in terms of communication,talking
  to whom, the families directly and for   them to decide as to whether they employ at their
  own cost7

  Mr Fraser - No what the Insurers say is that they will pay the generic costs of our
  preparation for the Inquests e.g. I ’m here today as one of the Committee as part of the
  generic costs of that Committee. But the moment the Inquests start, then no we would not



          INIAAF
                                         - 10-

  be here. Up to the 18th April we wouldbe in, but once you switch    on the microphone on
  the 18th, then w e ’re not here.

  HMC - You would accept communications and presumablynotifying your clients7

  Mr Fraser - Yes that’s right.

   Mr .... - But it does change how we got here, the question of Social Services support is
<jj^that it isn’t something that we could actually lay off to you.

  Mr Fraser - No, I wouldn’t have raised the question of money had that not been an obvious
  link. Our present view is that if funding is granted, we will be here in terms of an
  advocate and at least one legal runner who knows his way around the papers and can assist
   our Officers.

  Mr Metcalf -I would have thought we would have been looking at one representative here,
  solicitor or a clerk after things got going.

   umc- Let’s assume the financial side got sorted out and that you will be here. If we
  flf going to do eight a day, I reckon we will have to move at a fairly briskpace and
  what I have in mind is to warn the family to come at x time, deal with the case, take
  them out of Court, bring the next family in. That will mean that if you want to see the
  family who we have just dealt with, then you have got to have somebody here to see them
  because we will be starting the next Inquest.

   Mr Fraser - or they may want to see me, but I would have somebody from my office here or
   from the Committee to deal with any problems then, similar to the Public Inquiry. Who do
   you anticipate will be before you7

|j HMC - I have drafted a letter to all solicitors I am aware of, not just the Committee.
■' There are quite a lot of firms who were represented at the Inquiry who have not
    contacted me at all but I intend to tell them about the pre-inquest review so that they
 ^ • a n attend if they wish. I suspect that not everybody will come and that at the Inquest,
    it will be yourself and possibly you.

   Mr Metcalf - I would have thought the Club and Council would have someone at the
    Jiquests.

^ Mr Fraser - I think to some extent that the publicity that comes from your office fb™*-
  what the Inquest is. for may reduce the numbers. If it is known that it is non liability,
  non adverserial.

   HMC - I think they will be here the first two or three days, then they may decide there’s
   not much.

  Mr Jones - Can I just add that there will be transcripts as well.

   HMC - We are wired for sound and we usually transcribe from tapes, but at the moment that
   even if we have it here, I will get preferably the same firm that did the Inquiry to do
   shorthand transcripts and we will probably record as well. We will let anyone who wants
   copies of the transcripts, have them at the usual rate. I will try and get individual



           INIAAF
Inquests done separately so that we won’t get a whole day’s proceedings.     You can ask fov
individual copies rather than all those for that day.

Mr Metcalf - It will reduce the need to go through the evidence at the end. I can’t
think at the moment of circumstances where we would have questions to ask, if we don’t
the likelihood is that we would want a low level representation and a transcript.

Mr Fraser - I think from a political point of view, the Ch Constable might want somebod'-
in.

Mr Metcalf - Yes and no.   If it isn’t necessary, but I would have thought. I’ll have to*
think about it.

P^MC - I want to call the cases in Pathologist order because if I do need to call a
^Pathologist, I want to call him for half a dozen. But of course where there are two
 people in. the same family have been killed, then that’s an over-riding consideration.
 Those Inquests should be done on the same day. There are other factors which come into
  ^ as well. They will appear random. The disadvantage is that they won’t be in
 ^ficitor order. If the Committee doesn’t represent, it’s not a problem.

Mr Fraser - How much notice would you give the families or would you tell the
solicitors?

HMC - What I have in mind, is that we would notify the solicitors of the time andalso
the family directly. An Officer would tell them, and of course any witnesses wemay want
to call, the Officers would notify. And of course the Hillsborough Support Group so it
may well be that in certain circumstances, we’d turn up at the door as well. We’d have
to say that the Inquest is going to be held on x day but beprepared for change. Mr
Fraser, you could explain those aspects.

Mr Fraser - It would help me if you could also tell me with       my Committee hat on,         the
-Droposeddates as well.

HMC - Yes. If I know that the Committee will be representing en bloc, I wouldn’t notify
the individual solicitors, I would just notify you of the dates.

 r Fraser - I think it would be better if you told the solicitors as well. To a large
extent, we are anonymous in the sense that we have deliberately not identified ourselves
as individuals and if I have the information, then by the time I get to his solicitor an
he gets it out, or he gets the information get back to me, I think if it’s possible, te
the family, tell the solicitor and also tell me.

Mr Metcalf - It only matters in terms of preparation, reading up etc.

HMC - That is all I really need to say today.

Mr       - This question, your objectives as it were, in asense    you are united in term*
of finding out the information in order to settle on

Mr Metcalf - We each have the idea that this thing is bettersettled     quicker.




            INIAAF
 /                                        -   12 -

? K r         _ in particular, the pain and suffering levels., immediately before and after
    death, there may well also be needs amongst the families to actually question, which they
    would normally do in an Inquest, question the people who were actually there, to say what
    did you do to help my client. One thing that you will have to be sure of is that this
 ' i ‘device’ will actually bring out that to your satisfaction. A lot of it will centre of
  [what the summaries say, but the ability to cross examine will not be there at that point,
    either for you or for the families. If we called the police after we had just completed,
    and in many instances they would be in a position to give that evidence under cross
    examination, there could also be considerable problems there where it could become
    adverserial in terms of complaints against police.

    Mr Fraser - The majority of the families won’t be looking for that problem, there will be
    some. I think the advance publicity can make it as clear as possible,    on bothsides of
 ^ * h e Pennines, that this is an exercise to give information and not one to

   HMC - This is the draft letter.

       Fraser - Would it be your intention to talk to the press before next week s meeting?

   HMC - I ’m inclined to say I should tell the press about the meeting and I have drafted
   another press.

   Mr Fraser - Somebody must copy it to the press agency.

   Mr Metcalf - The only thing I would mention from your point of view is that some people
   might phone that number on the second page and be surprised when someone says "W Midlands
   Police".

   HMC - It is going to solicitors apart from those fey who are not represented.   I am going
   to do a covering letter to those.

   Mr Fraser - So this is to all those solicitors who have notified you they representthe
  ^.eceased to all organisations who were represented

   Mr Metcalf - Other bodies who were given representation at theInquiry.

   '4MC - Do you think you could send me the addresses?

   Mr Fraser - When would you expect to release this?

   HMC - Tonight if we finish early, we need the addresses so tomorrow. I don’t intend to
   send one to each deceased, just one to each firm. I do intend at some point to have a
   meeting with the press and re-explain a) what we are doing, b) try and point out that I
   don’t want any more bad press in my Court. I also want to talk with the Social Services.

   Mr Metcalf - I suspect you will get quite a big turn out next week from people, I don’t
   know if there’s scope for extra benches.

   HMC - We won’t have all the families, it will all be solicitors. I don’t think we 11
   have enough space next week but I agree with you, I suspect there will be quite a few
   representatives.



            INIAAF
                                          - 13 -

            Can I just confidentially brief you both in terms of the progress of the
/ investigation. That is continuing, I saw Mr Metcalfs eyes raise when I said the final
   submission to the DPP won’t have gone by the time this start§ on the 18th. It won t be
   lone after. I intend to finish it in the Spring and await the" DPP’s response. But in
   fairness, it will not be completed, every t crossed and every i dotted until the end of
 khis particular process. Not that this process is anything to do with it. it’s just       .
   simply that other things are going on and that includes interviews which I will be
  italking to you about. I have had your letter, we didn’t deliberately respond other than/\
   to acknowledge because we wanted to talk about this, bearing in mind your letter came
   about the same time as Miss Steel’s asking very similar questions.

  HMC - Are you content that we should proceed in the way that I have outlined?

 ^ r Metcalf - I see no reason why not.

        Fraser - I agree entirely. There will be one or two problems with this but on balance


 t      hink it’s an excellent idea, primarily

      information that they have wanted for
                                                 from the

                                                nearly a
                                                             point of view of the relativesto g

                                                            year, and also from the lawyerspo
  of view, there is an added bonus that information will come out, and those few problems
  will be the price we will have to pay for a much larger benefit. f)r^A S jtA ^

  Mr ......    -    Without naming anyindividuals, do you think there would be scope and woul
  it beappropriate to take those cases which perhaps could cause greater difficulty
  towards the middle or towards the end, rather than on the first day when all the press
  will be queued up7

  Mr Fraser - It depends on the nature of the problem really.

  Mr Metcalf - I think it would be usual in most Courts to take shorter cases before longer
  ones and if the anticipation is that in some cases there will be a lot of questions, the
  usual thing would be to list them at the end.

^Ir            What you might get is a lot of the other families hyped up.

  Mr Jones - I think it should be started as a low key thing and hopefully it will run that
   /ay. Whereas if you have the world’s press here on the first few days, the disadvantage
  is that if they get hold of the timetable, I thinkthey’ll do that anyway. But I agree,
  the stuff which can be got out of the way without any difficulty should be, so as not o
  upset them as individuals.

  M r         - Minimise the trauma really.

  Mr Metcalf - Again, if any cases which are going to cause a n y particular problems are
  last on the list on any given day, then no other family is going to be kept waiting.

  HMC - Structure them within the days as well.

  Mr Fraser - I would say that there is one particular case I can think of that should be
  heard in the morning.

  HMC - If you have any views Mr Fraser you must tell me.


             INIAAF
  Mr Fraser - I have to be very careful.

  HMC - I’m not asking you to tell me now.

 / Mr Fraser - There is one family who would swell thecoffersof the local hostelry before
V.-they arrived, so if they were a 9.00am start. One other thing, what time will you start
   in terms of travelling?

  HMC - Any thoughts?

  Mr       - 9.30am at the latest I would have thought.

 _ HMC - Can you do it7

  Mr Metcalf - There's no problem from our point of view, I am just thinking about.

  ^^Fraser - An hour and three quarters to    drive but I     don’twant to do    that15 days.

  HMC - No but from the families, if it takes two   hours     for the journery   fromLiverpool

  Mr Fraser - A third of them are not from Liverpool.

  Mr ..... - INAUDIBLE    see in fact in the order of the day whether wecan   actually get
  the geography.

  Mr Metcalf - I would have been inclined to suggest a start at 10.00am and be prepared to
  sit later rather than starting at 9.30am.

  HMC - Iagree. Vithout a Jury you can sit as long as you   like but with a Jury you have
  to stop for refreshments, etc. We'll have to do the best we can.

^ T h e vitnesses will be paid in the usual way. There won’t be many witnesses but none
   Witnesses, that includes family, will not be.

  Mr .... - Do you want to mention the possibility not the probability, the possibility of
  ^nother week being set aside for.

. HMC - We’ve chosen the dates because they suited us from a practical point of view but we
  recognise is that there may be INAUDIBLE we want to finish it if at all possible before
  the 4th May. We have tentatively reserved another week, beginning 21st May I think to
         the stragglers or those on holiday.




          INIAAF
                                  HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989


    Informal        Meetingof HM Coroner, Legal Representatives and the Bereaved, Held onTuesday,

    6th March 1990_______ _______________________ — -------- — ------ -- ---------------


    Legal Representativess-


    Mr Fraser - member of the Steering Committee which was formed by the firms of solicitors
         in Liverpool who were instructed by families shortly after the disaster.       My
         Committee represents approximately 150 practises within that Group, about 50
         practises have received instructions from bereaved families.       Those 50 practises, I
    £}   understand, represent 92 of the deceased, there being three bereaved families who
"   have either not contacted us as a group or contacted solicitors themselves.        We have had
         general contact and it would be our intentions subject to your approval, to be
         present to assist the bereaved and the Court throughout any hearing you may

         reconvene.


     Mr Gregory - representsSheffield City Council.


     Mr Peter       Doyle -Davies Arnold.Cooper Solicitors, for Sheffield WednesdayFootball   Club.


     Mr Andrew Callaghan - Dibb Lupton Broomhead, represents Trent Regional Health Authority
         and Sheffield Metropolitan Ambulance Service.
                *


     Ms Katherine Thorpe - Reynolds Porter Chamberlain, represent Eastwood & Partners.


     Ms Norcliffe -       Hammond Suddards, represents SY Police.


     I want to introduce Mr Mervyn Jones, Assistant Chief Constable, West Midlands Police and
     he is acting as my Coroner's Officer for the purposes of this meeting and also for the

     purposes of the Inquests.




\
                                               - 2 -


     The purpose    of this meeting is to try and tell you     some of the thinking which         I      h
     engaged in,    the proposals which I have with regard     to resuming the   Inquests and toobtai
      from the legal representatives, confirmation that what I am proposing would appear to be
      an acceptable way forward.    I ought to jnaic^ it clear, that I have had a preliminary
      discussion with Mr Fraser and      Kennedy^ last week, with a view to exploring the very
      subject which we are discussing today.    These are the 2 solicitors I have had most
      correspondence with.


      The second thing I want to say, the fact that we are meeting today and I am thinking of
    ^ L s u m i n g the Inquests rather sooner that I had originally intended, does not mean that
^     the Director of Public Prosecutions has either informed me of any decisions or taken any
      decisions with regard to this matter.


     My Coroner’s Officer who is also heading up the Team which is preparing the paper work
      for the DPP informs me that the Director at the moment is not able to take a decision
      because all   the paper work has not been delivered to him.


     As you will    note from the letter I sent to you, it    is my intention    subject to       this
     meeting to try and resume shortly after Easter.      The timing for that has got nothing
     whatever to do with any action or inaction by the DPP.


     The present time schedule for submission of papers to the DPP is such that if we do
£     resume these Inquests shortly     after Easter, the papers will not yet have been submitted
     to the DPP in full.     The position will be exactly as it is today. It may be that whilst
     we are proceeding with the Inquests, the papers will go to the DPP and indeed the
     submission may well be completed.     We had considered something of this sort some time
     ago and we rejected it because we were concerned that people might feel that there is
      something going on which I ’m not letting on about.    That is not the case.


     The reason why I revised my opinion as to the possibility of resuming these Inquests, was
     because we received a letter from Miss Steel, who is a member of the Hillsborough
     ,Steering Committee, in which'she had enclosed a letter which she actually wrote to the^
     .DPP, and by chance we also had a letter from Hammond Suddards, who didn’t actually, make
      the same'point .but it was alstf raising points relating to timing and disclosure.      I
      realised that what Miss Steel was saying was similar to my original thoughts and felt it
    r was appropriate to reconsider       my earlier   decision which was to do nothing until aftert
     DPP has answered.
I want to indicate three possible scenarios before the Inquests.     Please listen to these
bearing in mind what I have said as to my knowledge as to what the DPP is going to do.
The first one is. having considered all the paper work and the evidence, he decides to
bring a prosecution against somebody or bodies, corporate or otherwise, but he decides to
bring a prosecution for a major offence which falls within Section 16, and the only one'
which is likely to apply is manslaughter.     If he were to bring such a charge, then the
procedure under Section 16 of the Coroner’s Act is that I would adjourn the Inquest.       At
the end of the Town Hall proceedings, it would be my option whether I resumed the
^quests or not.      It’s only fair to say that I've been Coroner now for about      years and
^Pte never yet resumed an Inquest which was adjourned under Section 16.


Scenario     two is the DPP says no prosecution but that one or more or some other person
decides that they wish to bring a private prosecution against somebody corporate or
otherwise.    If that were to occur and if a charge were laid, then Section 16 would apply
again with exactly the same consequences.


The third scenario is that the DPP says no prosecution, and nobody else wants to proceed.
In those cases, we would in a normal run of events, resume the Inquests    and    complete it
within the ..... that I consider appropriate to the circumstances.


I don’t know which of these scenarios will apply but if we were to resume before the DPP
makes a decision, and if a Section 16 situation were then to arise, I would immediately
after resume the Inquests purely and simply for the purposes of adjourning under the
provisions of Section 16 in order to comply with the Act.     That would be a formality but
wouldn’t take very long but in a sense, getting the information now, would have the
advantage that we would be able to deal with it fairly quickly.     One of the reasons you
adjourn under Section 16 is that families can get their death certificates which they
can’t normally do until the Inquest is complete.
                                           -   k   -




 Following receipt of Miss Steel's letter and my reconsideration, I got in touch with the
 DPP or one of his representatives, to see whether he would agree that I should resume the
 Inquests on a limited basis.      What I proposed to him was that we would resume for the
 purposes of taking the medical evidence, and we would deal with the alcohol levels of the
 individuals at that time'*.    We would endeavour to put before my Court of where the
 deceased were within the Stadium and if possible, evidence of where they were seen either
 alive or dead at various points within the Stadium and probably, some evidence as to how
 they got to the Stadium.      We would not deal with how or why they died or who is to blame,
^pie reason for this is:


 a) the DPP would not agree to me resuming the Inquests if we were to deal with
 controversial matters.     He would not agree if we dealt with matters which would impair
 his investigations or the scope for action which he might wish to take.        It is in the
 interests of justice that nothing I do should muddy the waters and perhaps hinder other
 proceedings which make take place in a different Court.


 If I resume these Inquests-; they will be of a limited nature.They will        be designed to
 be non adverserial, to present the factual evidence.        The way I want the evidence
 presented to meet the legitimate requirements of everyone involved is as follows.


 We will deal with post morterns.     Some Inquests will require the Pathologist to be present
 others will only require documentary evidence.        We will discuss this with the
 Hillsborough Steering Committee and other relevant parties to determine whether the
 Pathologist
     *       is required.


We will deal with the alcohol levels of the deceased.         They were all done apart from one,
 and we will tell you at the Inquests what the individual levels were. Dr Forrest will
 attend some of the Inquests to formally prove his evidence and if there is any individual
 case where the alcohol level might be controversial, we will ask Dr Forrest to attend.
My intention is to hold a short Inquest for each individual deceased         and complete the
evidence as far as we are going.
#
                                            5



  W Midlands Police are preparing the remainder of the evidence following Lord Justice
  Taylor’s report and the publication of the interim report and submission to the DPP.      The
  Inquest cannot be held until the DPP has completed his work, so I said get the paper work
  done for the DPP, my documents can come later.   A file of each individual deceased will
  be presented to me containing copy statements together with a summary by one of the W        f
 Midlands’ Police Officers which will summarise, factually and non adverserially, the
  evidence of the witnesses.   We intend to present that summary to Court.


  In order to help the legal representatives and the bereaved families, we intend to
^^irculate the summaries before the particular Inquest to enable comments regarding
  inaccuracies or unclear statements, to be made to me via legal representatives.      If it
  is possible, we will either get the Summary Officer, who will be here and will be giving
  evidence, to elaborate on the particular point, or I might decide it is possible to get a
 witness to deal with that point, or we will read a witness’ statement by way of
  documentary evidence on that point.   Under no circumstances are we going to call any S
 Yorkshire Police Officer to the hearing.
#
                                          7 -

Hr Fraser - how far in terms of time do you anticipate the summaries will go, to the
point of identification or beyond, or not as far as that?


I would expect that they would go at least up to the temporary mortuary and possibly up
to the point of identification.     The identification in a sense will be dealt with at the
opening so we may well stop at that point*      The objective is to trace each individual
from the moment he left home to the point in time when he was in the temporary mortuary.
We may not succeed but that is the intention.     We feel that is what you want to know.


    will probably have available but I don’t think we will circulate, documents called
anna-cappas, these are rather nice summary charts which haveclocks on them and      it is
easier from that to see where certain events occurred.      There will be a copy in Court on
the relevant day.


It would be unreasonable for people like Dr Forrest who did the blood alcohols, to sit
here for every Inquest, so what 1 intend to do is to ask Dr Forrest to come along on Day
1 and to prove formally to the Court, his evidence and to explain as far as is necessary,
the method used for the test.     We also want to have Inspector Leighton and may be one or
two others, who will explain the anna-cappas, the codings, etc.      I am also considering
asking probably Professor Usher to give an overview of the pathology of the type of
injury which occurred.


We are aiming to hold eight Inquests per day.     We want to have enough time so that each
individual family can feel that their particular loved one has been given full
consideration.   This means the duration is likely to be 2% to 3 weeks of sittings.
Clearly for each Inquest, it’s a relatively short period of time but for me and the legal
representatives and for the Jury, it’s weeks of stress and it’s not fair to them to make
this longer than it has to be.     But 1 don’t intend to rush it, they have to be as
thorough and sympathetic within the limits 1 have indicated to you.      I want people to be
able to leave at the end of the day and be able to say, well we know we haven ’t heard all
the answers, but we know more than we did when we started.
+




                                             - 8 -

    The Inquests will not be held in numerical or alphabetical order.       The listing of the
    cases is a very difficult problem and I don’t think we have solved it.I had made up            my
    mind that we were going to do them in Pathologist order, in a sense that is still the
    order.    But in a few cases, more than one person died in a family,    and because of the way
    their identifications were done and the way the post mortem was done, it wasn’t always
    the same Pathologist who dealt with family units.      For that reason alone, we will have to
    break the general order because I don’t want to deal with the same family on different
    days.    There are other factors that come into play.'


      appreciate that it may be important to you, but the decision as to which order we are
    going to take the cases is going to be mine and my Officers.       We will certainly not want
    to inconvenience anybody deliberately, I think it will be an impossible task to try and
    take individual preferences into account, or if we       do take themintoaccount, they would
    come at the bottom of the list.     We are conscious   of where peoplelive and that they   have
    to come a long way in many cases.


    My initial intention was to hold the limited Inquests, assuming that we proceed, without
    a Jury being present.    I have reflected on this and despite the fact that the Jury at
    this stage will not have very much to do other than to listen, I feel that we will have
    to have a Jury present for each Inquest.     I think you should assume that we will be
    dealing with a Jury.    Even if this were an Inquest from start to finish, an Inquest is
Ifnot an adverserial procedure.       The job of the Jury is to reach a verdict on the evidence
I which they hear in the Court.
        0                     •>

    I intend, assuming that we proceed, holding the Inquests here at the Medico-Legal Centre.
    I intend to arrange for the proceedings to be transcribed so that transcripts will be
    available in a reasonable time.     I don’t think there is any need for them to be available
    on a next-day basis.    Of course, they will have tobe paid for.


    Do any of the lawyers think this is a non-starter7


    Mr Fraser - in view of your opening remarks, we have had an opportunity to discuss these
    proposals at some length and there is a general     .....    towards the idea and you are to
    be commended for putting forward the suggestions you have.
    Are there any other legal representatives who have any other comments as to whether we
     should proceed on this basis7


     I am well aware that there is a Hillsborough Support Group and 1 want you to feel that I
    wouldn’t do anything to harm or hinder your endeavours.       On the other hand, I think we
    have got to have correct lines of communication.       Probably the right way of looking at
    this is to say the support groups are really family orientated.       I know that you have
    thought of other groups, for example the Jury, who may need some support at some point in
    Mie future, but I am talking about the families now.       Uhat I intend to do is, we will be
    ^Plting hopefully when we anticipate the Inquests will be held and what we will probably •
    do is give you a provisional date and try and confirm as soon as possible.        If somebody
    could be nominated from the Hillsborough Support Group, I or my Officers would endeavour
    to inform you of the dates when a particular family will be involved.       Once we have done
    that, we would expect the solicitors to liaise with the Support Group.       The lines of
    communication should be through the solicitor rather than through the Coroner to relieve
    me of a certain amount of work.      It may well be if time allows that we will arrange fojr
    an informal meeting with the Hillsborough Support Group and myself and maybe the
    Officers.       If a family is informed of the Inquest and they do not arrive, we will proceed
    with the Inquest.


    We will try to have refreshments available in the building.
/               ,

    The press will be entitled to be present at these Inquests.       It is public Court and the:
    are entitled.
H E R MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR.SOUTH YORKSHIRE
-------- '     (W E S T D I S T R I C T )


          INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                     STADIUM DISASTER

               ON THE 15th APRIL, 1989




                     BUSINESS     MEETING




                            Before

S.   L.    POPPER,      LL.B.,   SB.MED.Sci.,       B M,   BS,   MRCGP

               (H e r    Majesty's    Coroner)




                                 At

               The Medico-Legal Centre,
                    Watery Street,
                      Sheffield.

                                 on
             Tuesday, 30th October, 1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS



     From  t h e N o t e s of J» L. H a r p h a m L t d . ,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
      ' 55 Q u e e n S t r e e t , S h e f f i e l d S I 2 D X
                                             APPEARANCES



H r . T. K i n g - c o u n s e l .           I n s t r u c t e d b y the H i l l s b o r o u g h    Group
of S o l i c i t o r s , r e p r e s e n t i n g the b e r e a v e d a nd i n j u r e d .

M r . C. R u s s e l l - c o u n s e l . I n s t r u c t e d by Barlow,                Lyde        and
Gilbert representing Superintendent Greenwood.

M r . S. C a t c h p o l e - c o u n s e l . Instructed                by D a v i e s , A r n o l d ,
Cooper, representing S h e f f i e l d Wednesday                       Football Club.

M r . V. H a l e - s o l i c i t o r .         Representing           Superintendent               Roger
Marshall.

Mr. R. M a n n i n g      -   solicitor.            Representing           Superintendent
Hurray.

Mr. P. I s a a c s - c o u n s e l . I n s t r u c t e d by H e p w o r t h            and     Chadwick
representing Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

Mr. G r e g o r y - s o l i c i t o r .        R e presenting the insu r e r s               of
S h e f f i e l d C it y C o u n c i l a n d   Shef f i e l d City Council.

M i s s B. N o r c l i f f e - s o l i c i t o r .        Representing           the   Chief
C o n s t a b l e of t he S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e     Police.

Mr. P. J a c k s o n - s o l i c i t o r .           Representing          the    Football
Supporters' Association.

Mrs.     J.   McBrian.           Representing           her    family.

Mr.    Holroyd.           Representing            the   Police      Federation.
                                     B U S IN E S S   M E E T IN G

                                             Held      on

                            TUESDAY,       30tn       OCTOBER,       1990

          THE CORONER:             Welcome.           C a n I s a y f i r s t o f a l l t ha t
t h i s is n o t a p a r t o f t h e i n q u e s t s p r o p e r , b e c a u s e t he
i n q u e s t s p r o p e r a r e a c t u a l l y r e s u m i n g , as y o u k n o w , o n the
1 9 t h of N o v e m b e r .       T h e p u r p o s e o f t h i s m e e t i n g a s I s a i d in
m y l e t t e r to the l e g a l r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s , is for m e to h a v e an
o p p o r t u n i t y to m e e t m e m b e r s o f t h e l e g a l p r o f e s s i o n a n d
r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s in o r d e r to s o r t o u t p r o c e d u r a l m a t t e r s so
t h a t as f a r a s p o s s i b l e w e c a n r u n t h e i n q u e s t s w h e n w e
a c t u a l l y g e t d o w n to them, in a s s m o o t h a n d as e f f i c i e n t a
w a y a s p o s s i b l e in th e i n t e r e s t s o f e v e r y b o d y w h o h a s an
i n t e r e s t in fhe matter, i n c l u d i n g m y s e l f .

        In o r d e r t o - a v o i d a n y p o s s i b l e m i s u n d e r s t a n d i n g w e w i l l
n o t - I r e p e a t n ot - d e a l w i t h a n y q u e s t i o n s of e v i d e n c e
t h i s a f t e r n o o n , o r q u e s t i o n s of f a c t .   VJe a r e d e a l i n g w i t h
simple procedural matters.                        I t r i e d to m a k e t h a t c l e a r in
t h e i n v i t a t i o n , a n d I h o p e t h a t w a s u n d e r s t o o d , b u t I just,
w a n t to r e p e a t it so t h e r e c a n ' t b e a n y d o u b t a b o u t i t a t
all.
          S e c o n d l y , t h i s m e e t i n g is - i t is d i f f i c u l t to k n o w^
w h a t to c a l l it b e c a u s e in C o r o n e r ' s p r o c e e d i n g s y o u d o n ’ t
n o r m a l l y h a v e o p p o r t u n i t i e s for t h i s s o r t o f g a t h e r i n g , b u t
y o u c o u l d m a y b e , b y w a y of a n a l o g y , t r e a t it as i f i t w e r e a
s e s s i o n b e f o r e the J u d g e in c h a m b e r s o r a n i n t e r l o c u t o r y
procedure.                T h e p o i n t a b o u t it is t h a t . a l t h o u g h n o t h i n g
w i l l be s a i d w h i c n is l i k e l y to c a u s e a n y p r o b l e m s b e c a u s e
w e w i l l b e s t i c k i n g to p r o c e d u r e , i t s h o u l d be t r e a t e d a s a
b u s i n e s s m e e t i n g , as a p r i v a t e - g a t h e r i n g b e t w e e n m y s e l f a n d
tae l a w y e r s .           P e r h a p s I o u g h t to s a y t h a t I d i d m a k e it
c l e a r i n t h e l e t t e r t h a t I w o u l d n o t r a i s e a n y o b j e c t i o n to
i n t e r e s t e d parties coming.                   I m e a n t that b e c a u s e I d i d n ' t
w a n t a n y b o d y to f eel t h at I w a s m e e t i n g w i t h l a w y e r s , o r
a n y b o d y e l s e for t h a t m a t t e r , w h e r e t he p e o p l e w h o h a d a
direct interest were specifically excluded.                                      I recognise
one or two faces, b ut I don't r e c o g n i s e everybody, m a i n l y
b e c a u s e I a m so p o o r at r e c o g n i t i o n o f fac es, b u t t h a t ' s m y
problem.

          W o u l d it be b e s t if y o u j u s t i n t r o d u c e d y o u r s e l v e s , the
l a w y e r s t h a t is, a n d t h e r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s , so I k n o w w h o is
h e r e a n d s o t h a t the s h o r t h a n d w r i t e r c a n t a k e a n o t e .        I
a m t a k i n g a p r o p e r n o t e of w h a t is g o i n g on b e c a u s e I
t h o u g h t i t w a s w i s e t h at w e k n e w p r e c i s e l y w h a t w a s s a i d .

         MR. K I N G :       S i r , rny n a m e is T i m o t h y      K i n g of C o u n s e l .
I am     instructed         on b e h a l f of a n u m b e r o f        the d e c e a s e d
through their personal representatives.                                  I c a n n o t today
r ea d o u t a d e f i n i t i v e l i s t of e v e r y o n e w h o m I r e p r e s e n t .
T h a t is b e c a u s e t h e r e w a s i n i t i a l l y a p r e l i m i n a r y l i s t of
a b o u t f o r t y to f o r t y - t w o .       A t the m o m e n t it is a b o u t t w e n t y -
six d e f i n i t e sets of i n s t r u c t i o n s . -          It i s likely....that t h a t
w i l l be a d d e d to a n d if it is o f h e l p , s i r , w i t h i n a w e e k I
arn t o l d I c a n p r o v i d e y o u , sir, w i t h a d e f i n i t i v e l i s t of
t h o s e w h o w i l l be r e p r e s e n t e d t h r o u g h m y s e l f .       I am
i n s t r u c t e d t h r o u g h H r. F r a s e r , s o l i c i t o r , w h o is o n e of si x
s o l i c i t o r s w h o f o r m t he H i l l s b o r o u g h g r o u p o f s o l i c i t o r s w h o
v/ere k n o w n as the S t e e r i n g C o m m i t t e e at the t i m e o f the
T a y l o r I n q u i r y , a c t i n g on b e h a l f of t h e b e r e a v e d a n d i n j u r e d
a n d t h e y in t u r n h a v e b e e n i n s t r u c t e d by a g r o u p w h i c h h a v e
f o r m e d tht2i;iseIves t h r o u g h the f a m i l i e s c a l l e d T h e
H i l l s b o r o u g h F a m i l y S u p p o r t G r o up .

         H o w e v e r , w e d o n ' t c l a i m to r e p r e s e n t e a c h a n d e v e r y s e t
o f p e r s o n a l r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of e a c h d e c e a s e d , o n l y t h o s e
w n i c h I have' i n d i c a t e d n u m b e r n o w t w e n t y - s i x a n d is l i k e l y
t o . g o u p p o s s i b l y to f o r t y to f o r t y - t w o .

       .;T H E C O R O N E R :       T h a n k you. W e l l , w h e n Mr. F r a s e r o r h i s
i n s t r u c t i n g s o l i c i t o r s a r e in a p o s i t i o n to l et m e h a v e a
d e f i n i t i v e l i s t it w o u l d be h e l p f u l b e c a u s e t h e n I w i l l k n o w
who you aren't representing.                        T h a t is w h a t . I a m r e a l l y
i n t e r e s t e d in.         It is the o n e s w h o a r e o u t s i d e y o u r . . .

      • HU.-KING:              S i r , I o u g h t to s a y t h e r e m a y w e l l b e
individuals here today who represent p e r s o n a l
r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of, d e c e a s e d w h o h a v e n ' t g i v e n i n s t r u c t i o n s
to o u r s e l v e s w h o w o u l d w a n t to be h e a r d t o d a y as b e i n g
representatives.

        THE CORONER:            Indeed.           P e r h a p s it is o n l y f a i r to s a y
thi s i n v i t a t i o n w a sn 't - e x t e n d e d to e v e r y s i n g l e
representative.               It w a s a l i m i t e d i n v i t a t i o n to p e o p l e w h o
I t h o u g h t h a d m o s t to g a i n f r o m t h e m e e t i n g .

          MR. R U S S E L L :      S i r , I a m n e x t in l i n e .         M y n a m e is
C h r i s t o p h e r Rus s e l l and I am a barrister.                    I am instructed
b y B a r l o w , L y d e a n d G i l b e r t , s o l i c i t o r s i n L o n d o n , to w h o m
y o u e x t e n d e d s u c n a n i n v i t a t i o n , to r e p r e s e n t t h e i n t e r e s t s
of S u p e r i n t e n d e n t G r e e n w o o d .

          MR. C A T C H P O L E :      M y n a m e is S t u a r t C a t c h p o l e .    I am a
b a r r i s t e r i n s t r u c t e d by Messrs. Davie s, A r n o l d , C o o p e r .
W i t h m e t o d a y is Mr. D o y l e f r o m t h a t f i r m o f s o l i c i t o r s a n d
w e a p p e a r o n b e h a l f of S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y F o o t b a l l C l ub .

          THE CORONER:            Yes,      I do r e m e m b e r       you    from   the     interim
h e a r i n g s , Mr. C a t c h p o l e .                                                           t

     MR. .HALE:             I a m V i n c e n t Hale.                  I    represent
Superintendent            Roger Marshall.          I am            a       solicitor.
         MU. ISAACS:                PaulIsaacs, » & t£ “"85 e ^ o r t h ‘and* “
^                        S : ^ p “ J L T c ^ ESs i p - i n Ce ^ e n ? n u c k . n f l .l d .

          THE CORO N C R :           Yes.'
          UK. OKEGOaV:               Hy name ^            Gffi|°dycltyKCouncil"and the
L S S T S U S                   1“hS?“       . f S                 i s o a s o l i c i t o r f r o . the
City Council.                   He is wLth me today.


press, is that n j n t ? '-e U ’This is not part of the
I would like you to leave.               occasion and I would
Ere, ; » - if “ « “ o W leave because I think that is the
hasis upon which t called this meetmg.

     As I explained to you, this               nobody can
anything being ^ ^ “ ^ “'^bearins in mind.the matter is
hear          it,   but     I don     t want            oeac       r      ^      think        it    is o n l y
    ooing      t o be d e a l t w i t n                J               deal, w i t h    the        procedure,
    rig h t    t h a t we r e m e m b e r a n d we j u s t
                                                                                                                        a

    solicitor 8             ? ? 5U           J      M                                                       ^
    Yorkshire            Police.

              Tins CORONER:             Yes, I remember you too from the
    previous        ses sio n s.

              MR. JACKSON:           . S i r , I am. P e t e r J a y s o n                    I »       a
     partner        in    Hill,     Dickenson, D a v i e s , C j m p D e                i ^         ^           x
     r e p r e s e n t the F o o t b a l l S^P^ °              .       staoe     t h a t w e a r e h e r e in
     f e e l I o u g h t to p o i n t o u t at             t               p         clients t h a n k you.
     response        to                          £ he   fu „ d L ™ S f a i y      clients ''
     o r g a n i s a t i o n , y ie w i l l b e a b l e t o S p p e a r b e f o r e you                             .
     throughout           the    inquiry.

               THE COROWER:             Perhaps _thtd°biene iS1 toSchh 5 ithe Kill ^
     trie r e s t o f t n e l a w y e r s .              I h      urooerlv                p o i n t e d o u t to
     D i c k e n s o n in the pas t a nd                they very                         £ a r t i c u ia r , but
     m e t ha t t h e y w e r e n t                                            about the p r e p a r a t i o n
     it o c c u r r e d to m e w h e n           I was      th            “       ,--1 miwht well
      for these inquests that suppor *j[     t                                     th     evidence.     I
      feature to a greater or lesser extent i                                      u        of n i U   _ .
      thought it right t o draw that to the at                                            ^ ^        That
      Dickenson in case th*Jdw ‘^ i o u s l y it is a matter entirely
      is w h y      you    are    here and         obviously
f o r y o u to d e c i d e w h a t ,    if     anything,          you     do..         I appreciate
y o u r .difficulty.
                                         i
          MR. J A C K S O N :      S i r , ray c l i e n t s d o t a k e t h e v i e w t hat
t h e r e w o u l d b e a v o i d b e f o r e y o u in r e p r e s e n t a t i o n if the
s u p p o r t e r s w e r e n ’t h e r e , b u t w e a r e in d i f f i c u l t i e s .       I
w i l l s p e a k to the s o l i c i t o r s f o r t h e ot'neir p a r t i e s .            I t may.
b e t h a t if I ca n o b t a i n u n d e r t a k i n g s a b o u t t h e e x t e n t a n d
s c o p e of c r i t i c i s m of L i v e r p o o l F o o t b a l l C l u b s u p p o r t e r s ,
t h a t a l o t of the n e e d f o r r e p r e s e n t a t i o n b e f o r e y o u w i l l
go.         T h a t w i l l o b v i o u s l y d e p e n d o n w h a t s o r t of
u n d e r t ak i n gs - I can o b t a i n .

         THE CORONER:             H a v e I g ot a ll t he l a w y e r s n o w ?         I did
w r i t e to Mrs. M c B r i a n - yes, t h e r e y o u a r e - b e c a u s e I k n e w
s h e w a s n o t r e p r e s e n t e d s p e c i f i c a l l y a n d I t h o u g h t it w a s
r i g n t t ha t y o u c o m e a l o n g as w e l l .
                   i
         HRS. McBRIAM:             I a m Mrs.          Joan      McBrian         and    I represent
our    f a m i l y in this.

     T H E COROWF.K:             Yes,        t ha t   is   all    you     can     represent,    just
yourself.

          W h i l e I am on n a m e s , I a p p r e c i a t e that s o m e o f y o u m a y
n o t w a n t to b e p r e s e n t t n r o u g h o u t t h e i n q u e s t s w h e n we.
resume.            S o m e of y o u w i l l be h e r e a l l t he t i m e , s o m e of y o u
m a y change.             It w o u l d be h e l p f u l to m e if o n c e y o u tcnow w h o
is g o i n g to be c o m i n g o n a m o r e o r l e s s r e g u l a r b a s i s , if
y o u c o u l d let us k n o w b e c a u s e w e a r e g o i n g to b e g o i n g to
t r y an d m a k e n a m e p l a t e s for y o u so t h a t I c a n r e c o g n i s e y o u
w h e n w e s i t in c o u r t .        It m a k e s it a l o t e a s i e r f o r m e to
a d d r e s s y o u c o r r e c t l y by name, so if y o u w o u l d l e t ^ m e k n o w
w e w i l l g e t t h at d o n e .      T h a t is a n a i d f o r m e.        . Of^course,
y o u a r e f r e e to c h a n g e , if s o m e b o d y is n e w o r d o e s n t w a n t
to b e t h er e, o r s o m e t h i n g like" that.

          MR. K I NG:        S i r , in the c a s e o f t h e d e c e a s e d , I a m h e r e
as j u n i o r counsel.             A t the t i m e o f t he I n q u i r y l e a d i n g
c o u n s e l w as a l s o i n s t r u c t e d .   It is t h e i n t e n t i o n , I k n o w ,
o f t h o s e w h o i n s t r u c t me, tha t o n o c c a s i o n t h e y m a y w i s h to
h a v e leading cou n s e l here, leading myself, and p o s s i b l y
l e a d i n g c o u n s e l o n l y o n hi s own.      I assume, sir, you w o u l d
h a v e n o o b j e c t i o n to t h a t c o u r s e ?

        THE    COROriiiR:        No     objection          at    a l l.

        MR.    KING:        I am       obliged.

         T H E COROtlER:        Provided somebody has got locus s t a n d i ,
in the s e n s e t h a t t h e y r e p r e s e n t a n i n t e r e s t e d p a r t y , I am-
q u i t e p r e p a r e d to be as r e a s o n a b l e a n d as a c c o m m o d a t i n g a s I
c a n be.         A l l I a m a s k i n g y o u is t h a t y o u h e l p m e b y k e e p i n g
me informed.

                                         -    4   -
         C a n I g o t h r o u g h o n e or tw o t h i n g s w h i c n I t h i n k y o u
m i g h t w a n t to k n o w a n d then I w i l l e i t h e r p a u s e f r o m t i m e to
t im e to g i v e y o u a c h a n c e to c h i p in, o r a t t he e n d in t h e r e
is a n y t h i n g I h a v e n o t d e a l t w i t h w h i c h y o u f e e l I o u g h t    o
be t h i n k i n g a b o u t t h e n I . w i l l g i v e y o u a n o p p o r t u n i t y to
d r a w it to tny a t t e n t i o n .

          T h e v e n u e of t h e r e s u m e d i n q u e s t s is g o i n g to b e t h e _
Council Chamber.                  F o r t h o s e of y o u w h o w e r e a t L o r d J u s t i c e
T a y l o r ' s I n q u i r y , i t is e x a c t l y t h e s a m e l o c a t i o n , whether
w e w i l l s t a y t h e r e t h e w h o l e t i m e w i l l d e p e n d u p o n the
n u m b e r s o f people, w h o a r e p r e s e n t .

         Sir?

         MR. H O L R O Y D :       G o o d .a f t e r n o o n .     I a m Mr. H o l r o y d
r e p r e s e n t i n g .the P o l i c e F e d e r a t i o n ,    sir.    My apologies        for
being      late. f

          THE CORONER:           T h a n k y ou.      W h e t h e r we translocate at
s o m e p o i n t o r n o t I d o n ' t know.           It w ill depe n d upon the
n u m b e r of p e o p l e w h o a t t e n d .     I t is o b v i o u s , l o o k i n g a r o u n d
this a f t e r n o o n , t h a t w e w o u l d h a v e t h e d i c & e n s of a j o b
g e t t i n g i n n e r e a s s u m i n g we h a v e t h i s s o r t of t u r n - o u t .and
t hat w a s t he r e a s o n w h y w e c h o s e t h a t v e n u e .

          W e a r e d o i n g o u r b e s t to m a k e i t a s c o n v e n i e n t f or
legal r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s a n d o t h e r s a s p o s s i b l e , but, of
c o u r s e , I a m l i m i t e d w i t h w h a t is p r o v i d e d for tne.
                               a
          I h a v e b e e n a s k e d w h e t h e r t h e r e w i l l b e s p a c e to s t o r e
p a p e r s a n d w e b e l i e v e t h e r e is a r o o m .          T h e y c a l l it a
safe, b u t i t is a c t u a l l y q u i t e a l a r g i s h r o o m w h i c h w e w o u l d
be a b l e to m a k e a v a i l a b l e for a n y b o d y w h o w a n t e d to p u t
t h i n g s in.        Y o u w o u l d h a v e to b e r e s p o n s i b l e f o r y o u r o w n
security.             I could not possibly take any respo n s i b i l i t y for
security.            T h e y k e y to the r o o m is i n t h e c u s t o d y oE t n e
C i t y C o u n c i l a n d w e w o u l d m a k e a r r a n g e m e n t s f o r it to b e
o p e n e d a n d s h u t a t c o n v e n i e n t h o u r s , say, b e t w e e n n i n e a n d
ten a n d f i v e a n d s i x , o r s o m e t h i n g l i k e t h a t in t he
a f t e r n o o n , s o t ha t y o u c a n h a v e a c c e s s , (a) to p u t t h i n g s i n
and '(b) to g e t t h i n g s out.              W h e t h e r y o u u s e it o r n o t is of
c o u r s e a m a t t e r e n t i r e l y fo r y o u .

           T h e t i m e s of t h e s i t t i n g s :      at the m o m e n t I h a v e it in
 m i n d to .sit f r o m 1 0 . 0 0 u n t i l a b o u t 1 2 . 4 5 o r t h e r e a b o u t s .
 O b v i o u s l y t h e h o u r s h a v e g o t to b e f l e x i b l e b e c a u s e ^ o f
 evidence.             T h e n m a y b e f r o m q u a r t e r to t w o o r two o c l o c k
 u n t i l a r o u n d four.           Y o u m a y f e e l t h a t t h a t is n o t v e ^ Y l ° n S
 a nd that L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r s a t f o r a l o t l o n g e r .            I know
 he did. b u t t h e n n e d i d not s it w i t h a j u r y .                 It is n o t
 fair, in m y v i e w, to e x p e c t o r d i n a r y p e o p l e w h o a r e n o t u s e d
 to l e g a l p r o c e e d i n g s , e v e n a l b e i t t h i s is j u s t c o r o n a l
                                         i- f ' „ am hn s i t         fo r    very        much l o n g e r    than
p r o c e s s i n g s ,t o e x p e c t     tn em t o    s it          cor        y
th at.
                                                   . .     mairp a f e w a d i u s t m e n t s t o
           I f we f i n d    th at             we w a n t     ^  ^  alo n g .       We w i l l p a u s e
  these tim e s ,         we w i l l           do       a ® on f 0 r - a s h o r t b r e a k      to
  p ro b a b ly in the                          { L    l e g s and h a v e a c u p o f c o f f e e
. a l l o w p e o p le to a t ^ e t c n        tn e ir     0
 and     so   on.
          I have to t e l l              you   t h a t the p re s e n t P O ^ t i o n ^ t j u i t
 t h e C i t y C o u n c i l i s a n° s“ ° ^ 1 = k e r J   b u t a p a r t from t h e
 t n a t f o r t h o s e o f y o u who > r e         u ’       u e a i so t h i n k t h e
 f a c t t h a t t n a t . is t n e i r stand;.rd p o : L i e ; , Uot f e d i t .
 f i r e s e r v i c e might n o t h e t         £ P£ a v e t o a s s u m e i t                        i s no
 T h e r e f o r e , f o r t h e t i m e Dems* y
  sm oking.           f




  h a v e to b e put in t h e a b s e n c e   01                  a a r k so t hat w e                          i
  w e t r v a n d do it a r o u n d  t he f o u r o c l o c k n a ^       ^  ^     an
  the t i m e w h e n the j u r y h a v e                    a n d e v e r y d a y on
   i n v i t a t i o n t nat y o u a d d r e s s m      r o n v e n 4 e nt wa y b e c a u s e o n
   p o i n t s o f law, b u t it »           3 “ s " a c^ S S i i h j u s t a l i t t l e b i t
   p r i n c i p l e we should be                          *     r sav      if s o m e t h i n g
   lo n g e r tnan the j u r y .                 “ ° w®£e e l                h a s 't 0    be d e a l t w ith
   o c c u r s d u r i n g tne d a y           tnat y
   the n, t h e n so b e it.
                                                 t            «- kA      a11? a b o u t       is w h a t     I call
         Now t h e n e x t . t h i n g I wap$ “                         - n r e c o l l e c t t h a t we h a v e
   th e scope of the i n q u e s t s .       .                             v ith th ree q uestions:

   ss:-wt.d
          .“.s
    n o r m a l l ^ d e a ^ w i t h ^ 30 r S r ^ r i o u s ^ e a s o n s I felt it was
                                                                                                      -°“d
             W h a t i s .l e f t .° f ^ h  e     t i o n 1 o f S h o w 1 a n d C<t h a t e is w h a t w e
    l a r g e d e a l with, is t h e q                            these resumed inquests,
    a r e g o i n g to be c o n c e n t r a t i n g o n «         the • «           q a U      the
    F o r p r a c t i c a l p u r p o s e s tne ^                        w i U appreciate,
    ninety-five deceased, ^ J f ^ ^ e d o i n g                     ninety-five
    I am n o f doing o ne #                       t      w h i c h is w h y w e t o o k
    s e p a r a t e and i n d i v i d u a l         V i f ive p e o p l e in A p r i l and
     evidence in d iv id u a lly fo r n in e ty - f iv e
     May.   However, b e c a u s e w o u l d             P of the e v i d e n c e
     impossibility to r e c o u n t the g e n e r a l    y evidence together
     ninety-five times over, *e will take t n ^                             Qf us .
     in r e s p e c t of a l l o f                            c a { i i no i t ’t h e        inquest.         When    I
     w i l l s l i p into t h e f a u l t                of   c a l l i n 0 i t tn              m

                                                     -    6   -
d o t h a t y o u w i l l f o r g i v e m e and r e a d       i t a s m e a n i n g the
inquests.           W e w i l l b y a n d large' b e          d e a l i n g w i t h a l l the
e v i d e n c e for e v e r y b o d y toda y.

          I am, o f c o u r s e , a w a r e t ha t t h e r e a r e s o m e d i f f e r e n c e s .
J u s t to t a k e a s i m p l e e x a m p l e , t h e r e w e r e t w o e n c l o s u r e s -
e n c l o s u r e 3 a nd e n c l o s u r e A - but I d o n ' t t h i n k that a f f e c t s
t h e v a l i d i t y o f t h e p r i n c i p l e o f h o w I w a n t to d e a l w i t h t h e
evidence..           If e v i d e n c e is s p e c i f i c to e n c l o s u r e 4, t h e n of
c o u r s e we w i l l t a k e c o g n i s a n c e of t h a t .      I f e v i d e n c e is
s p e c i f i c to s o m e t h i n g e l s e w e w i l l t a k e c o g n i s a n c e of t ha t
a s w e l l , b u t w e will' be d e a l i n g w i t h t h e e v i d e n c e in r e s p e c t
of e v e r y b o d y •t o g e t h e r .

          I h a v e to r e m i n d y o u t ha t a n i n q u e s t is n o t a p u b l i c
inquiry.           I n a n o t h e r c a s e w h i c h I h a p p e n e d to n a v e r e a d
r e c e n t l y , Hr. J u s t i c e W o o l f , a s h e t h e n w a s , d e s c r i b e d an
i n q u e s t as, " A n i n q u i r y in p u b l i c , b u t n o t a p u b l i c
inquiry."            I t h o u g h t t h a t w a s a r a t h e r n e a t w a y of p u t t i n g
it.                  '                    ;                          \\

          ■I do n o t e x p e c t , p a r t i c u l a r l y a s t h e r e h a s a l r e a d y b e e n
a p u b l i c i n q u i r y , to r e p e a t e v e r y t h i n g t h a t L o r d J u s t i c e
T a y l o r had d o n e , b u t it is, I 'm a f r a i d , a s I s e e it,
i n e v i t a b l e t h a t w e w i l l b e d u p l i c a t i n g a c e r t a i n a m o u n t of
the w o r k he did.              T h i s is b e c a u s e i t f a l l s w i t h i n , as I
p e r c e i v e it, the p u r v i e w of m y j u r i s d i c t i o n a n d a l s o , of
c o u r s e , b e c a u s e as I a m s i t t i n g w i t h a j u r y a n d as t he y h a v e
 to r e a c h a v e r d i c t o n the e v i d e n c e , i t i s n o u s e r e l y i n g
u p o n w h a t w a s s a i d f i f t e e n , s i x t e e n , e i g h t e e n m o n t h s a go
before somebody else.                      R e g r e t t a b l y , o r m a y b e n ot, it
d e p e n d s w h i c h p o i n t of v i e w y o u t a ke, t h e r e w i l l h a v e to b e
s o m e r e p l i c a t i o n of e v i d e n c e of L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r s
 investigation.               I n d e e d , if y o u l o o k a t t h e T e r m s ^ o f
R e f e r e n c e a n d c o m p a r e those with w h a t the C o r o n e r s Act
s a y s , y ou w i l l s e e t h e r e is a q u i t e r e m a r k a b l e s i m i l a r i t y i n
 places.

            I h a v e to r e m i n d y o u that i n c o n t r a s t to a p u b l i c ^
  inq uiry, w i t n e s s e s in a C o r o n e r ' s C o u r t h a v e g o t c e r t a i n
 p r i v i l e g e s , p a r t i c u l a r l y w i t n e s s e s w h o s e c o n d u c t is liabl_e
_to b e c a 11 e O J C q H e s . ti on.,.. axid..i.n_ p a r t i c u l a r J t h e y ...Djve_ t h e
” rTeKt_„no^.„to .answe.r„.in.cr.imiJiatjjig_.qj4fi-S..t.i_Q.n5 • _ 1
 d e a l i n g w i t h t h i s a g a i n w h e n I o p e n w i t h t h e j u r y and^
  e x p l a i n this to t h e m in d e t a i l , b u t I w a n t to t a k e this
  o p p o r t u n i t y n o w b e c a u s e it is a n i m p o r t a n t p o i n t to
 u n d e r s t a n d a n d if o n e d o e s n ' t g r a s p i t t h e n o n e tend s, n o t
  j u s t in the H i l l s b o r o u g h I n q u e s t s b u t i n a l l i n q u e s t s , to
 w a l k a wa y d i s a p p o i n t e d .

           T h e r e f o r e t wo things' p r o c e d u r a l l y : witnesses have got
 p r i v i l e g e s w h i c h I w i l l ensure that th e y a r e c o g n i s a n t of  t
 a n d if t he y w i s h to e x e r c i s e t h e i r r i g h t s t h e n t h e y a r e
 e n t i t l e d to do so.           Secondly, a c o r o n a l i n q u i r y has got
limited      objectives and again w i t h i n               the   best    of m y    ability
we will      t r y to s t i c k to t h o s e .

          M y p r e s e n t i n t e n t i o n is, a s f a r a s p o s s i b l e , to ta ke
t he e v i d e n c e w e w i l l h e a r v i v a v o c e .          In o t h e r words, I am
g o i n g to t ry a n d g e t t h e w i t n e s s e s to c o m e a n d gi've
evidence.            W e k n o w a l r e a d y t h a t t h a t is n o t g o i n g to be
p o s s i b l e i n s o m e cases.. . A t •l e a s t o n e w i t n e s s w h o m I h a d ■
t h o u g h t a b o u t , t h o u g h n o t n e c e s s a r i l y d e c i d e d on, h a s d i e d .
C l e a r l y we c a n n o t take his e v i d e n c e v i v a v o c e .               Th e r e may
be s o m e o t h e r s who, f o r m e d i c a l o r o t h e r r e a s o n s , a r e so .
r e l u c t a n t to c o m e t h a t I w o u l d t h i n k it o n l y f a i r n o t to
c a l l them.            llouever, w e h a v e a h u g e p o o l , if I c a n u s e t h a t
e x p r e s s i o n , of w i t n e s s e s a n d I t h i n k it w i l l b e p o s s i b l e to
h a v e the b u l k of the e v i d e n c e v i v a v o c e .                I t h i n k t hat is
p r e f e r a b l e though m a y b e a l i t t l e bit m o r e time c o n s u m i n g and
c e r t a i n l y mor e expensive, but at least people will have
h e a r d it b y w o r d of m o u t h .
                    i                                                                    •    .
        S h a l l I p a u s e for a m o m e n t h e r e a n d a s k w h e t h e r . I h a v e
m a d e m y s e l f c l e a r , w h e t h e r y o u h a v e a n y q u e r i e s o n this
aspect?.

          MR. K I N G :       S ir , I d o n ’ t k n o w w h e t h e r t h i s is t he time,
to r a i s e s u b m i s s i o n s a s to t h e n a t u r e o f t h e e v i d e n c e y ou
a r e g o i n g to c a l l o r the a m b i t o f t h e e v i d e n c e .         If I may
m a k e m y s e l f c l e a r , o n tne n a t u r e of t h e e v i d e n c e I h a v e a
n u m b e r o f s u b m i s s i o n s to m a k e to y o u a s to the u s e o f the
T a y l o r R e p o r t itself.

          THE CORONER: -          I will come        to t h a t i n a m o m e n t .    I
a p p r e c i a t e tha t you     didn't know        t h a t, b e c a u s e I h a v e n o t
d e a l t w i t h it.

         MU. KING:         As to t he a m b i t o f the e v i d e n c e , i t m a y be|
t n i s is n o t f o r t o d a y at a l l , t h a t is t o s a y , t h e s t a r t i n g ^
p o i n t of t h e e v e n t s w h i c h y o u 'intend to i n v e s t i g a t e and, if
Ic a n p u t it this w a y , t h e        cutting off point         of e v e n t s .

          THE CORONER:           Y e s , I a m c o m i n g to t h a t   as well.
P e r h a p s I had better carry on for a little bit long e r and
t h e n t u r n to y o u b e c a u s e i t m a y be t h a t I m a y c o v e r s o m e of
t h e p o i n t s w h i c h y o u h a v e i n m i n d o r, i n d e e d , o t h e r p e o p l e
h a v e in mind.

          I n f a c t -you b r i n g m e o n to w h a t I h a v e c a l l e d " G r o u p s " .
I t a k e t h e v i e w tha t, if y o u l i ke, t h e c u t - o f f p o i n t for t h e
e v i d e n c e is - I h a v e s e l e c t e d a s a m a r k e r t h e a r r i v a l of the
f i r s t a m b u l a n c e on t h e p i t c h .       T h a t d o e s n o t m e a n to s a y we
w i l l n e c e s s a r i l y d e a l w i t h e v e r y e v e n t u p to t h a t p o i n t , b u t
i t is a c o n v e n i e n t m a r k e r b e y o n d w h i c h w h a t e v e r h a p p e n e d h a s
e i t h e r b e e n d e a l t w i t h in A p r i l / M a y t i m e, o r is o u t s i d e the
s c o p e of m y i n q u i r y .        So if y o u l i k e t h a t is t he e n d p o i n t .
          N o w t h e b e g i n n i n g is a l i t t l e b i t m o r e d i f f i c u l t to
d e t e r m i n e b e c a u s e o n e h a s to c o n s i d e r t h e e v e n t s o f the d a y
o n t h e o n e h a n d , a n d to a c e r t a i n e x t e n t o n e a l s o h a s to
c o n s i d e r p o s s i b l y t h e p r e v i o u s o c c u r r e n c e s , b e c a u s e they m a y
h a v e a r e l e v a n c e in e v a l u a t i n g and a s s e s s i n g t h e e v i d e n c e
w h i c h is p u t b e f o r e t h e j ur y.

          H o w e v e r , g e n e r a l l y in p r i n c i p l e the. w a y I l o o k at. it is
w e a r e g o i n g to s t a r t , as far as the d a y is c o n c e r n e d , f r o m
t ne o u t s i d e a n d w o r k o u r - w a y i nw a rd .         The- e v i d e n c e w i l l
b e c o m e m o r e d e t a i l e d or, if y o u l i ke , I w i l l b e c a l l i n g m o r e
w i t n e s s e s as w e g e t c l o s e r to the e v e n t s .             T o t a k e an
e x a m p l e , I m a y j u s t c a l l v e r y b r i e f l y s o m e b o d y ' s e v i d e n c e as
to t r a f f i c c o n d i t i o n s , b u t I c e r t a i n l y w o u l d n ' t g o i n t o a n y
great detail.                   It is r e a l l y , as my c o l l e a g u e in e a s t K e n t
s a i d w h e n h e w a s d e a l i n g w i t h the Z e e b r u g g e i n q u e s t s , it is
like a theatre.                   Y o u h a v e got y o u r s t a g i n g , y o u h a v e g o t
s o m e s u b s i d i a r y a c t o r s a n d yo u h a v e g o t t h e m a i n p l o t , b u t
it is d i f f i c u l t to u n d e r s t a n d the m a i n p l o t if y o u h a v e n o t
g o t t h e s t a g i n g , s o y o u n e e d to h a v e a c e r t a i n a m o u n t o f ’
i n f o r m a t i o n ^ w h i c h i s n ' t necessarily v i t a l but w h i c h makes
the w h o l e t h i n g m o r e r e a d i l y u n d e r s t a n d a b l e .

        As I say, I           i n t e n d to m o v e f r o m t h e o u t s i d e in an d          as
w e g e t n e a r e r to      the g r o u n d we will be g o i n g into more
detail.

          I a n t i c i p a t e c a l l i n g e v i d e n c e f r o m s u p p o r t e r s , ^if I c a n
u s e that term.               T h a t w ill include relati v e s , but with
r e g a r d to r e l a t i v e s I a m g o i n g to be v e r y - r e l a t i v e s w h o
q u a l i f y i n m y view* a s w i t n e s s e s a n d w h o m I c o n s i d e r to be
a p p r o p r i a t e to c a l l .      C e r t a i n l y e v e n if I f e l t a r e l a t i v e
c o u l d g i v e u s e f u l e v i d e n c e , if h e / s h e r e a l l y f e l t t he y c o u l d
n o t g o t h r o u g h t h e t r a u m a I w o u l d be v e r y s y m p a t h e t i c to
that p o i n t of view.

          So s u p p o r t e r s i n c l u d e relatives, f r i e n d s .        What I have
j u s t s a i d f o r r e l a t i v e s a p p l i e s to t h e m a s w e l l , a l t h o u g h to
a slightly lesser degree.                         Other c o n t a c t s w i t h the deceased
and "O t h e r s " - p e o p l e w h o were there w h o d i d n ' t necess a r i ly
h a v e s o m e t h i n g t o .do w i t h the d e c e a s e d b u t w h o c a n tell us
s o m e t h i n g a b o u t w h a t h a p p e n e d w h i c h I c o n s i d e r to b e
r e l e v a n t to t h e p u r p o s e of my i n q u i r y .

        That     is    the    first     group,.

        The- s e c o n d     group    will     be   local     residents.

         The    third      group     will    be p e o p l e   like     shopkeepers          and    so
on.                           “

     T h e foyrt.h._group w i l l be w h a t I c a l l " O t h e r
Independents".      I d o n ' t meant supporters aren't
independent, b u t I m e a n people who w e r e either
#
             p r o f e s s i o n a l l y p r e s e n t o r w h o m a y n o t e v e n h a v e b e e n a t the
             scene.            I w i l l g i v e you' an e x a m p l e , m e d i a p e o p l e , f o r   ,
             instance.

                       T h e n w e a r e g o i n g ’to take e v i d e n c e f r o m c l u b e m p l o y e e s .        .
             P e o p l e w h o w e r e e n g a g e d w i t h t h e club..            For example,
             t u r n s t i l e o p e r a t o r s , s t e w a r d s a n d p e o p l e of t h a t n a t u r e .
        •    *   ..                                   ’■}            '     '      *

                       T h e police, of c o u r s e -         W h i l e T a m on t h e s u b j e c t ,o£
             t h e p o l i c e , t h e r e a r e in the- c a s e o f a f e w p o l i c e . o f f i c e r s
             and, i n d e e d , at l e a s t o n e o t h e r p e r s o n , s t a t e m e n t s w h i c h
             w e r e t a k e n u n d e r P A C E - t h a t is u n d e r t he P o l i c e a n d
             C r i m i n a l E v i d e n c e A c t - ’ .It is m y n o r m a l p r a c t i c e a t t he
             m o m e n t if I w a s d e a l i n g , say, w i t h a r o a d t r a f f i c i n c i d e n t ,
             t h a t if t h e r e w a s s u c h a s t a t e m e n t f r om , say, t h e d r i v e r ,
             t h a t I w o u l d h a v e t h a t e i t h e r r e a d o r p l a y e d on t h e a u d i o


    •        tap e.
             ^
                             I h a v e d e c i d e d t h a t I a m g o i n g to d o t h a t in thi s
                                  c a s e as w e l l , so w e w i l l ’h e a r w h a t e v e r is s a i d in
             s t a t e m e n t s . ' I i n t e n d a t the m o m e n t to u s e t h e a u d i o t ap e
             r a t h e r t h a n to h a v e t h e m r e a d b e c a u s e t h e n w e h a v e it as it
                                                                                                                       these


             was recorded.

                       I h a v e d e c i d e d that I w i l l n o t c i r c u l a t e t h e l i s t of
             w i t n e s s e s w h o I i n t e n d to c a l l i n a d v a n c e .    There are
             s e v e r a l r e a s o n s f o r this.         T h e f i r s t o n e - I d o n ’ t h a v e to
             g i v e y o u a l l t he r e a s o n s b u t I w i l l g i v e y o u a f e w j u s t so
             y o u k n o w i t is n o t an e n t i r e l y a r b i t r a r y d e c i s i o n .        The^
             f i r s t a n d m a y b e t h e m o s t i m p o r t a n t p o i n t is th is:         th i s is
             an inquiry wh i c h I conduct.                      It is a n i n q u i s i t o r i a l
             p r o c e d u r e a n d not adv e r s a r i a l .        It is t o t a l l y d i f f e r e n t , in
             f a ct, to e v e r y o t h e r l e g a l p r o c e e d i n g i n E n g l a n d a n y w a y .
             T h e r e is i n f a c t I t h i n k - c e r t a i n l y the b o o k s t e n d to
             i n d i c a t e t h a t it i s q u i t e p r o p e r n o t to d i s c l o s e ..or.
             c i r c u l a t e ' n a m e s , _ a n d t never^dcTI      When" I sa y ’' n e v e r " , t h a t ' s
            ~a 51 g word." ' T h e r e may"~be the “o d d e x c e p t i o n w h e n I h a v e h a d
^            to l e t s o m e b o d y s e e a s t a t e m e n t fo r v e r y s p e c i a l r e a s o n s .
             H o w e v e r , i n p r i n c i p l e , I d o n ' t a n d I d o n ' t i n t e n d to d o it
             in this c a s e .

                       S e c o n d l y , w e h a v e n ' t got th e c a p a c i t y , e v e n if I w a n t e d
             to d o it, to d e a l w i t h t h e c i r c u l a t i o n of s t a t e m e n t s .        We
             h a v e g o t o u r w o r k c u t o u t in c o p i n g w i t h m y n e e d s .          I am
             very lucky.                I h a v e g o t w h a t I s u p p o s e f o r a C o r o n e r is
             q u i t e a g o o d s i z e d team, b u t w e h a v e to r e m e m b e r t h a t I am
             j u s t a C o r o n e r , an i n f e r i o r c o u r t of record, let m e remi n d
             y o u , a n d n o t a n y t h i n g else .         T h e r e a r e l i m i t s to w h a t I ca n
             m u s t e r , s o I c a n n o t do it f r o m a p r a c t i c a l p o i n t o f v i e w .

                       T h e t h i r d t h i n g is that c i r c u l a t i o n of s t a t e m e n t s , w e
             d i d do it w i t h the summ a r i e s .                As y ou may r e m e m b e r we did
             c i r c u l a t e t n e s u m m a r i e s b e c a u s e w e t h o u g h t t h a t w o u l d be
             helpful.            I n f a c t to a c e r t a i n e x t e n t in s o m e c a s e s t h a t •
             b o u n c e d b a c k on me.            P e o p l e w e r e n ' t e n t i r e l y h a p p y t h a t the
             e v i d e n c e w h i c h w a s g i v e n w a s no t w o r d fo r w o r d w h a t h a d b e e n

                                                      - 10 -
S „ t out in the- summary^                                                 &    V    ,
-'guide- and •to- give legaL;repr                     .Vo:make- any 'further 't rr:; '
  c o m m e n t and c o m e bacs ^ ^ ‘l J a r n e d from that and so. I don' f " :
 investigations-       I have,    -                   learned, t r o n         wi-u _
.vs-intend to ;get,into .that;


-;t f V * n j S ; ^ L ' P°: ci^cUlaSngP;s tatem^nts?

 V.;   W h a t t will do,',iff I- Witnes ses                                        for     the.n e x t day or -
  on a-notice board the proposed witn ^                                            ^e. you. some, idea of
   two days and maybeT^ " three^ays ^            £^ . £Ey
                                                        i cuLt.. -,-j w. « c - -
  •what is coming.   I a m “ ? t\ ^ ny fo| a i]_ of us.      but that
   to make life as easy as I « " f“ m| st certainly allow the.
  includes me as well.       we           from the.- s t a t e men ts on the
  witn ess es- to refresh th e i r memory from^tne s             ei hteen
  day-     Do y,ou follow w h a t L mean by that.      ic        ^ s SQm£
 -months ago that this event *>®PPe 5j®a tements or.written- down
  of the witnesses m a y have’.&J-veaj    long  or    even longer. ^s
                                                                   •

     recollections whl^ ^ f ^ l e E S i l Shi t they said and, indeed,
     They may not recollect in d                       like ly that we
     they may not recollect the ®^ent •            S t a t ement, although
     will allow them to have a aig-ht °£ theiir               faox> Ue
     I don't expect them to nave them m        tne
     would not normally do that.

 i           Uith regard to Lord                             admit*that Report
     deal with that next.
     as part of the evidence at the
                                     I do no1 j-"‘

     could do that would be to read it in toto,
                                                               The oniy uay one
                                                                ‘"d  ain't think                 l
     t h a t would s e r v e any u s e f u l p u r p o s e .
                                     . jl i , o oin» to c a u s e more problem s
           ln ! r S d i S r 1thP ? r i lS d l4 h l
                                                 . ,tl- : i n ! d o n ' t               intend           to a d m i t
      tha
      th a t..

                 S i m i l a r l y , I d o n o t Vn t e £ g          r^ ^ I n q u i r y •     O f Pcourse,
      tne     evidence            at L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r s                  the
      I am       fully     aware                  ^ a v e        and       I   would n o t b e          a t all
      tra n s c rip ts         as i n d e e d     I          »         i        with    a v ie w        to   s e e in g
      surprised           if    you       looked       through     them wit h a vi                       ^          ^
      what       people have              said.          I would       M p e ^ "            is    relevant          to
      I    d o n 't   m in d     th a t    p ro vid ed , y o u r   q               .    ^        £o r    in s ta n c e ,
      th e in q u e s ts .        W h a t I ' ^ ^ V i l r f J h t n o t t o a n s w e r an
      a w i t n e s s w e r e , t o e x e r c i s e 11         5        n e r m i t y o u to p u t to
      in c r im in a tin g q u e s tio n s , I w               t r a n s c r i p t s so t h a t i n f a c t
      t h a t w itn e s s                                         n o t   t o   answer th a t
      h e c o u l d t h e n e x e r c i s e h i s : e i g h t s no                h a d s a id-    I am
      q u e s t i o n , b u t - i n £ a c t yo u h a d § “ * , “ h ; ”        e to m u 2 2 le y o u ,    x



          possible'you S l u ' f e e l y o u h a v e h a d a f a i r c h a n c e ,                           so   to

                                                        -11 -
 s pe ak, b u t e q u a l l y I i n t e n d        t o - b e •f a i r   to 'the w i t n e s s e s -as
;E a r .as I a m a b l e _to~ be ..so

     ■;•• A l t h o u g h I d o n ' t i n t e n d to a l l o w L o r d J u s t i c e - T a y l o r 's
 Report, to b e i n t r o d u c e d as evidence,... i t ^ i s g o i n g ^.p.-be^very ..
’difficult, n o t .to r e f e r ; to ;it frornl..time..,to .time-'J C o m m o n s e n s e
 will,’d i c t a t a vwherev.we.^dr aw_ the _;.l ine ^t^ kI Jtt h i n k it-vis s a l s o-
cr ig h t;:'to -•s a y "It h e r e-Tm ay^’jjbetYth e.?o dcLC o c c a s i b ’                             v
                                                                           n r w h e r e - <E*:w i 1 ir h a er'
 to b r e a c h w h a t L.; h a v e - j us -t^ s a i d j t h a ts weli.w i l l -.have-/ to^use.-.
‘
' some7 o £ : ? t h e r t r a n s c r i p t s ,^:but-':r?tb.ink:::it‘'wilL.' b e 'a .r a r i t y

      . "Documents.."”              B y •t h a t ;I m e a n b u n d l e s of. d o c u m e n t s , o r ,
p l a n s o r p h o t o g r a p h s o r any thi ng, of. that, s o r t — e x h i b i t s if
y o u w is h ..       B e a r i n g i n m i n d (a) w e a r e d e a l i n g w i t h
i n q u es t s , (b) w i t h a j u r y and ( c ) . t h a t we. a r e g o i n g to h a v e
o u r w o r k c u t o u t a s it is w i t h t h e n u m b e r ' o f w i t n e s s e s , I
want., to r e s t r i c t .as f a r r a s I ' a m ~ a b l e - to^ t h e n u m b e r of •
d o c u m e n t s w h i c h a r e put. in as e x h i b i t s -            T h e r e / is v e r y     <
l i t t l e p o i n t (i n h a v i n g h u n d r e d s a n d h u n d r e d s , of. p a g e s o f;       ■,
d o c u m e n t s .if t h e # j u r y c a n n o t: a b s o r b them-'                "

          I a m p r e p a r e d to l i s t e n to y o u o n t h i s point, b e c a u s e it
 is a d i f f i c u l t o n e , b u t w h a t I h a v e i n m i n d , a n d I w i l l
 p a u s e a f t e r t h i s to e n a b l e y o u to c o m e b a c k on w h a t I h a v e
 said,- is t h a t if, f o r i n s t a n c e T w e w e r e ^ t£L-in t ro.djjg._e__tha
 G r e e n G u i d e , wnXcft i s ~ a d o c u m e n t j^hi c h- we. won' t — k e,_a.bJ.e_JLS.
 a v o i d . reT e T r T n T ^ £ 5lC-we^.caj^,.1 n.tr.od.u.c.e^j-_t._as .an..exhibit.
 iTowever, I w o u l d n o t e x p e c t the j u r y to r e a d th e w h o l e t h i n g
 from c o v e r to c o v e r b e c a u s e a l o t o f it w e d o n ' t n e e d f o r
 tne i n q u e s t s .                                                jiaip,t^ja^Jt^Ju.P-^
 y o u w i s h to mak e_ jt o _a *witnes.s.«.^thfiiLJ[;._wo_u.ld..re x p e c it _you_ t o .




wfiaT’T n e j u r y w i l l h a v e in m i n d w i l l b e , say, t e n p a r a g r a p h s
o u t of t h e G r e e n G u i d e -           Also-with other documents. There
may      b e o t h e r d o c u m e n t s w h i c h w e m a y n e e d to r e f e r to.
T h e r e f o r e , at. t h e e n d of. the da y t h e y w i l l h a v e o n l y to
t h i nk a b o u t t h o s e b i t s of the e x h i b i t s w h i c h a r e r e l e v a n t to
us a n d n o t m a y b e f i f t y o r s i x t y p a g e s w h i c h a r e t h e r e b u t
which are totally unnecessary f o r o u r purposes.

          Is t h a t r e a s o n a b l y c l e a r w h a t I a m t r y i n g to s a y ?  I
 t h i n k it w i l l b e e a s i e r to do t h a n f o r m e to e x p l a i n it.
 Shall I p a u s e h e r e ?           Mr. King, h a v e I d e a l t w i t h s o m e o f
 the p o i n t s y o u h a d i n m i n d ?

      M R. K I N G :      S i r , y o u have,       a n d if I m i g h t d e a l w i t h o n e
 or two-       S i r , if I d e a l w i t h m a t t e r s w h i c h y o u feel, o u g h t
 to be r e s e r v e d f o r f o r m a l l e g a l a r g u m e n t , p l e a s e s t o p m e .
 I am n o t i n a n y w a y t r y i n g to t r e s p a s s o n t i m e s w h e n I             *
 shouldn't-                                                                ' ‘*
                                                                                                         •* • .
                                                                                                         I*?-«• ;


                               C a n I d e a l .f i r s t w i t h m a t t e r s a r i s i n g o u t o f w h a t h a v e .J.
                   &vi b e e n k n o w n •'a s •the -mini i n q u e s t s ' - a n d y o u h a v e a l r e a d y
                   •^•■referred to t h e f ac t that: o n t h e - i n d i v i d u a l s y o u h a v e - b e e n
                   .j’j.into c e r t a i n q u e s t i o n s a l r e a d y ? " I h a v e a n e v e r i n c r e a s i n g
                       number:.. o f . s e t s .of i n s t r u c t i o n s *as t'o-:individua l-.questions-;




      «xr.tsa-t*
                  afternoon,'.'but what'"T- w o u l d .wish.' to h a v e ' l i b e r t y .to :d o is to-
                  c o m m u n i c a t e w i t h y o u under. the_ n a m e o f e a c h i n d i v i d u a l '        , •
              ' " ' d e c e a s e d - h o p e f u l l y it w i l l n o t b e as l o n g as I a m p e r h a p s         ••
        • -' .V i n d i c a t i n g - b u t t h e r e a r e s p e c i f i c i s s u e s o f ' f a c t where- I
         -‘ - k n o w t h o s e w h o h a v e l o s t t h e i r l o v e d o n e s a r e v e r y a n x i o u s




.
 (■   t
      •
                  that e i t h e r factual i n a c c u r a c i e s or o m i s s i o n s , .if possible,
                  c o u l d be rectified.                S i r , if t h e y c o u l d b e l a i d b e f o r e you.
                  i n w r i t t e n f o r m y o u m a y t a k e t h e view,, a n d I w o u l d h o p e . t h a t
                ..y°*J. m i g h t , ttyat in m o s t o f t h o s e c a s e s y o u w o u l d .be p r e p a r e d
      .     . '.-i.for t h o s e m a t t e r s to b e r e c t i f i e d p e r h a p s . - s t r a i g h t a w a y a t
               . t h e b e g i n n i n g o f t h e i n q u e s t s p r o p e r in N o v e m b e r , or, if
                  n e c e s s a r y , to h e a r a s m a l l a m o u n t of e v i d e n c e r e l a t i n g to
                  them.                                   ‘                          '
                                                               t

                              O b v i o u s l y until y ou h e a r the q u e s t i o n s y o u c a n n o t make
                      y o u r inind u p , b u t I w o u l d w i s h to g i v e n o t i c e , if I c a n put
                      i t t h a t w a y , t n at t h a t is w h a t I a m i n s t r u c t e d to l a y b e f o r e
                      you.

                                T H E CORONER:            C a n I te l l y o u m y v i e w o n t h a t ?        I was
                      a w a r e you m i g h t well be r a i s i n g this point.                     I have already
                      m a d e i t c l e a r t ha t I d o n ' t i n t e n d to r e - o p e n a l l t h e n i n e t y -
                      five cases.               Indeed, I h a v e h a d c o r r e s p o n d e n c e f r o m the o d d
                      p e r s o n w h e r e they h a v e r a i s e d m a t t e r s .        If t he m a t t e r s .are
                      p u t t o m e a n d if w h e n I h a v e s e e n t h em , i f y o u r i n s t r u c t i n g
                      s o l i c i t o r s w o u l d c o m m u n i c a t e w i t h m e, if I f e e l t h a t t h e
V.                    p o i n t w h i c h y o u m a k e is - I w i l l u s e t h e w o r d j u s t i f i e d ,
                      t h a t is n o t i n t e n d e d to b e r u d e a t a l l - j u s t i f i e d a n d
                      l e g i t i m a t e , a n d p r o p e r to be d e a l t w i t h , t h e n o f c o u r s e I
                      w i l l c o n s i d e r th at s y m p a t h e t i c a l l y .     However, there may
                      w e l l be matters which m a y be r a ised w h i c h I feel h a v e either
                      b e e n a d e q u a t e l y d e a l t w i t h , in w h i c h c a s e I w i l l s a y so, o r
                      a l t e r n a t i v e l y w h i c h I f e e l a r e o u t s i d e t h e s c o p e o f th e
                      i n q u i r y , in w h i c h c a s e I w i l l a l s o s a y s o -

                                 I a m n ot.turning y o u down.                   I am just reserving               th e
                      p o s i t i o n , , d e p e n d i n g u p o n w h a t y o u a c t u a l l y sa y .

                              M R . KING:          Indeed.       Really, the p u r p o s e of m y rising
                      o n t h a t m a t t e r n o w w a s to g i v e y o u f o r w a r d n o t i c e o f i t a n d
                      to e m p h a s i s e , b e c a u s e I k n o w t h e r e a r e t h o s e h e r e h e a r i n g
                      w h a t I a m saying, they a r e m a t t e r s w h i c h i n e v i t a b l y a r e d e a r ,
                      to t h e h e a r t s . o f m a n y p e o p l e -

                               THE   CORONER:          I understand         that.

                                                             -13 -
               -•M R . KING:T-p:-Sir,':might I.now address you on the-cut-off
.    ^-.^-'point,.•as it. has .been ^called, of.;,the scope- ...As.I understand
           t ■you. have"indicated,. sir, .you have :.in mind .the., arrival of-.
'         the first ambulance, which is probably going to be sometime
          - I am guessing.now. *          * ‘       -   •




                                              sion»:to <make;to y ou, which. is •
                                              represent,. , and L would say
          jlu j-o a              « very dear to them,' that.it should be
          extended, that timing,.’ to about four o'clock... • .1 explain      ...
          why.      A number of those who L represent/are anxious that._
          there be an inquest into the nature of the medical attention
          which was given to those who had been in the* crushing, in

ft      . regard to the allegation which certainly •they, wish- to make,
          and wish to •j.nvestigate, -that- the absence of proper medical
          care facilities and attention-and technique, led:to those,
          certain of them in any event,’ dying perhaps when they might .
          not have died at all or certainly dying sooner than might
          have been the case, and specifically the diagnosis of when
          somebody had actually died.

                   Sir, I know in selecting your cut-off point - and I can
          understand from having read some correspondence on the
          matter relating to it - that those are matters which your
          immediate feeling was you weren't going to go into.            ^
          Certainly my submission is they are relevant to the how in
          r e s p e c t o f the deceased here because the time of death is
          obviously of importance and how they died involves the ..
          consideration of the attention paid to them when perhaps
          they were still alive and that is a very relevant matter.

               THE CORONER:   Can I stop you there because I think we
          are getting into a legal submission.

               I have heard what you say.    I don't think it would be
          right for me to give a ruling on that because I would be
          breaching, if you like, the procedural aspects of this
          meeting, except to say that obviously I have thought- about           .
          this point quite a bit and at the moment I am not persuaded
          yet that I would want to go down that road.           I £av®        _
          reasons for it, but I don t think.I will deal with them,
          would not want to encourage you to think I will actually
          accede to that, but if you could just r e m i n d , me betore we
          end that you have made this point, because Lfc m?y.‘             '
          what we should do is have another meeting possi y             _
          the 19th, but a formal meeting of the inquests^pcop.er, so to
          speak, but without the jury, where legal point
          discussed in a more conventional way*                              ,•
(




        v .1on- . - the decision
            ".f T r rt A ^ ^ a a
                                        not,
                                 . T" aa_. J
                                             to
                                             _ i
                                                 circulate.-in
                                                   i
                                                     —  — w w.
                                                          <•   m
                                                                 advance.-the.
                                                                 a
                                                                 _
                                                                   u v a ^ u c - LUC. U
                                                                                      .
                                                                                        names
                                                                                         4UU  .of -**•• *•*-
           witnesses-             I understand          the logistical-problem                 of
    •   • 1 -«Fa ^ rnent?*    1 fuL1Y understand .tha t - Y T h e - g r e a t advantage
            ot t hose I r e p r e s e n t of k n o w i n g i n a d v a n c e t h e n a m e s o f
H               ? k f S e S ^ 1S r thu S : J   1 would     h o P e , sir,     you would        b e .willing
                  enV        day   to-; hear representatipn as to your-*, --
           calling witnesses who haven't been called* ~

           fn
                     T H E CORONER:.          ' ~     '
                                    „-Vi V M a y 1 i n ,t e r r u p t ; . y o u r Mr.- K i n g ? -,jT h i v e -.
           in t a c t f o r e s t a l l e d y o u on t h a t b e c a u s e I .h a v e a l r e a d y
           w r i t t e n - I t h i n k i t m u s t b e a m o n t h ag o .            .1 w r o t e to e v e r y
           s i n g l e f i r m o f s o l i c i t o r s t h a t I w a s a w a r e of.           If I h a v e
           m i s s e d a n y I a p o l o g i s e , b u t I h a v e w r i t t e n to e v e r y s i n g l e
           f i r m o f s o l i c i t o r s t h a t I w a s a w a r e of s p e c i f i c a l l y
           r e q u e s t i n g t h e m to n a m e p e o p l e w h o t h e y w i s h e d m e to
           c o n s i d e r as w i t n e s s e s .     I m a d e it clear- t h a t t h e f i n a l
           d e c i s i o n w o u l d be m i n e , b u t I d i d i n v i t e t h e m to d r a w ray
           a t t e n t i o n to a n y b o d y t h e y w a n t e d m e to t h i n k a b o u t .       You
           m a y b e i n t e r e s t e d to k n o w t h a t I t h i n k I h a v e h a d f i v e
          :r e p l i e s .     T h r e e o f t h e m s a i d t h e y d i d n o t h a v e a n y n a me s
           a n d t n e o t h e r two d i d p u t f o r w a r d a f e w n a m e s .             There may
           b e s i x, b u t a n y w a y , a v e r y s m a l l n u m b e r .

                    I f I c a n j u s t c o m e b a c k to y o u r p o i n t .  That
          o p p o r t u n i t y has a l r e a d y been g i v e n an d the m e r e fact I d o n ' t                  -
          c i r c u l a t e names does n o t stop y o u from t e l l i n g . m e - t h e names
          o f p e o p l e w n o y o u w a n t m e to c o n s i d e r .

                     M R. K I N G :        S i r , I a p p r e c i a t e th at, a n d e v e r s o . g e n t l y ,
           L a m n o t w i s h i n g to o c c u p y y o u r t i m e , p u t ' t h e c o u n t e r •
          argument.              I n t h e n a t u r e o f this i n q u i r y w h e r e t h e r e h a v e
          b e e n a vast- n u m b e r o f w i t n e s s e s - w h e n I s a y w i t n e s s e s , w e
          k n o w f r o m t h e I n q u i r y i n v e s t i g a t i o n t h a t a v a s t n u m b e r of        .
          statements have been taken from many, many people a n d before
          t n e l a y l o r I n q u i r y b e g a n t h e y w e r e c i r c u l a t e d a n d a d d e d to
          as i t w e n t o n -            I k n o w a t e c h n i q u e w h i c h h a s b e e n adopted,,
          i t n a y b e t h e t e c h n i q u e o f c o n v e n i e n c e w h i c h w i l l h a v e to be'
          u n a d o p t e d , of many of those i n s t r u c t i n g . s o l i c i t o r s who
          i n s t r u c t m y s e l f , h a s b e e n , " l e t u s w a i t a n d s e e w h o m the
          C o r o n e r i n t e n d s to c a l l to s e e w h e t h e r w e c a n s e e a n y
          o b v i o u s o m i s s i o n s , " r a t h e r t h a n d o i n g i t the o t h e r w a y r o u n d
        . o t s i t t i n g d o w n a n d m a k i n g u p t h e i r o w n i i s t , as -if they-


                                                  -15 —
'.■* Wi- i -I\C.
              *”; V **                                                                  s- TV-r1:■         .r.‘rr.= . •           - ••
                                                       .•;••• .I’ ••      - ”•                                . • ...




i^saS^stssgjsinques t* .o t? tn is :;s o r c r ^ w o u i a s p e a . u i P H t z . . ‘.z.zr^. “ "= £gs&5hg.
                                    fcrar-^IIs t ‘ wi t h ^ a n '^ s t a t e m e t t t ^ a t ^ a U ^ j ^ S r i r y ^ ^ e a v ^ ^ ; ^
g & g S S 8 m &lltha.
                * .vs.- ~£-.> ^u
                              ttil-V_..  .»ancLfp
                                  -iyo uJJ „„ J      er-via
                                                       chag.s»f>roi^in£     ^hrf^VrV^eo r r < r T d ' e ^ £ t g a e : a i ^ « i ^ ^ ^ l § ^
                                           ■It*iHifg *•"^frara.vfe&feuii3»iACj5533S




               so g ently b e c a u s e X k n o w X am t r e s p a s s i n g on y o u r


      §
   .■•.■*-•
               j u r i s d i c t i o n a n d a u t h o r i t y to m a k e - w h a t e v e r d e c i s i o n s ^you:
              .wish,, as to the. u s e to be. made.of.. Lord. J u s t i c e : T a y l o r s ; ..-^
               Rapoj-f,. a n d r e a l l y i n s u p p o r t o f t h e s u b m i s s i o n t h a t it.?., ;
    -•-•.rr'-V s h o u l d b e pute b e f o r e - the-; jury,:-not* i n r i t s ; e n t i r e t y . - and.,
             - t h i s again: m i g h t - . b e r e s e r v e d , f o r a n ' a r g u m e n t . b e f o r e - you; y h e n
        -P&C    t h e o t h e r m a t t e r i s r e s e r v e d — b u t o f c e r t a i n ‘p a r a g r a p h s
               w h i c h can be i d e n t i f i e d .          T h e y a r e p a r a g r a p h s w h i c h go to
                f a c t s , n o t o p i n i o n , a n d t h e y w o u l d c u r t a i l a l o t .of a r g u m e n t
                a s to c e r t a i n e v e n t s b e c a u s e t h e y a r e there, l a i d o u t v e r y                 t ^
                c l e a r l y and s u c c i n c t l y .                                                                    '

                              Sir, if I m i g h t d r a w an a n a l o g y .              I k n o w th i s is a n
                    inquisition.                I t is n o t a c i v i l t r i a l , i t is n o t a c r i m i n a l
                    t r i a l , b u t in t h e c i v i l l i t i g a t i o n w h i c h is n o w c o m p l e t e a
                    v e r y u s e f u l d e v i s e w h i c h e v e r y b o d y a g r e e d to w a s th a t it w a s
                    a g r e e d t ha t t h e c o t e f a c t s , s u b j e c t t o a n y b o d y s r i g h t to
                    s a y , "I d i s p u t e a p a r t i c u l a r f a c t , " w o u l d be as se t o u t in
                    c e r t a i n n u m b e r e d p a r a g r a p h s w h i c h w e r e g i v e n a n d h a n d e d i n.
                    E v e r y o n e a g r e e d i t a t t h e end' o f t h e d a y to a p p r o a c h it m
                    t h a t w a y a n d it prov-ed to b e a g r e a t b o o n as a se tt ing ,, a
                    b a s e , u p o n w h i c h e v e r y o n e c o u l d o p e r a t e f r o m , b e c a u s e , ot
                    c o u r s e , o f t h e d i f f i c u l t y of not wishing t o b e a P u b l i c
                     Inquiry.

                                Sir, I c a n o n l y u r g e a g a i n t h a t         perhaps        some
                     c o n s i d e r a t i o n , be. g i v e n to t h a t -                                                   .
                                                             * 1                                  *
                              T H E CORONER:             One- o f t h e r e a s o n s w h y r anti r e l u c t a n t to
                     u s e t h e R e p o r t is b e c a u s e i t d o e s n o t n e c e s s a r i l y , f o l l o w    •
                     t h a t it is a c c e p t e d , o r t h a t e v e r y p a r a g r a p h s a c c e p t e d , by
                     e v e r y single p a r t y b e f o r e m e -           I t w o u l d b e i m p r o p e r to u s e
                     i t r o r if. I d i d w e w o u l d t h e n h a v e to. a r g u e o u t a l L t h e
                     d i s p u t e d a s p e c t s - o f i t i n s o f a r as t h e y w e r e r e l e v a n t -

                           .       I f i t w e r e - p o s s i b l e ' f o r ther p a r t i e s t o r e a c h a n     .
                         a g r e e m e n t a n d say,. " W e a c c e p t t h e f o l l o w i n g p a r a g r a p h s , r e
                         and   Zr"       then,, o f course,.-;! would- n o t h a v e a n y o b j e c t i o n to
                         t h a t b e c a u s e i t w o u l d , be.;an agreed s t a t e m e n t an d^ I w o u l d bfc
                         q u i t e h a p p y w i t h t h a t * . W h a t I d o n t w a n t to d p is to



                                             .+ •
                                                                 -16.-
- <
 . * *i h.'“             .   *■   •                            . i * '* ‘ V*. .        * • " » V* ■=.#*•* J 'v i* »*. ' • » ^                                 . • -I,
                 **U.%'••••V*vV !.***. —I**—-• •’ *- •_■■»'*«-                    »                 , f . "v O - * : * * ^ . V \ v                           *7rvr*~
  ■.*'1'             r»'w itn         n t tr r ^n r   t   '.                      • .‘y * '•**       • * %. -•’* s'*'**’ . , *      •,   ” “•-****'" *'“••     .**>




                                               aBmer«.s%r
^ i r ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ : H ^ - | ^ - . ' - R y s s E L L r iC ” T d ’;jres£dentV-arid,:then'7s'hopkeepecs2^7f'^’*'*-3!j;.;::^

                         THE CORONERr    No, no t necessarily*-. That was purely a
                  grouping. What I would intend to do is to work; from the
                  outside in..    If,. for example,' I was dealing with the
                  surroundings of Leppings Lane, we would call some residents,
      t           w e would call other groups,~. we ..would call .any* supporters, who.. ••,
                  had something, specific to say- oir that-' * Then..we would.move
                ...our. way through the. events-,.:'so to speak*   :I'.da recognise -
               L: that, in many cases it. isv.no t. actually.:possible to ■.      r-
                  categorise. - You can't say, "We will only listen to this
                  little bitvand not to the rest."          If we call a supporter
                  he is going to want to tell us the story from A to Z, and
                  quite rightly, because there is no way we could get him to
                  come backwards and forwards across the Pennihes just to suit
                  the convenience of a scheme which I have designed.

                      However, there are some witnesses who will only give
                 very restricted evidence because they don't know anything
                 else, but we will try and deal with those as we go.   The
                 order in which I g^ve them was not specific.   It was just
                 the way I happened to write it down.   In fact it is quite
                 likely that for logistical reasons we might well start with
                 local people in the morning and have people who are coming
                 from a distance later on in the day*   In other words, I
                 will be guided not by their category, but by the convenience
                 and timings of where they live'and so on.

                             Does that help you at all?

                       HR.. RUSSELLi.  Thank, you for that clarification* • The ■*-
                 other matters are perhaps matters T could raise at any
                 subsequent meeting if there is to be a further lawyers'
                 meeting at which matters of law are going to be canvassed..
                 They deal with two matters ray learned friend Mr* King has
                 raised.     One of them relating to the matters arising from
                 what he has termed the mini inquests, additional matters
                 that ne wishes to have put* What concerns me, my first
                 reaction, is whether and to what extent those matters are
                 going to be circulated to the other legal representatives.
                 It seems to me appropriate if he is going to supply you. with
                 specific questions for you to ask the witnesses, which is * ,
                 what* I understand he wishes to do, whether those questions
                 should be made public to other representatives so that.we
                                                                                      •i                                        •
                                                                            ' -19 -
                                                       ly ffr ie n d :fromrt ’ ‘ ’r'“ T'7’ —                  ....
                                                     p r o p e r ly ’r a i s e d ' ^
    •^.•^^ii^1^-utl<lectak^n8
      •*.»-*-***- ,•k?.*’ g q » > A a 1 A f
                                            s
                                            a P
                                                migh  t be given
                                                 (hama.*      J ' I
                                                                        which^might^save
                                                                                     i.1 ^
                                                                                                      al- lo t 'J-.1________
                                                                                           C . ______ 1 * n .
                                                                                                                   o f time,V       ; i;K.
                                                                                                                             a____ '••-•■ * - • "




                       y o u r !o f f ice-■perha*psA'*sendingf^ to •e a c h ’p e r sotr*whoVi's- o n •y o u r
                       l i s t as a r e p r e s e n t a t i v e , a c o m p l e t e l i s t - o f a l l the
                       r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s s o that. we. m a y g e t in t o u c h w i t h e a c h o t h e r
                     • a n d s e e - w h e t h e r w e c a n in f a c t a g r e e o n a n y s p e c i f i c m a t t e r s
                       w h i c h , w i t h o u t i m p i n g i n g on y o u r j u r i s d i c t i o n , m i g h t h e l p to
                       avoid areas of contention*

c     f                       " I f that could b e done I know that-my client would be
                 •       very happy*         H e d o e s n o t w a n t to c a u s e a n y f u r t h e r d i s t r e s s - '
                     .... to a n y o f t h e r e l a t i v e s * . _• •' ...-.v .
               i -* *. •                      .                                     ’*’•       • --»*       •*        *                      *•
                                                    . %     ’’ * *                                                   .’■ ’'
                                 THE CORONER:            C a n y o u s e e a n y o b j e c t i o n to m y
                       c i r c u l a t i n g a l i s t to a l l o f y o u o f y o u r r e s p e c t i v e n a m e s
                       and a d d r e s s e s and r e f e r e n c e s ?     I d o n ' t s u p p o s e a n y of y ou
                       w o u l d o b j e c t t o t h a t , so w e c a n d o that.

                                 I h e a r w h a t y o u say.           I t h i n k t h e q u e s t i o n o f the . . .
                       U n d e r t a k i n g s , I t h i n k , a r e r i s k y in t h e s e i n q u e s t s .     It is
                       not for m e to say w h a t u n d e r t a k i n g s a n y b o d y s h o u l d g i v e , b u t
                       o b v i o u s l y I w i l l c o n d u c t the i n q u e s t s a n d t a k e w h a t e v e r
                       e v i d e n c e I t h i n k is a p p r o p r i a t e , w h i c h e v e r w a y i t t u r n s ou t,
                       so to s p e a k .          M y j o b .is to m a k e a n i n q u i r y i n t o t h e d e a t h s
                       of t h e s e u n f o r t u n a t e p e o p l e .
                                                            .      i
                              MR. I S A A C S :      S i r, m a y I a s k y o u to c l a r i f y t w o p o i n t s ?
                    T h e f i r s t r e l a t e s t o t h e T a y l o r R e p o r t , b e c a u s e as I
                    u n d e r s t o o d w h a t y o u s a i d a t thfe o u t s e t , t h e T a y l o r R e p o r t
                    w a s n o t to b e u s e d a t all, s a v e i n s o f a r a s m y l e a r n e d
                    friends and m y self and other colleagues m i g h t a c t u a l l y a g r e e
                    ce rtain facts.              T h a t may o r m a y no t p r o v e s o m e t h i n g that
                    can b e done*              Assuming that that.cannot b e d o n e , h o w far do                                      .
                    you b e l ieve you w i l L allow the u s e of t h e T a y l o r Report a t
                  ■ all?.                              - - ...*                              7

                                A s I s a y , as I u n d e r s t o o d it a t t h e outset,' it w a s n o t
                      g o i n g ^ t o be used, b u t then I n o t i c e d w h e n my l e a r n e d friend
                      Mr. K i n g . w a s a d d r e s s i n g y o u b r i e f l y , t h e i m p r e s s i o n I
                      c e r t a i n l y g o t w a s t h a t y o u w e r e g o i n g to a l l o w t h e
                      t r a n s c r i p t s to b e u s e d f o r c r o s s - e x a m i n a t i o n p u r p o s e s , which,
                      was c e r t a i n l y not s o m e t h i n g I u n d e r s t o o d a t the o u t s e t and
                      w o u l d b e s o m e t h i n g w h i c h - a n d I l e a v e t h i s to a n o t h e r t i m e
                      — I would make submissions against*

                               T ha t, is t h e f i r s t point,, sir.-         T h e s e c o n d is t h i s, a n d
                      i t is     a r e l a t i v e l y liiinor" matter, a n d r e L a t e s to t h e .video.
  -- .         \ • -*:V • -V              7        -v":"!-- ,,“ PS.,SiP                        ■ -i •• - ••• •C'.       . ; ••
                  ‘“ -       y       -ita ^ i d e ^ l f ^ o S b r a i r > S ;sho«n't£';the^^
-|evidence^.-^vYes                        .•%.*.*            j ••t h a t^'Is-s-asi# L * u n d e r s t a n d ^ y o u r ^ ^ ^ K g g ^
;c.rccumstances                                       jS"^',clat i fyi.'this:^as .Iiunders tand^***;.
                                     * - --        « ., ■
                                                        ’^                       . K a ' cVinwrr "during* th e --•:» ««• --•*.'




f p r x n c i p I ^ t h e S a n s w e n i t o ^ t h ^ ^ » ? y h a v e ? t o > b S ?arn:i t t I e . * S
;video " a n d t h a t w o u l d ' b e - , i t . - ‘ H o w e v e r , ^ .       r can
 bit careful with regard                              to t h -.    jj A                r a ise d a n d where           it
 c o n c e i v e of a situation                       where a p o i n t ^ s            1* 1 * 6 ^    it by
 would b e infinitely q u i c k e r an                        u n d e r t a k i n g that-
 l o o k i n g at the video.       I w o u l d not g i     v     .      .1 w o u l d
 w e w o u l d n o t look a t t h e v i d ^    ^  ^  v i d e Q is t o g j ve t h e
 seek-to a v o i d it.       The P ^ P ° ^ p ^ ~ ^         gr d . of w h a t i l ~ -
  j u r y a n ,ove^v tn lll7 '^ r                  fl °nrr            *~ft h&   a E T e T t a u n d e r s t a n d * - ...
  h a p p e n e d _ flfi(1f i n o r d e r                    tpgffl                   T f i s an aid rather
  ^       ^       5 5 S ! l h e w U nes.ses ara                          one   .:
  th a n .anything else, but it                . of video.           Indeed I ‘
  might want to look a t c^e             s t a t e m e n t s ' which I have read
  the S S l o ' S r e f erred° to, or part^of the video, i s referred



                       ISAACS:                We   are very            grateful       for     that,
              MR .

              THE      CORONER:                However,           the-last         thing      I                   t0

   ^i^tia°eUon               i S      'vVlilY t o T e a !                 Ihe'people          v i v a . v oc e a s     is
   conventional.

       . Now- the other .point which you                                                   th^tranfcript, I
   Justice T a y l o r ' s Report and in                                                    lt problern. W h a t
   must confess I do find this <l“ £ e M ® u«             ££ f                             foolish- o f m e to
   I w a s t r y i n g to s a y is this.                cripts and that-none of
   a s s u m e t h a t you d on t h a v e th              1 am sure y o u are all
   y o u a r e g o i n g to l o o k a t t*|em      ag     no doubt have guessed
   g o i n g to d o that,, p a r t i c u l a r l y    y         h a v e g o t to c a l l                                      ■
   some o f the witnesses are ^ t a b l e .                 W e have go^ ^
      them because they- are                         key      piayers. shalL                      y,

      s   r   ^    ^     s   -   s    -   r    s     :                                                 * * *
      examination.

               W h a t I am not very'keen                             on doing      is




                                                                                                   p    a     w    .    • 1
      r n o w i5hoeverTtPisVti pursue them or, that point                                                by       quoting
     § « n ever^ever'conH,                                                         r ^ P “ac.«<«snave^pEJ
        a„J       ru   conducted              a n v i n q u e s f cr of -t hi sr size-orr. c o m p l e x i t y ' " '
      . and. r h a v e to l e a r n ,         l i k e m o s t o f u s - p r o b a b l y - h a v e to. a s to
          th.               "5 «£«ctly..-. . In that sense I hiva tl reserve
          the     right that I        t oo m a y          have   to m o d i f y   vrhat I d o -

                  Have- I h e l p e d    you      in       any way?


    u n H p r « h n J SA^ S ; C e r t a i n l y you. h a v e , : ' s i r . " V O n e can."
..^.understand,. f f L c a n p u t : i t this- w a y , .t h e - u s e ' o f ther
      •                     f° Pe r h a P s r e m i n d .somebody o f something, they s a i d
'                 ? h S ey  ha:t  p e r h a P S f o r g o t t e n about.. As r u n d e r s t a n d
          i t, t n at w a s t he s o r t o f e x a m p l e y o u w e r e g i v i n g j u s t a
          m o m e n t o r t wo ago.


       t h i s - W h ?hx,J ? f i 0 k " ? l e a r " e d f r i e n d M r. King, w a s s a y i n g w a s
       cod   ! *«f            t    2 w l J: n e s s L x      X Y a n d Z a nd Mr. K i n g h a s a
       M ? y K ? J . i S ^ s c r i p t w h e r e h e a c t u a l l y s a i d A B a n d C, t h a t
                        s h o u l d b e p e r m i t t e d to s a y to t hat w i t n e s s , " W a i t a
       said       AB   anH r ”     u ! y i n ® X Y and z but e ig h t e e n m o n t h s ago                you
       said       AB   a n d C.    W h a t is the p o s i t i o n h e r e ? " T h a t is
       b u T i n i ”8/ * are u?ed t0 in the normal civil process,
       hnm. ?!’. -my *“* » « » « " , something which is necessarili at '
       home       m    an   inquest     such          as   is    being   conducted.


       that            fC 2 R 0 N E R s *Iy f e e l i n § on. t h a t p o i n t is s i m p l y ' t h i s , '
              I                a r f t r y l n 8 to e s t a b l i s h is the t r u t h a s f a r as

      C and the XY and V                a   ^     .        ^     M t i ” 1' Up°n “hat Che AB
                                                . -   »




      T <ao._1C a n , w ? l ? a v e t h i s p o i n t ?   W e a r e m o v i n g o n to* t h e
    •                   1 S S 1 °" P ° L n t - -.-.It i s o bv iou s: to m e r a n d s u b j e c t
      to w h a t y o u m a y s a y , t h a t w e will' have- to h a v e a. . s e s s i o n
     'd e a f W f h      ?!    Wlt     l e g a 1 ' s u b m i s s i o n s - a n d we- can. t h e n t r y and.-'
      a s far- ac        5       JJa t t e r s a n d T w i l L t r y a n d g i v e y o u r u l i n g s ,
      “ uf £r? Isaacs?                  ’ “       the ti"'e -            IS        acceptable:to

      idea„Mif         \S^%             ^   “ ^ainlyis,                  sir, and a very good


      to     J w * S ! l eS        is o n e f u r t h e r m a t t e r t h a t I h a v e b e e n a s k e d .
      to     r a i s e a n d t h a t i s t h e q u e s t i on - o f the. r e c a l l o f                 1
             nesses.         C e r t a i n l y one;.can. u n d e r s t a n d w h y i t w o u l d be=*
^ J V o p p r e s s i v e : f o r a w i t n e s s , f r o m o \ ) e r " t h e . P e n n i n e s ory; indeed,'
£f~ f r o m down-. s o u t h . ; t O ‘b e ;c o m i n g \up on- a ;numberr.of.:r e g ul
      o c c a s i o n s ,., but,.-;sir,.,-. that;[same:
i ^ j t h e , g i v i n g j o £.. a v i d encejiin^fany "•
      p r o f e s s i o n a l witness,
^ gypoint:'milst. apply,. ':


     w.iith?i                                    stoo              e g o rrgtha tn dayv|and?|th e



     oppressive         indeed.

             T H E CORONER:             I. t a k e y o u r - p o i n t .   I t h i n k that, is a
   very f a i r point and I agree.                         I- a m n o t s a y i n g t h a t no-
   w i t n e s s w i l l e v e r b e r e c a l l e d , b e c a u s e if y o u r e m e m b e r t h o s e
   o f y o u w h o w e r e h e r e a t the. i n t e r i m i n q u e s t s , w e d i d r e c a l l
 . w i t n e s s e s e v e n in. t h a t i n s t a n c e because; things: o c c a s i o n a l l y
   c o m e u p w h i c h w e h a d f o r g o t t e n o r a p o i n t is- m a d e w h i c h o n
   r e f l e c t i o n w d o u g h t to h a v e e x p l o r e d .         I t m a y b e t h a t I."
   will, h a v e t o re cal l, w i t n e s s e s f r o m t i m e to t i m e , b u t . I
   a c c e p t y o u r point.             I t h i n k it is a v e r y v a l i d o n e a n d in
   p r i n c i p l e ' I ’a g r e e w i t h y o u .      I e n t i r e l y a c c e p t that these
   i n q u e s t s a r e g o i n g to b e p r e t t y h a r d o n e v e r y b o d y , n o t l e a s t
   the witnesses.                                                                           :.

               M R. I S A A C S :     T h e o n l y p o i n t t h a t p e r h a p s I o u g h t to
     make, one can understand why witnesses should b e recalled                                             to
     e l u c i d a t e s o m e p o i n t t h a t h a d n o t b e e n r a i s e d a t t h e ti m e
     w h e n h e o r s h e g a v e - e v i d e n c e , b u t t h a t is q u i t e d i f f e r e n t
     f r o m a s k i n g a w i t n e s s t o s t o p at s o m e s t a g e a n d t h e n c o m e
     back.

                T H E CORONER:            N o , t h a t w a s n ’t m y i n t e n t i o n .  What I
     w a s t r y i n g to s a y w a s t h a t if, f o r e x a m p l e , w e h a v e a l o c a l
    . r e s i d e n t w h o c a n o n l y g i v e e v i d e n c e as to w h a t h a p p e n e d
      o u t s i d e t h e g r o u n d , d i d n ' t g o J.n, t h e n o b v i o u s l y w e w i l l
      s t o p a t t h a t p o i n t w i t h h i m b e c a u s e * t h e r e is n o t h i n g m o r e h e
      c a n say.          H o w e v e r , if w e h a v e a s u p p o r t e r w h o w a s t h e r e a n d
      t h e n h e w e n t i n t o t h e g a t e s and. so on, w e w i l l l i s t e n to a l l
      o f i t a n d d i t t o w i t h o f f i c e r s as f a r as t h e y a r e c o n c e r n e d .

            . M I S S N O R C L I F F E r . .' S i r , ju st, the- o n e p o i n t - - . W e d i d        •
      p r e v i o u s l y s e n d to you. o r d r a w to y o u r - a t t e n t i o n a n u m b e r o f           •
      i t e m s o f d o c u m e n t a t i o n w h i c h t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e w o u l d -l i k e
      to b e b e f o r e t h e j u r y a n d w e h a v e p r e v i o u s l y a s k e d f o r
      p e r m i s s i o n t h a t t h a t b e 't h e c a s e .      T h a t w a s n ' t d o n e , sir,
      o n t h e b a s i s t h a t t h e j u r y w o u l d b e e x p e c t e d to t a k e t h e m
      a w a y a n d r e a d t h e m from, c o v e r to c o v e r , b u t t h a t . t h e y s h o u l d
      b e u s e d to d i p i n t o a s a n d w h e n r e q u i r e d .

                T H E CORONERt         Yes,, t h a t is r i g h t .          In f a c t y o u s e n t
      me I      think volume 3-            -t. c a n n o t r e m e m b e r y o u r v o l u m e s     L.
                                                                                                  ana _
      2 at      t h e m o m e n t s o it.: is. d i f f i c u l t f o r m e to a n s w e r this,..
                                            ^ e Sp             ^         bUndleS         “ d       **“     >    «          through

                          .. THE* C O R O N E R r w . V W e ~ d o n ' t                                                   ~r-r:4~ .,*.
               .,. s tact with single s h e e t ^ r agreed'!:
•   ..   »••
                       '/?''“,HR..
                                 V              That, w a s m y :opanine^'s-f t-:- t-‘n : '
                                 l°i.“       you. « > • * if-b   tE."S5;;   V

                  introduced            o r areuments              3 9 C J ° n s , a f o u f:;!'h          a        trb£---^<r.
                  we    could        j u s t h.r5S"?Sot : . a i
                                                              , n ^ o S ' b tu S f i , t . b *                 *•*“ » ° U t > an d

                            THE      CORONER:            Yes,          Miss     Norcliffe?



                 has beenSno°attempt*at ™ t I lettin                                                th e P ° in t t h a t t h e r e
                 t h e s e were. It S a s d e S d e J t i i ? S /                            h ? u P a ? ie s k n o w w h a t
                 those documents woulH u            ! J         m                              th e f i r s t i n s t a n c e
                 if y o u
                                 thereafter°atdthisPUt t° y°U *°C Y°U t0 ^ o k ^ t ^ m d
                 wtu^tr n^ Vr h a v t^ L L lrL U^ 0ti”? > ; r r 1'0n - “ yU” ^ “                                          part,
                 reason       „ hy                                                           ^ ^ o n e ! ^ ‘                 ^


                 for the^tirae°being? C"                       hfve^ot ^                       SUeStl°n of documents
                 d e c i s i o n a n d to a c e r t a i n 1 ^ !        f t        3 d e f i n i tive
                 of t h ose d e c i s i o n s u n t i l a f t e ^ ^ h *       6 <?e f e r r e d o n e ° r two
                 to h e a r w h a t y o u t h o u ^ h r          if        nieetlng b e c a u s e I w a n t e d
                 thought.              y    t h o u g h t as w e l l as y o u to h e a r w h a t I
                                                  •1


                that w ^ a r e ^ o i n g H f o ^ e e d ' ^ o b v i o u s ! h r * * * ?                     t0    d °“ “ en ts is
                put, t h e r e h f s         to be e n o u s h           fo^     ^              docuraents w h i c h are
                There have got               to b e a t                                  m a *n r e P r e s e n t a t i v e s .
                t h i n k it i s 8 o n l y f a r          should ^         C ° P l e S f° r t h e         a "d I      ^
                p r o l i f e r a t e d o c L e n ^ I b e c a u s e I ? M n S C ° Py a? S e l 1 "        Don,t
                w i l l n e e d t w e n t y c o p i e s if w e 3 ™             •W e w o r k e d ifc o u t w e
                the needs of these i n q u e s t s .                      S ° ln g t0 C 0 V e r a d e q u a t e l y

                        Yes,, a n y t h i n g          else?


               point.       P e r h a p s ' m y J u s I of             t h e ^ o 3^ " 0 " ^ the u n d e r t a k i n g s
               unfortunate.             What T h.j                     the word       undertakings" was
               w e c a n do, a n d J e e r .                                      “ 3S P re? isely “ h a t I hope
               Report       from      my c n “          ts? plint           0? v     ^   t? H l ft h i n        the Tayloc-
                                                                   a    s   -   g    ^   s    :    :   %   r     a^       ralata
                             3        WY     to    liaise          with       whoever         on    that        point.

               o f . „ Ny    S e C O "d    and     third       P ° ints         come     from      the s t a n d p o i n t



                                                           - 26 -
           THE CORONER;              M a y I just s a y t h e d i f f i c u l t y a b o u t t h a t
 is t h a t if I a m g o i n g to cal l o n e h u n d r e d w i t n e s s e s , it is
 v e r y d i f f i c u l t f o r s o l i c i t o r s , i n d e e d a n y b o d y , to g i v e
 u n d e r t a k i n g s a s to w h a t they w i l l s a y , a n d th is is a
 problem.              I w o u l d n o t b e very h a p p y a b o u t s h u t t i n g
 w i t n e s s e s u p i n t h e m i d d l e of a s e n t e n c e if w h a t t h e y a r e
 s a y i n g is r e l e v a n t to m y in q ui ry .              I t h i n k t h a t is a
 p r o b l e m w h e n I w a s l o o k i n g at y o u a b o u t g i v i n g u n d e r t a k i n g s .
 I t is a v e r y m a j o r p r o b l e m for y o u a s th e s o l i c i t o r s f o r the
 supporters.               It is e a s i e r for t h e o t h e r p a r t i e s , b u t it is
 a v e r y m a j o r d i f f i c u l t y w h i c h y o u h a v e g o t a nd I a m not
 q u i t e s u r e h o w w e c a n r e s o l v e it a t t h e m o m e n t .

         MR. J A C K S O N :       W e w i l l o b v i o u s l y h a v e to w a i t a n d see
 w h a t p e o p l e a r e p r e p a r e d to a g r e e b e f o r e w e m a k e a n y f u r t h e r
 comment.

       . S e c o n d l y , s i r , f r o m the v i e w p o i n t   of a c l i e n t who may
be looking at t h e s e inquests from a f a r                      a n d c o m i n g in. Am        I
r i g h t i n t h i n k i n g t h e r e will be a l i s t          available perhaps
t h r e e d a y s i n a d v a n c e of w i t n e s s e s w h o     will be called?

          THE CORONER:          T h a t is w h a t I a m h o p i n g f o r a n d of
c o u r s e if I a m p e r s u a d e d by the a r g u m e n t s of y o u r c o l l e a g u e s
y o u m a y g e t a n e v e n f u l l e r list s o o n e r , b u t c e r t a i n l y I
w o u l d w a n t to try a n d g i v e a t h r e e d a y p r o v i s i o n a l l y w a r n e d
l i s t , so to s p e a k , s o t hat you w o u l d h a v e s o m e i d e a of wh o
was coming.            N o t t h e i r s t a t e m e n t s , b u t t h e i r n a m e s and, if
y o u l i ke , c a t e g o r y - s u p p o r t e r , f r i e n d o r w h a t e v e r it m i g h t
be.

         HR. J A C K S O N : M y final p o i n t is a q u e s t i o n :                whether
there     will b e a d a i l y transcript available.

      THE      CORONER:           I   am c o m i n g   to   the    transcripts        in a
momen t.

         Before I move     on, w e ar e t a k i n g a b i t l o n g e r t h a n I h a d
anticipated.       I am sorry        a bo ut t h a t b u t I t h i n k w e m i g h t as
w e l l press o n and d e a l w i t h m a j o r i t e m s today.        Mrs.
HcB r i a n , yes.  Y o u m u s t shout b e c a u s e o t h e r w i s e I c a n ' t
h e a r y o u.

           M RS . M C B R I A N :      I am c o n c e r n e d v e r y m u c h a b o u t the
p o i n t , the c u t - o f f      p o i n t , w h er e y o u s a y y o u a r e g o i n g to
t a k e no e v i d e n c e a f t e r 3.15.            I t h i n k th e m o s t i m p o r t a n t
t h i n g that d a y is...

          THE CORONER:              No, Mrs. M c 3 r i a n , I h a v e g o t to s t o p
you.          I k n o w i t s o u n d s u n f a i r b e c a u s e I h a v e n ' t s t o p p e d the
o t h e r s , b u t y o u a r e m o v i n g into w h a t I c a l l the q u e s t i o n of
evidence.               In f a c t w h a t you a r e s a y i n g is y o u w a n t m e to
r e c o n s i d e r t h e c u t - o f f po int ?
         MRS. MCBRIAN:              I would like you to do that.
          T H E CORONER:              Y e s , OK.        W h e n w e n e x t m e e t f o r l e ga l
s u b m i s s i o n s t he n y o u c a n a r g u m e n t a t t h a t p o i n t o n the p o i n t
of law.             F o r g i v e m e , I r e a l i s e t h i s is d i f f i c u l t f o r y ou,
M r s . M c B r i a n , b e c a u s e y o u ar e n o t a l a w y e r .           On the other
h a n d , if y o u r e p r e s e n t y o u r s e l f y o u h a v e to b e t r e a t e d as if
y o u w e r e o n e and s o I h a v e to a p p l y e x a c t l y th e s a m e , if y o u
l i k e , r u l e s to y ou , e v e n t h o u g h it is h a r d e r fo r y ou.                  At
t h e n e x t m e e t i n g w h e n w e a r e a r g u i n g point's of law, t hen by
a l l m e a n s if t h e r e is a l e g al p o i n t o n w h i c h o n e c a n a r g u e
t h a t I a m w r o n g a b o u t t h e c u t - o f f p o i n t , then le t it be
argued.             If^ h a v i n g l i s t e n e d to t he a r g u m e n t , I a m
p e r s u a d e d , t h e n of         c o u r s e I w i l l h o p e f u l l y say so.     If I am
not persuaded I will also                          say so a n d w e wi ll h a v e to a c c e p t
i t b e c a u s e t h a t is           h o w it is. H a v e       I m a d e tha t c l e a r ?

         MRS.    MCBRIAN:           Yes.

         THE    CORONER:          Was     there s o m e t h i n g   else,    Mr s.    McBrian?

         MRS.    MCBRIAN:           No.

          T H E CORONER:          I a m n o t t r y i n g to b e u n f a i r to y o u
b e c a u s e I k n o w it is v e r y , v e r y d i f f i c u l t in the c o n t e x t of
t h i s m e e t i n g a n d a n y w a y l e g a l p o i n t s , b u t I h a v e g o t to try
a n d b e f a i r to t h e o t h e r s as w e l l .

          W h a t I w a s g o i n g to sa y w a s a r e t h e r e any o t h e r p o i n t s
o n t h e p r o c e d u r a l a s p e c t s w h i c h y o u n e e d to r a i s e ?  I am
not talking about legal points.                           I w a n t to s t i c k to
p r o c e d u r e as f a r as I a m able.               Right, I hope I have
succeeded.

          T r a n s c r i p t s , s o m e b o d y r a i s e d it.       It is m y i n t e n t i o n
to h a v e n e x t d a y t r a n s c r i p t s , s o e a c h d a y ' s p r o c e e d i n g s
s h o u l d b e a v a i l a b l e f i r s t t h i ng n e x t m o r n i n g .       T h e r e are
t w o t h i n g s a b o u t it.             I w o u l d l i k e to know, a n d I d o n ' t
n e e d to k n o w thi s m i n u t e , bu t I w o u l d l i k e y o u to w r i t e to
m e as s o o n a s y o u p o s s i b l y c a n a n d l e t m e k n o w w h e t h e r y o u
a n t i c i p a t e w a n t i n g t r a n s c r i p t s b e c a u s e w e h a v e to p l a n h o w
w e a r e g o i n g to p r o d u c e them a n d w e n e e d to k n o w in r o u n d
terms how many we want.                          S e c o n d l y , it is g o i n g to b e a
j o l l y e x p e n s i v e e x e r c i s e for y o u b e c a u s e t r a n s c r i p t s , as y o u
k n o w , y o u g e t a b i l l f r o m the c i t y , a n d it is e x p e n s i v e , b u t
t h a t is h o w it is s o y o u h a v e g o t to t h i n k h a r d .                    I am not
a s k i n g y o u to w a s t e y o u r money.

          If y o u k n o w y o u a r e g o i n g to w a n t a d a i l y t r a n s c r i p t
t h e n o b v i o u s l y t e l l m e.       If t h e r e a r e s o m e o f y o u wh o s a y
y o u d o n ' t w a n t a d a i l y t r a n s c r i p t b u t t h e r e m a y b e the o d d
o c c a s i o n where you may want a d ay's transcript, then
i n d i c a t e t h a t to m e a s w e l l a n d w e w i l l do o u r b e s t to
oblige.           H o w e v e r , w h a t w e w i l l n o t b e a b l e to d o is to h a v e
      a s o r t o f i n d u s t r y w h e r e on v e r y s h o r t n o t i c e w e w i l l b e
      a b l e to c o u g h u p a t r a n s c r i p t . - I w a n t to b e as h e l p f u l              as
      I c a n o n t h is .            I w a n t y ou to u n d e r s t a n d t h a t w e a r e
      i n t e n d i n g to h a v e t h e m a v a i l a b l e b e c a u s e I w a n t t h e m f o r      a
      start.            T h e y w i l l c o s t yo u m o n e y u n f o r t u n a t e l y , or
      f o r t u n a t e l y , it d e p e n d s w h i c h w a y y o u l o o k at it.            Is
      that c l e a r ?

              . M R. M A N N I N G :   Si r, n o r m a l l y if      t h e c o u r t is p r o d u c i n g
      a t r a n s c r i p t t h e r e is a c os t fo r t h e         p r o d u c t i o n a n d th en
      t ha t is s p l i t b e t w e e n th e n u m b e r s o f       p e r s o n s w h o w a n t an
      i n d i v i d u a l copy.

              THE CORONER:             W h a t we d o. ..        Well,      I will      think     about
     it.      We will write           to you.

               MR . M A N N I N G :      Si r , if y o u a r e g o i n g to r e q u e s t t he
     c o p y , it m a y be t h a t a l l we w e r e i n v o l v e d in w o u l d be th e
     p h o t o c o p y i n g c h a r g e w h i c h , of c o u r s e , w o u l d b e m u c h m o r e
     palatable.             '

               THE CORONER:                B u t even t ha t is e x p e n s i v e , a s - s o m e o f
     y o u k n o w w h o h a v e h a d t r a n s c r i p t s f r o m the i n t e r i m
     p r o c e e d i n g s b e c a u s e it is laid d o w n in the C o r o n e r ' s C o p y of
     D o c u m e n t s R e g u l a t i o n s 1988, w h i c h n o d o u b t y o u w i l l l o o k u p
     w he n you get home.

                S o m e b o d y a s k e d m e in o n e of t h e l e t t e r s h o w l o n g t h e s e
      i n q u e s t s w i l l t ak e .           W e l l , y o u r g u e s s p r o b a b l y is as g o o d as
     m i n e , b u t w e a r e p l a n n i n g to s t a r t o n t h e 19<th„Nq.VLenib.e.rj. -.We
      i n t e n d to r i s e on a b o u t the 1 tftFT q r “T9't'ETqf' De ce r n b e r .                  I do
    'not tKTnlc w e wiil'"hav1e‘JTinxsfi¥3 ~Ky'~t‘KenT'*"'’^'f“ xt“>'Isr o b v i o u s
     w e a r e g o i n g to f i n i s h w i t h a d a y o r w e w i l l c a r r y o n f o r
     a n o t h e r d a y o r two, b u t I th ink it is u n l i k e l y .                       We will
      t h e n p r o b a b l y r e s u m e o n the 7t;h..of J a n u a r y a n d c a r r y on
     until w e finish.                       ' TT Sw tHe re " a r e ^ r o tfrem^7 ^              se,
r   T e c a - u s e if w e h a v e i l l n e s s , p a r t i c u l a r l y a m o n g s t t h e j u r y ,
     w e m a y h a v e to a d j o u r n .                 It d e p e n d s o n the t y p e o f i l l n e s s
     b ut I c a n ' t , of c o u r s e , gi ve u n d e r t a k i n g s t h a t n o - o n e w i l l
     f a l l il l.            H o p e f u l l y not, but t h i s is a q u e s t i o n w h i c h is
     unpredictable.                     S e c o n d l y , of c o u r s e , I c a n ' t s a y h o w l o n g
     y o u l a d i e s a n d g e n t l e m e n are g o i n g to b e w i t h y o u r c r o s s -
     e x a m i n a t i o n or, i n d e e d , yoj^r_l^^l_sjjh!Ri.s.s,iojas so I a m in
     t h e d a r k to a c e r t a i n e x t e n t as f a r as t ha t is c o n c e r n e d .

              I a m g o i n g to try, as far as I a m a bl e, to g r o u p
    w i t n e s s e s s o t h a t p e o p l e who a r e s a y i n g s i m i l a r t h i n g s a r e
    c o m i n g a t the s a m e time which I t h i n k w i l l s p e e d t h i n g s u p a
    l i t t l e bit.

            I c a n n o t t e l l y o u h o w m a n y w i t n e s s e s w e a r e g o i n g to
    h a v e e i t h e r , b u t I w o u l d be s u r p r i s e d if it w a s l e s s t ha n
    w e r e c a l l e d a t L o r d J u s t T a y l o r s I n q u i r y , w h i c h w a s 17 4 ,        T
    think.          I t w o u l d n o t s u r p r i s e m e if it i s n ' t m o r e .     That

                                              - 29 -
 d o e s n ' t m e a n to s a y t h e y w i l l a.ll b e         lengthy,         but    I expect
 t h e r e w i l l be q u ite a f e w w i t n e s s e s .

           Any comments on leng t h ?              I d o n ' t s u p p o s e t h e r e is m u c h
 o n e c a n s ay , is t h e r e ?      I a m v e r y c o n s c i o u s , of c o u r s e ,
 t h a t it is d i f f i c u l t f o r a l l t h e f a m i l i e s , b u t it is a l s o
 g o i n g to b e v e r y h a r d f o r t h e j u r y , b u t I d o n ' t k n o w w h a t I
 c a n d o a b o u t it.       I h a v e t h o u g h t q u i t e hard, a b o u t h o w to d o
 it a n d I c a n ' t see a n y w a y r o u n d it, o t h e r t h a n t h e w a y I a m
 t a c k l i n g it.

           Perhaps I should just m e n t i o n a n o th er thing about
 timing.           O n the    2 8 t h of N o v e m b e r w e c a n n o t u s e t h e C o u n c i l
 Chamber because              t h e r e is a C o u n c i l m e e t i n g   a n d I h a v e h a d to
 a g r e e n o t to be        t h e re.   Similarly,           it m a y b e t h a t on t h e
 6 th D e c e m b e r we      will not             b e a b l e to u s e the T o w n H a l l a n d
 t h e 9 t h o f J a n u a r y is a n o t h e r C o u n c i l d a y w h e n w e w i l l
 d e f i n i t e l y n o t b e a b l e to u s e t h e C o u n c i l C h a m b e r .       Our
 i n t e n t i o n i s to s t a r t o n the 7 t h b u t o b v i o u s l y as w e g e t
 n e a r e r t h e t i m e w e w i l l t h i n k a b o u t it a b i t h a r d e r .

          I am considering, a l t h o u g h I have not take a decision
o n thi s y e t , t h at on t h e 2 8 t h if m i g h t b e w o r t h w h i l e ,
p r o v i d e d w e c a n a r r a n g e it, to t a k e the j u r y o u t f o r a n o t h e r
s i t e v i s i t f o r a l i t t l e b i t l o n g e r a n d le t t h e m s e e the
s u r r o u n d i n g s and e v e r y t h i n g else.     P e r h a p s Mr. C a t c h p o l e
you could check wi t h y o u r c l i e n t s w h e t h e r they w o u l d be
w i l l i n g to a l l o w us to c o m e ?

         MR. C A T C H P O L E :     I am c e r t a i n        they   would       be    willing    to
allow     it a t y o u r c o n v e n i e n c e , sir;

          T H E CORONER:          That would mea n we weren't totally
w a s t i n g t he tim e a n d it m i g h t b e of b e n e f i t to t h e j u r y to
s e e t h e g r o u n d a g a i n a n d to r e f r e s h t h e i r m e m o r y .    I know
t h i n g s h a v e c h a n g e d a b i t b e c a u s e s o m e of th e b a r r i e r s h a v e
d i s a p p e a r e d a n d s o o n, b u t t h a t . i s j u s t h o w it is.

          MR. C A T C H P O L E :        Certainly my instructions                 are    that    the
g r o u n d is a v a i l a b l e    at    a n y t i m e y o u r e q u i r e it.

        T H E CORONER:      That's              v e r y k i n d of you.         T h a n k you
v e r y m u c h indeed.   We will               le t y o u k n o w a b o u t   that a little
b i t n e a r e r the time.

        I have dealt with                 th e d a t e s w h e n w e c a n ' t si t .    If w e
d o t h e v i s i t , a n d I arn         h o p i n g w e w i l l b e a b l e to s i t on the
6 th o f D e c e m b e r , it is          o n l y r e a l l y the 9 t h of J a n u a r y w h e n
w e d e f i nitely will not               b e a b l e to sit, and, o f c o u r s e , t h e r e
w i l l b e a n o t h e r d a y in        F e b r u a r y if w e g o on t h a t long, b u t I
h o p e not.

        I D o intetidL-Lo^call a f e w - e x p e r t s             right-, a t j -Jt p e n d ........I
h a v e n o t y e t formalised-giv— Jthinking o n                  t h i s s o I -can~t

                                           - 30 -
r e a l l y t el l y o u m o r e t h a n t h e f a c t I w i l l b e c a l l i n g a f e w
e x p e r t s to d e a l w i t h s p e c i a l t h i n g s , b u t y o u m u s t r e m e m b e r
t h a t e v e n th e e x p e r t s , t h e i r e v i d e n c e is g o i n g to be
r e s t r i c t e d to w h a t is r e l e v a n t to an i n q u e s t .               I am s u r e
y o u a l l a p p r e c i a t e t h a t a s p e c t s , say, of c i v i l a s p e c t s - I
k n o w t he c i v i l m a t t e r h a s b e e n d o n e a n d in th a t s e n s e I a m
lucky.            V e r y o f t e n w h a t p e o p l e w a n t f r o m an i n q u e s t is t h e
a m m u n i t i o n f o r t h e c i v i l trial, b u t t h a t d o e s n o t s e e m as if
t h a t is g o i n g to b e n e c e s s a r y .           H o w e v e r , w e s t i l l h a v e to
t a k e i n t o a c c o u n t t h a t w e d o n ' t d e a l w i t h c i v i l a s p e c t s as
s u ch.

          L i s t i n g I t h i n k I h a v e a l r e a d y d e a l t w i t h to a c e r t a i n
extent.             It is g o i n g to be d i f f i c u l t .       We will do our best
to m i n i m i s e i n c o n v e n i e n c e a nd to m a k e t h i n g s as s e n s i b l e as
w e c an , b u t I a m a f r a i d that w i t n e s s e s a r e g o i n g to h a v e t o
be p r e p a r e d to b e s h i f t e d a r o u n d at r e l a t i v e l y s h o r t n o t i c e
b e c a u s e it is s o h a r d to p r e d i c t h o w l o n g a n y p a r t i c u l a r
p e r s o n is g o i n g to b e g i v i n g e v i d e n c e for, b u t w e        will learn
f r o m e x p e r i e n c e a s w e g o a l on g.

          A s I h a v e a l r e a d y s a i d the i n q u e s t s a r e p u b l i c so t h e
p r e s s will be there.              W e k n o w t h a t f r o m l a s t time.           They are
n o t h e r e t o d a y b e c a u s e I d i d n ' t c o n s i d e r this an a p p r o p r i a t e
m e e t i n g f or t h e m to b e h e r e at.             T h e y a r e not, h o p e f u l l y ,
g o i n g to r e p o r t i t a n d y o u s h o u l d n o t d i s c u s s it e i t h e r
b e c a u s e w h a t I a m v e r y c o n c e r n e d a b o u t is that w h e n t he j u r y
c o m e s t o g e t h e r a g a i n it is they w h o           r e a c h the v e r d i c t .    It
is n o t I.           It is c e r t a i n l y n o t y o u      a n d it is n o t e v e n y o u
u p t her e, it is t h e            j u r y that h a s to m a k e its m i n d u p o n t h e
f acts and I w a n t as             f a r as p o s s i b l e to e n s u r e t h a t t h a t
happens.

         T h a t is a b o u t it, as far as I a m c o n c e r n e d .             Snail we
s t a r t a g a i n w i t h y o u , Mr. King , a n d w o r k o u r w a y        round, just
in c a s e t h e r e is s o m e t h i n g ?

        HR. K I N G :  I h a v e n o f u r t h e r c o m m e n t s now, sir.             I am
happy    to k n o w w e a r e g o i n g to h a v e a f u r t h e r m e e t i n g       for the
legal    points.

          THE CORONER:               Oh , yes, I h a d w r i t t e n it d o w n a n d I h a d
f o r g o t t e n it, t h e o r d e r in w h i c h y o u g e n t l e m e n a n d        ladies
w i l l b e a s k i n g q u e s t i o n s of w i t n e s s e s .      As y o u k n o w I s t a r t
o f f in an i n q u i s i t i o n a n d a s k w h a t e v e r I w a n t .             Strictly
s p e a k i n g , it i s n ' t a p e r s o n ' s w i t n e s s , b u t if s o m e b o d y
r e p r e s e n t s a p a r t i c u l a r w i t n e s s , h e a s k s q u e s t i o n s last.
E v e r y b o d y e l s e a s k s in w h a t e v e r o r d e r I d e c i d e , b u t I w o u l d
p r e f e r , I t h i n k it w a s d o n e in L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r ' s s e t - u p ,
t h a t y o u a g r e e d a m o n g s t y o u r s e l v e s in w h a t o r d e r y o u w a n t e d
to ba t.           I a m q u i t e h a p p y to b e r e a s o n a b l e a b o u t that.
N o t o n l y am I q u i t e h a p p y to b e r e a s o n a b l e a b o u t it, y o u
w i l l p r o b a b l y h a v e a l r e a d y n o t i c e d I t e n d to g o r o u n d a n d
then I start again at the b e g i n n i n g b e c a u s e a l t h o u g h o ne has
to draw the line some wh er e I want e v e r y b o d y to feel that
they h av en 't been p re j ud ic e d b e c a u s e they have g o n e first
and something has occurred.             Don't feel that if something
occurs to you, w i th in reason I am a m e n a b l e to a l l o w anything
r eas onable to be asked.

         MR.   KING:    I have n o t h in g else.

         THE CORONER:      A n yth in g else?       No.

      Now if we turn to the point on a n o t h er m e et in g, it
sounds to me as if there are goi ng to be va rious legal
subm is si on s which have to be made.        We could do those on
the 19th, but then we lose a jury day, so to speak.                  If it
is agreeable to you there is no reason why I s h oul d not
deci de to c ommence the inquests - if we met on Friday, the
16th, and I think we will meet in the Co un ci l Chamber.
That will be a formal session so if you like the inquests
will c o mme nc e on the 16th, but w i t h o ut the jury being
present, simply and solely for legal s ub m is s i o n s .        We can
deal with those.       I can give you any r ul ings or I can think
about them over the weekend.       On M o n d a y m o r n i n g when we
start with the jury we can get straight into that.                  Is that
convenient?       Mr. Isaacs?

        MR. ISAACS:      I h e sit at e to say it is inconvenient,
sir, but perhaps I speak on behalf of sc.ne of my learned
friends who, like myself, have c o m m i t m e n t s and w h o s e
c o mm it m en ts have been a rranged so that the i n qu e st s will
start on the 19th.         For my part I w ou ld m u c h p r e fe r to be
maki ng such su bmissions as have to be m ad e and to be
listening to the submissions that are g o i n g to be made, on
the first morning.          I ap pr ec ia te what you say, sir, about
the loss of a jury day, but in the c on te x t of in qu es ts that
are going to last seven to eight weeks, p er haps one day is
not going to m ake that much d i ff er en ce.

         THE CORONER:      What does e v e ry b od y      else   thi nk about
tha t?

        MR. RUSSELL:        I would like to e n d o rs e w h a t my learned
friend has just said.           It is very r ea so na bl e, especially
those of us who have clerks w it h d i a r i e s and h a v e sought to
a cc o mm o d a t e the start data on the 19th.

       THE CORONER: In other words,-'what you are saying is
that you have booked the 19th, but if we bring it forward it
is going to make it awkward for you.    T hat is w ha t you are
s ay ing?

       MR. RUSSELL:       Sir, yes, but subject,           of course,    with
che ck in g w ith our    respective offices.
                   THE CORONER:    A l l right.      In that case we will start
            on   the 19th in the m o r n i n g with legal su bm is s io n s. We will
                          thf i Ury    S ° that they come on the 2 0 t h instead of
            the 19th.       Before     I say that, this is a d i ff i c u l t q u e s t i o n
           on?n«°h* ► S°9             yOU judse the legal submissions are
           go in g to take.  A v e r y hard qu estion but can you just gi v e
           me an indication?                                      J    S-*-v e
                                                                          J   ■




                   MR. KING:      I would      have    thought,   sir, we could do     them
           m     tne morning.

                  MR.   ISAACS:       I agree.

                THE CORONER:   OK then, we will p robably g e t the iurv
           to come...   I will t h i n k about that b ec au s e it depends on
           what else we need to do.      We will meet then on the 19th for
           legal submissions.

     C^           -w?' CATCHPOLE:        Sir, there is only point.           Would it be
           p os si bl e for. the list of witnesses w ho m you i nt en d to call
           on     the first or s e c o n d day to be a v a i l a b l e on the Friday to
           be     sent through to the various s ol ic i to rs ?

                  THE CORONER:        Yes.

               MR. KING:    Sir, I am sure you h a v e n ' t fo rg ot t en you
          did say you would c o n s i d e r the overall point of perhaps
          circulating the w i t n e s s e s in full.

               THE CORONER:     T h e witness list, yes.    T ha t is
          something which   I w il l think about.    If I dec id e to do it
          then I will.    If not, we will discuss it on the 19th and ’
          you can have another g o at me.      I have taken on board what
          you have said.

                     Perhaps I could say one thing ab out that and maybe you
r
\.
          c o u l d h e l p me.   O n e of the factors that influen ce s me in
           the circulation of s u c h a list is this:                  from w h a t I have
          a lr ea dy told you it m u s t be obvious to y o u that I am
          co nsidering quite a lot of people as p otential witnesses.
           Ihis is, of course, b e c a u s e I have got to base my judgment
          on what I read b e c a u s e I haven't heard them.                  M ow it is
          p os si bl e that when we g e t cracking that we may find...
          Let s imagine that I h a v e got fifty supporters as potential
          w it ne ss es on my list, it may be that as we get a lo ng that we
          d i s c o v e r the evidence is coming out in such a way there is
          rea ll y no need to h e a r fifty people.               O n e of the
          d i sa dv an ta ge s of my c i r c u l a t i n g a list to you is that it
          m ea n s I have to d e l e t e people whose names are on a list
          I
          i l i L yw
            like     5 aVe I
                   because ? ecan
                              e n * macce
                                       <
                                       If a
                                          1 judgment.
                                            d0n,t c i r c u l a t e it I can do w ha t

                  Now I would not w a n t to feel - o bvi ou sl y if I have out
          s o me bo dy s name down the reason I have d o n e that is because

                                          -   33   -
I t h i n k h e is s a y i n g s o m e t h i n g w h i c h m a y b e of i n t e r e s t so I
w o u l d n o t d e l e t e t h e m j u s t f o r - t h e h e c k o f it.     However,
n e i t h e r w o u l d I w a n t to w a s t e t h e i r t i m e o r o u r t i m e in
r e p e a t i n g things.         H a v e y o u a n y v i e w s o n the r e v i s i o n of
any c i r c u l a t e d list downward?                Of course, I might also add
names upwards.

          MR. K I N G :    S i r, t h a t w o u l d b e e m i n e n t l y s e n s i b l e a n d
if I m a y s a y so o n e of t he a d v a n t a g e s o f a l i s t is t h a t w e
c a n a l l a p p l y o u r m i n d s the w h o l e t i m e it is p r o g r e s s i n g as
w e l o o k d o w n t he l i s t a s to, " W e l l , t h a t g r o u p of w i t n e s s e s
could in effect become agreed evidence."                              That w o u l d be
e n t i r e l y sensible.

          T H E CORONER:             D o e s a n y b o d y d i s a g r e e w i t h Mr. K i n g ' s
comment?             No.     W e l l , t h a t d o e s m a k e it a l i t t l e b i t e a s i e r
f o r m e b e c a u s e I w a s a l i t t l e b i t c o n c e r n e d , m a y b e fr o m
e x p e r i e n c e , t h a t a n y t h i n g t h a t is p u b l i s h e d b e c o m e s l a w a n d
I w o u l d n o t w a n t t hat.

          MR. C ATCHPOLE:              S i r , c o u l d I j u s t a d d t h a t o n e of the
a d v a n t a g e s t h a t w e c e r t a i n l y s e e of h a v i n g a c o m p r e h e n s i v e
l i s t is t h a t t h e r e a l a r g e n u m b e r o f us w h o h a v e a c t u a l l y
s e e n a l o t o f t h e w i t n e s s e s t h a t y o u m a y w i s h to c a l l .           We
h a v e h a d t h a t b e n e f i t a n d it m a y b e t h a t w e c o u l d say, as a
s u g g e s t i o n o b v i o u s l y , o n l y to y o u r s e l f t h a t t h e r e m a y b e
s o m e b o d y e l s e y o u m i g h t l i k e to c o n s i d e r c a l l i n g , o r th a t as
t h i n g s p r o g r e s s w e c o u l d p r u n e it d o w n .

          T H E CORONER:          T h a t is r i g h t .     T h a t is o n e o f th e
p o i n t s o f Mr. King.             I w a n t e d to t a c k l e it t h e o t h e r way.
I w a n t e d y o u to t e l l m e w h o y o u w a n t e d b u t I c a n s e e it d o e s
c r e a t e a p r o b l e m b e c a u s e y o u h a v e g o t to d o u b l e - g u e s s me, so
to s p e a k , a n d I c a n s e e that.              It is a v a l i d p o i n t a n d I
will c e r t a i n l y very seriously c o n s i d e r the point you have
made.

        M r s . M c B r i a n , is it a l l c l e a r to y o u ?   W e l l , it m a y
not   a l l b e c l e a r to y o u but is t h e r e a n y t h i n g y o u w a n t to
say   on t h e s e p r o c e d u r a l aspects?

        MRS. MCBRIAN:          D o e s it m e a n t h a t w e a l l w a i t u n t i l the
1 9 t h f o r y o u to m a k e a d e c i s i o n as to w h a t t i m e t h e e v i d e n c e
is to b e h e a r d , a n d th e q u a r t e r p a s t t h r e e ?

          T H E CORONER:            No, I c a n t e l l y o u this.          We will
a l m o s t c e r t a i n l y s t a r t w i t h e v i d e n c e on the 2 0 t h .      However,
on the 1 9 t h we are s t a r t i n g so yo u s h o u l d be t h e r e b e c a u s e
in the m o r n i n g we w i l l d e a l w i t h l e g a l s u b m i s s i o n s .         In the
a f t e r n o o n I w i l l d e a l w i t h a n y t h i n g I w a n t to s a y to t he
j u r y a n d a n y t h i n g t h a t is a g r e e d w h i c h w e c a n p u t to t h e
j u r y a n d t h e n w e w i l l p r o b a b l y s t a r t w i t h r e a l e v i d e n c e on
the 20th.             T h a t m a y b e v i d e o s , y o u se e .    W e m a y u s e the
90    14:5]       ^1609                                  MEDICO LGL C'NTER                                              (g,




       a f t e r n o o n for the v i d e o s b u t I h a v e sot                    m       i^ir =                  _
       d o s o m e s u n s a n d d e c i d e h o w b e s t to u s e                 the      tiae!

                MRS. MCBRIAN:      S o it w i l l be                            i q   *i,        ..
      when      the evidence w i l l b e heard?                                                       y0u decide


      been      ™ f d “ R 0 KER:           Definitely            the 19 th,           exactly as              you have



      the question?*            I^hink t h ^ d r i s ^ k i n l ^ i ^ u n d e r s t o o d
      t h a t i t w o u l d o n l y b e o n t h e 1 9 t h th«f »             ?             case
      m a d e a s to t h e a m t i t o ? t h e c J t - o f f               ^ 1 0 ^ K i 1 1 be
              t h a t is “ h e n t h e d e c i s i o n s w i n b e i a d e ?       “     W°r d s’


                                          ^Thank y            ^ /T       I &    “     *     1d id


     said     a S f s o i S IC S i l l C p ; o b a b l v ib e S t
                                                                1^ - Ii ^ V e £ 8 a r d w h -
                                                                                            at -
                                                                                               vou havs




     today!          ’               a D S W 'e r   1S    there       is n o d e c i s i o n        on       that



     witnesses       S        ^      ls   S t U                                                 ~         n     y




     p r o b a ^ S S ^ n f ^ ^ K ^ ^ 11**
     be q u i t e a f e t ^ . f l ^ S                                                        U      «*"«         *«


 poiat“ if rSere°tohd 2 ! ? ^ yT”,
                                 lt,d,°n this? on ?hs = « • » «
 date, then I would let" imii-anJ        to alter it before that
 don    -I „ a n ?       tc e n c o u r S g e ^ L        ^o                                              ^
 o ^ t i ^ f                                 saying           that?      ^ 1 1        & ' & £



 -«.t     “ i « s , ; 0 n g i , s t^ i s , ts i s t h a i        t                    i'“ it ha                as
 Of use      a n d t h a t we h a v e m a d e a b i t of p r o e r e s s                            it
 g o i n g to be a very d i f f i c u l t i n q u e s t  I       *       m                           5         •
 j u s t h a v e to do t h e b e s t            wecan?’          - ir ai d.                          We       will

          MR.     KING:           T h a n k you,     sir.
