                                       MAX B I T E L ,                         GREENE,                    EMANUEL
                                                                            S O L I C I T O R S
MAX & IT E L                                                        P R IV Y   C O U N C IL A G E N T S                                         TELEPHONE:
              S . E. G R E E N E                                                                                                             0 1 -3 5 4         2767
EAN     M. R E IO                                                One tanonbury Place                                                          te le x :      27756
PAUL      H. EM A N U E L
R O G Ee |r    g   . butler
                                                                   London N 1 2 N G                                                         fax:    01-226           1210
                                                                                                                                              GROUPS            2 & 3
N IC H O L A S      A. B I T E L
                                                                                                                                                 DX      5 8 2 5 5
OEAN      J. GROSSM AN
                                                                                                                                                 ISLINGTON



YOUR REF                                                    ——oW S     ef
                                                                            — -UAB/K&/471                                          22nd March 19SC
                                                                                                          V,
Ms. Sara Dent,              TREAT                                                                 (W
Private Secretary                                                                                                                                  .G&7Uu%rb
Rt. Hon. David W® d i „ g P l F | C I A U Y                                                                Co
Horae Secretary,           18MAY1990                                                                      C tL                     ^LraSNrOi
The Horae Office,                                                                               2 5 t ir - Z    -
50 Queen Anne's G te.
London SW1H 9AT.                                                                                                BY HAND             H>f'l
                                                                                                                                     t*r-
                                                                                                                                    mr,   760*1
                                                                                                                                    •»'~Coo£,

                                                                                                                                   ,7)'~                 !o-f
Dear Madam,

Re:           Anti Tout Provisions
                                                                                                                                  Pi       t^?.              (^
                                                                                                                                                                     8\<?- /6/k
                                                                                                                                                                     e^

                                                                                                                                                                     ChcuxH o
At the request of our client, Paul Burns,Chief Executive of Keith Prowse
Expotel we enclose herewith copy Memorandum together with copy documentation
relating to Anti Tout Provisions.

Yours faithfully,


                                                            -

MAX BITEL, GREENE, EMANUEL

Enc.




                                                                                                                       %                             A?




                                                                                                                       n:\/
                                                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                                            %tc                          ** i
                                                                                                                                             'rt . - « i ' V - ^ '




                        T H IS F IR M IS R E G U L A T E D B Y T H E L A W S O C IE T Y IN T H E C O N D U C T O F IN V E S T M E N T B U S I N E S S
                                    "ANTI TOUT" PROVISIONS

                                     Re:     1989 RYDER CUP




To:         PAUL G. BURNS of Keith Prowse Holdings Limited

From:       NICHOLAS A. BITEL of Max Bitel, Greene, Emanuel

Date:       22nd March 1990




For the 1989 Ryder Cup, Max Bitel, Greene, Emanuel                    (MBGE) acted on behalf

of    the   Professional       Golfers Association Limited            (PGA)   and Keith Prowse

Holdings       Limited    (KPH)     in     attempts   to    prevent       'Pirate'    hospitality

operations.        The Ryder Cup was not likely to have difficulties with touts

at the event because of physical                factors     and    therefore       MBGE's   efforts

were concentrated on the 'Pirates'.




The    first      step   was   to   draft     conditions     to   attach      to    the   forms    of

applications for tickets so as to incorporate                     these   terms     as part of a

contract for the sale of tickets to the applicants.                        The placing of such

conditions merely on the tickets themselves would not be                            sufficient     to

bind the applicants.            These    conditions were      later    amended to deal with

comments     of    Mr.   Justice    Vinelott     (see      later).     The    purposes      of    the

conditions are:-




            (1)          To make     it a term of the contract to prevent onward

                          sale or transfer.




            (2)          To make the ticket void if sold or transferred.
                                                         -2-




  The main difficulty               was that only the one person                      who applies fortickets

  actually       signs      the     application form even though the                  application            may be

  for more       than one         ticket and therefore            inevitably one            or       more    tickets

 will     not be used by the applicant.                        The later version of the conditions

 does deal with this                problem but of course it would be preferable if the

 tickets issued for instance bear the name                             of the        applicants in each case

 so     that   the     additional       tickets        can be     identified         for    the       use    of    the

 applicant s guest.               This is not so much a problem when dealing with touts

 where all that is provided is the ticket and thus clearly there is a sale

 which     can    be     shown     to be   in breach of contract                 and which           renders       the

 ticket thus void.




 The ticket application forms                   also bore        a warning      against         the making of

 multiple applications of a similar nature to that which might be found on

 privatisation         issue      application      forms.         In     the   light       of    this       warning

 dishonestly making multiple                applications          or making use of false details

may be a criminal offence (e.g., Keith Best MP's prosecution over British

Gas pic.).




After    the wording was            decided upon letters were written to a number of

pirate     hospitality            Companies       warning        them     of    the     effects         of        the

contractual       provisions        and    seeking       undertakings          not    to    offer for         sale

tickets thus inducing a trespass and/or a breach of contract.                                           Possibly

their     actions      would       also    be     in    any      event    passing       off      or     wrongful

interference with the PGA's business.




Undertakings         were    received      from    all     the    pirates       written         to    but    later

three     Companies          breached      those        undertakings           and     proceedings            were

commenced against all three.
Maceworth Limited.             Their breach          of    undertaking         came

to     the    notice     of    PGA/KPH     in    the       week    before       the

event.        Since    their     brochure       misleadingly            suggested

that     'Pirate'      facilities      were     in    fact       authorised by

PGA.     Search and Seizure Injunction                    (an Anton Pillar)

was sought and obtained.               Soon after service Maceworth

on legal       advice submitted to            Judgment       paying       all    of

the costs.       The Injunction granted against the selling

of tickets was by then no longer relevant as the event

had passed.




Capital       Events      Their        breach        of    undertaking          was

discovered        some        months      before          the      event        and

proceedings      were     then    issued.       After       receiving legal

advice       they submitted to Judgment               paying       all    of    the

costs.




Marcus       Evans/Ryder       Cup     Hospitality          Limited        Their

breach was discovered very soon after it was given and

proceedings       commenced       in    December          1988    when    an    Ex

Parte Injunction was granted against their use of the

Ryder Cup name.




The action was fought vigorously and a full hearing in

the    Interlocutory Injunction held                 before       Mr.    Justice

Vinelott.       The    main      thrust    of    the       hearing       was    in

relation to the Defendants              use of the Ryder Cup name

and the application was successful.
                                                          -4-



•
                M r . Justice     Vinelott           agreed       the      contractual           conditions          could

                work but doubted the effectiveness of                              these    conditions.              As     a

                result    these    were       then amended and a second action commenced.

                The    Defendants       Defence       on    the       "Ticket      Condition"        was           firstly

                that    there     was       not   proof         of    breach       and     secondly           that     the

               conditions       were     in    restraint         of     trade.       As     to     the    first       the

               Defendants said they planned to get their customers to apply for

               tickets and bring their guests to the facilities offered by them

               for hospitality.             It is of course accepted that no one can stop

               for     instance   a     local     hotel         offering        special      lunches          to    those

               attending and this is all that Mr. Evans and his Companies were

               pretending       that    they      were     doing.          Of     course     this        is    not        an

               argument    which       is     even    open       to    a    tout    to argue.            The       second

               argument according to Leading and Junior Counsel for PGA/KPH was

               completely untenable.              Due to a time difficulty the passing off

               action came on first and on the day of the Trial the Defendants

               conceded    and    submitted          to    Judgment         and     agreed        to pay PGA/KPH

               costs    and an account of profits.                         Since    this     is    all    that        was

               being sought the remainder of the action was not then proceeded

               with.




    In the case of the Ryder Cup the only sources of tickets were PGA, KPH or

    Club Professionals      and it could be said therefore that all tickets sold

    were subject to the ticket conditions.                       Where tickets             are    issued       to    say

    debenture holders which are unrestricted in their onward sale the problem

    is that any tout or pirate will say that they will be selling only those

    tickets.
The     Injunction       may   therefore        be   obtained    more    easily          once    the      actual

event has commenced and there                   is evidence of sale           of tickets which are

the subject of the ticket conditions.




Another positive feature of the action taken in relation to the Ryder Cup

was that after representations from MBGE, the Daily Telegraph agreed not

to     carry advertisements            for    the sale of Ryder Cup            tickets          as   this was

possibly        assisting      in    the     breaching    of   contract       or    inducing         of     such

breaches.        In events          such as Wimbledon where classified advertising for

the     sale of tickets         is    more     widespread      the    early    co-operation            of   the

Papers should be sought.




If the Ryder Cup was likely to have touts outside of the ground offering

tickets for sale then contingency plans were laid.                            The Courts were going

to     be    asked to grant         a "John Doe"         Injunction which would have                   allowed

MBGE    to seize     any tickets           found in the possession of such touts                          found

outside the ground.             Police co-operation would perhaps be needed but this

was not a problem as they were keen to assist.




In conclusion therefore I would say that although the basic plan                                       can be

operated at any event where                   tickets    are central      to it (i.e., excluding

events like Henley Royal Regatta) there must be                         some adjustments               to the

needs of each individual event and co-operation should                                   in any event be

sought       from the relevant Police Authority.                     The possibility of              a "John

Doe"        Injunction    coupled       with     the     co-operation     of       the    Newspapers         in

preventing advertisements would at least bring to an end the most visible

source of the "Touts" business.
                                         -6-




The operation of the event also showed the value of the close monitoring

of   the   ticket   applications   and   I   have   no     doubt   that   K P H ’s   detailed

scrutiny    of   the   applications   prevented     many    tickets   falling        into   the

hands of "Touts".




NICHOLAS A. BITEL
                                           IK THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                   CH 1988 P 8990

                                           CHANCERY DIVISION

                                           MR JUSTICE HARMAN

                                          MONDAY the 12th day of JUNE 1989
         rtf JUD/q                         BETWEEN
                                                                      (1) THE PROFESSIONAL GOLFERS
                                                                          ASSOCIATION LIMITED
                                                                      (2) Keith Prowse Holdings Limited
                                                                                                    Plaintiffs

                                                                                    and

                                                                       (1) MARCUS PAUL BRUCE EVANS
                                                                       (2) Ryder Cup Hospitality Limited
                                                                       (3) Open Golf Hospitality Limited

                                                                                                    Defendants

                                                      UPON THE TRIAL of this Action

                                                      AND   UPON   HEARING Counsel for the Plaintiffs and

                                           Counsel the Defendants

                                                      AND UPON READING the documents recorded on ths Court

                                           File as having been read

                                                      AND UPON the Defendants and each of thea by their

                                          Counsel undertaking (as regards the First Defendant whether

                                   /V by himself his servants or agents or any of thetfl or otherwise
                                  pm
                                      ftossoever and as regards the Second and Third Defendants
                                         whether by tb&r respective directors officers servants or
                                 ifU*
                                          agents or any of them or otherwise howsoever) not to do or

                                          attempt to do or cause enable or assist others to do the

                                          following acts or any of them that is to say

                                          (a)         passing off any business or goods or services not the

                                          business or goods or services of the Plaintiffs as and

                                          for the business or goods or services of the Plaintiffs

                                          (or either of then) by the use in connection therewith of

                                          the names "Ryder Cup Hospitality" or ''Ryder Cup Hospitality



S46«7 .28910i Dd 8046636 25m 7:88 G.W.B Ltd. Go.870
 Village' 'cc^Ryder Cup Hospitality Sales Office''or by

 representing that the Defendants or any of then or any other

 persons are solely orathenri.se authorised or dedicated or

 entitled to provide or organise tickets or hospitality or

any other facilities for the 1989 Johnnie Walker Ryder Cup

at the Belfry Golf Course ("the 199 Event") or by making

any similar representations

 (b)      passing off any business or goods   up   services not the

business or goods or services of the Plaintiffs as and for

the business or goods or services of the Plaintiffs (or

either of then) by changing their names to any names incluttng

the words "Ryder Cup” or any colourable imitation thereof

or trading under any such name

         IT IS ORDERED

(1)      that the following Account (I) be taken as to the     $

profits made by the Defendants and any of them attributable

to passing off by the acts referred to in paragraph

         (a) of their undertakings above and that the Defendants

              and each of them do pay to the Plaintiffs the sums

              found on such Account to be due together with

              such Interest if any as the Master thinks fit
(2)      that the Defendants do pay the Plaintiffs costs of

this Action down to the foot of this Order including the

costs preserved on 9th June 1989 such costs to be taxed if
not agreed

(3)      that the costs reserved on 30th January 1989 be reserved
to the trial of the consolidated Action

(*0      that the trial of the Plaintiffs outstanding claims

the su ^ject of prayers (1XC) and (2) of the statement of

claim herein be stood over to be heard in the consolidated
Action
I




                                                (5)      that the costs of the said Account are to be reserved

                                               to the Master,
                                                            v -




    S4647 (28910' Da.80*6636 25m 7 88 G W.8-Ltd Gp 870
IN IRE HIGH COURT OP JUSTICE

CHANCERY DIVISION

MR JUSTICE HARMAN

12th JUNE 1989




THE PROFESSIONAL GOLFERS
ASSOCIATION LTD

          -v-

     EVANS




MAX BITEL GREENE
1 Canonbury Place
London N1 2N
                                                      Chi988 P. No. 8890
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

 CHANCERY DIVISION

                                                Royal Courts of Justice

                                        Wednesday, 25th January, 1989


                                  Before:

                          Mr. Justice Vinelott



B E T W E E N :
                  (1) THE PROFESSIONAL GOLFERS ASSOCIATION LTD.
                  (2) KEITH PROWSE HOLDINGS LTD.         Plaintiffs

                                  - and -

                  (1 ) MARCUS PAUL BRUCE EVANS
                  (2) RYDER CUP HOSPITALITY LTD.
                  (3) OPEN GOLF HOSPITALITY LTD.             Defendants




(Transcribed from the of f icial court ■taipei; recording! by: Harry -
Counsell & Co., 61/ Carey Street/ London/ WC2A 2JG.)




MR. C. ROSS MONROE, O.C. and MR. M. ROSEN         (instructed by

   Messrs. Max Bitel, Greene Emanuel)         appeared on behalf of the

   Plaintiffs.


MR. T.L.G. CULLEN-, O.C. and MISS CATHERINE NEWMAN (instructed by

   Messrs. Guy Clapham & Co.)      appeared on behalf of the

   Defendants.




                            J U D G M E N T

                            (As   Approved)



                                   1.



                                  ©
MR. J U S TICE VINELOTT:    This is an application for an interim

   injunction pending trial of an action between the

   Professional Golfers Association Ltd. ("PGA Ltd.") and Keith

   Prowse Holdings Ltd*. ("Keith Prowse") and Marcus Paul Bruce

   Evans and two companies owned and controlled by him, Ryder

   Cup Hospitality Ltd. ("RCH) and Open Golf Hospitality Ltd.

   ("OGH").   RCH was incorporated on 8th June, 1988 and OGH was

   incorporated on 30th March, 1988.      Both companies have an

   authorised share capital of £100 divided into 100 shares at

  £1 each, and in the case of both companies only two shares

  have been issued, both of which are beneficially owned by Mr.

  Evans.    He is the only director of RCH and OGH.

        The background to this application is as follows.       In

  1927 a Mr. Samuel Ryder presented a gold cup to the

  Professional Golfers Association ("the PGA") to be played for

  at a biennial tournament between teams of profisssibrial

  golfers drawn from the United States of America and

  (originally) England.       The tournament takes place alternately

  in the United States of America and England, and so is played

  in England once every four years.       The last tournament to be

  played in England was held at the Belfry Golf Course at

  Sutton Coldfield in September 1985.       The next will be played

  there between 22nd and 24th September, 1989.       However, the

  1985 tournament was organised and the 1989 tournament will be

 organised not by the PGA but by PGA Ltd. which took over the
                                                                     «
 property (including the goodwill associated with the Ryder

 Cup) and assumed the liabilities of the PGA with effect from

 1st January, 1985.        So PGA Ltd. now own the Ryder Cup and the

 goodwill in and the income from the tournament and activities

 associated with it.
       Before 1985 such food and refreshment/ seating, tents

 and marquees and similar facilities as were provided on the

 golf course for spectators attending tournaments in England

 were provided by the PGA.       In the early days the scale of the

 facilities offered (and I will refer to them compendiously as

 "hospitality") was modest.          In the early years a cup of hot

 soup on a cold wet day and perhaps some shelter at midday was

 all that the keen golfer required.         In recent years tickets

 for admission have become scarce and highly prized and large

companies and professional partnerships have made a practice

of inviting favoured customers and clients to join a party to

see the tournament.       The provision of hospitality has thus

become a profitable ancillary activity.

      In 1985 PGA Ltd. appointed Keith Prowse to be the sole

agent for the provision of hospitality on the course.              Keith

Pirbwse weire "also appointed PGA Ltd.1s sbliss a g V n t ^ f o r 'the

sale of tickets.      The application forms for tickets and the

hospitality brochures made it clear that Keith Prowse were

the agents of PGA Ltd. for the sale of tickets and the

provision of "entertainment facilities".           The entertainment

brochure offered three different ways in which parties could

be entertained - a chalet accommodating up to 40 near and

overlooking the first fairway, a suite in the clubhouse and

seats in a Supersport chalet also overlooking the first

fairway.    The chalets and Supersport chalet are there

described as a "tented village".         The next match has

attracted considerable interest.         The English (or now

European) team won the 1985 tournament for the first time in

28 years.   The last tournament in Florida in 1987 was a close

                                 3
 fought one.    PGA Ltd. and Keith Prowse expect that the next

 tournament will be oversubscribed.    But PGA Ltd. and Keith

 Prowse fear that the shortage of tickets will be exploited by

 ticket touts who will buy tickets from successful applicants

 and resell them at a profit.    X will turn later to the steps

 which they propose to take to prevent this from happening.

      In the late summer of last year Keith Prowse issued

 their hospitality brochure for the forthcoming event.     As in

 the case of the 1985 brochure it is made clear that Keith

 Prowse have been officially appointed - they are. said to have

 been appointed by PGA, though in fact of course the

 appointment has been made, or will be made, by PGA Ltd.      The

 range of facilities offered is much the same as in 1985,

 though an off-course marquee dining room is also to be

provided.    Early in 1985 there came into the hands of PGA

Ltd. and Keith Prowse brochures issued by RCH and OGH.      The

brochure issued by RCH advertised facilities available at

what is described as "the Ryder Cup Hospitality Village".

RCH is described as "the only organisation at these historic

matches dedicated to providing entertainment facilities" at

the tournament;   it is said that "You can be sure that

booking with us you are not dealing with agencies but direct

with the Hospitality Village organisers".   The location is

described in these terms:   "Due to our prime position at the

Belfry our village is located at a prime course site

location."   The facilities available are said to include in

the case of a chalet "entrance badges", and in the case of a

shared facility "entry tickets". Customers are invited to

enquire from the "Ryder Cup Hospitality sales office" at an
address in Sheen Lane.   OGH's
 brochure or letter is less full.    But the facilities saidto

 be available are also said to include, both in the case of a

 private chalet for 30 persons    and in the case of shared

 facilities,   entrance badges.   It is claimed that

 "Hospitality space will be limited.    It is essential to book

 now if you want to participate in the Ryder Cup".     It is

 hardly necessary to observe that RCH and OGH had no right to

 use nor any prospect of obtaining any right to use the Belfry

 Clubhouse, or the course for the purpose of providing chalets

 or other facilities nor any certain way of obtaining tickets.

      The claim that RCH's hospitality village would occupy a

 "prime course site location" was simply unfounded.    Mr. Evans

in his evidence claims that the assertion that RCH was the

only organisation "dedicated" to providing entertainment

facilities at the tournament meant only that RCH was the only

company which to his knowledge pursued no other trading

activity.   I do not think that is how it would be understood

by the ordinary reader.   The ordinary reader would take it as

meaning that RCH was the only company which.made it its

business to provide those facilities.    Understood in that

sense this claim is also plainly untrue.

     The Plaintiffs not surprisingly were alarmed by these

advertisements.   They wrote to Mr. Evans and to RCH and OGH

seeking undertakings (a) that they would not pass themselves

off as authorised to issue or to provide tickets or
                                                                I
hospitality or other facilities at the 1989 tournament;       (b)

that they would not seek to breach or induce others to breach

the conditions attaching to tickets by transferring or using.

them in connection with facilities not provided by Keith

                            5.



                            ©
 Prowse;   and (c) that they would cease using the name "Ryder

 Cup Hospitality Sales Office" or "Ryder Cup Hospitality

 Village", or any name using the words "Ryder Cup".

      In their reply solicitors to RCH and OGH said that the

 publications complained of had been withdrawn after only 20

 copies had been circulated and had been replaced by another.

 The new brochure also invites inquiries from the Ryder Cup

 Hospitality Sales Office and offers similar facilities

 (including entrance badges or entry tickets), but it includes

a paragraph which I think I should read in full:

      "Ryder Cup Hospitality Ltd. is an independent company

and is not associated with the Professional Golfers

Association.    Of the facilities at the Ryder Cup next year we

believe our entertainment facilities to be, by far, the most

.exclusive;    after.all, why entertain,on the Golf Course with

the general public imposing on your privacy and be catered

for with the masses of enormous numbers of companies within

the course caterers tent,    when it could be in our private

location? The PGA, organisers of the event, have already

decided to locate some of their facilities in the country

side adjacent to the Belfry and ourselves.    Booking with us

puts you within a private location with an exclusive

atmosphere created by the 1,000 private guests being

entertained by our Blue Chip Clients.    As a division of one

of the countries leading entertainment companies, the
                                                                t


Hospitality Group, a professional event is guaranteed.     By

placing your order with us you will be guaranteed the

personal service which you require to entertain your top

clients.   Our facilities are in a prime location, situated

within 100 yards of the Belfry complex."
      In their reply the solicitors for RCH and OGH also

pointed out quite rightly that they had not seen a copy of

any conditions attaching to tickets.      They offered an

undertaking in the terms set out in paragraph (a) of the

letter from the Plaintiffs' solicitors.       On the 16th November

the Plaintiffs' solicitors wrote enclosing a copy of a

condition which it was intended to attach to tickets when

issued (they have not yet been issued and will not be issued

for some months).     The condition reads:
      "WARNING.    This ticket is issued on the strict condition

that it will not be resold or transferred: It shall be void

and all rights conferred or evidenced by it shall be

nullified if it is purchased or obtained from any commercial

agent or otherwise than directly from Keith Prowse

;Hospitali.ty.   Any. person seeking tovugeya ticket- iii-^rder•
                                                               .to

gain or give entry to or remain at this Event will be ejected

and will be liable to legal remedies for trespass and other

torts."
     The Plaintiffs were not content with the undertaking

offered, and on 17th November the Plaintiffs' solicitors

wrote to say that proceedings should be commenced unless all

the three undertakings sought were given.       Undertakings in

these terms were then offered on behalf of all the Defendants

on the 18th November but for a limited period of seven days

while they sought advice from Counsel.       However, on 21st     ^

November the chief executive of Keith Prowse heard from a

prospective customer that he had received a brochure from RCH

offering a "hospitality package" and that later he had been

telephoned by someone claiming to represent RCH who described

himself as from "the Ryder Cup Hospitality Sales Office".
      In these circumstances the Plaintiffs issued a writ on

23rd November and applied ex parte for an injunction.

     In their written notice of motion the Plaintiffs claim

(amongst other things) an injunction restraining the

Defendants from passing off any business "by the use in

connection therewith of the names Ryder Cup Hospitality or

Ryder Cup Hospitality Village or Ryder Cup Hospitality Sales

Office or any other name which includes the words Ryder Cup

or any colourable imitation thereof, or by representing that

the Defendants or any of them or any other persons are solely

or otherwise authorised or dedicated or entitled to provide

or organise tickets or hospitality or any other facilities

for the 1989 Johnnie Walker Ryder Cup at the Belfry Golf

Course or by making any similar representations, or by any

other means whatsoever."

     The application for an ex parte injunction came before

Mr. John Mowbray, Q.C., sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge.

He granted injunctions until 29th November in slightly

different terms.   The injunctions included an injunction

restraining the Defendants from:
     "(i) passing off any person other than the Plaintiffs as

authorised to.issue and provide tickets or entertainment,

hospitality or other facilities on the Belfry Golf Course for

the 1989 Ryder Cup tournament ....[or] (iii) using the name

Ryder Cup Hospitality Ltd. or Ryder Cup Hospitality Sales
                                                              i
Office or Ryder Cup Hospitality Village or any other name

including the words   Ryder Cup or any colourable imitation

thereof without making it clear that the Defendants have no .

connection with the Plaintiffs or either of them."

                            8
      On 29th November the motion came before Morritt J.        It

 was stood over to be heard as a motion by order on the

 Defendants .giving undertakings.    The first undertaking also

 differs from the terms of the first injunction sought in the

 notice of motion in that it is in what is commonly referred

 to as "the Havana Cigar" form, restraining the Defendants

 from passing off their business as the Plaintiffs' business

by the use in connection therewith the name Ryder Cup

Hospitality or Ryder Cup Hospitality Village and Ryder Cup

Hospitality Sales Office or any other name which includes the

words Ryder Cup or any colourable imitation without making it

clear that the Defendants have no connection with the First

Plaintiffs or by any other means whatsoever.       That is

supplemented by an undertaking not to pass off their business

.as the business, of the Defendants;, by, representing, that; the

Defendants or any other persons are solely or otherwise

authorised or entitled to provide or organise tickets for the

1989 Johnnie Walker Ryder Cup 1989 event or offer hospitality

or any other facilities on the Belfry Golf Course or by

making any similar representation or by any other means

whatsoever.

     The main :issue that now falls to be decided is whether

the undertakings offered which the Defendants are willing to

continue until trial, afford adequate protection to the

Plaintiffs' legitimate interests.     It is thought that it will

be possible to arrange for a speedy trial of the actiCn

before the end of July.    Tickets will not be issued until

August or September.    It is said that in these circumstances

if the Plaintiffs are entitled to any relief undertakings in

the terms offered will afford them adequate protection until
the trial.                    9.
         The case for the Defendants is shortly this.   It is said

 that there is no property in the name "the Ryder Cup".      There

 is, for instance, nothing to prevent British Rail from

 putting on a special train and calling it "the Ryder Cup

 Special", or to prevent a local hotelier from offering "Ryder

 Cup Weekends".    An action to restrain a Defendant from

 passing off his goods or services as those of the Plaintiffs

 is:

         "... an action based on misrepresentation, conscious or

unconscious, calculated to lead to confusion between the

goods or business of the plaintiffs and those of the

defendants.     Secondly, the rationale of the action is that

the law will not permit the plaintiffs' legitimate business

interests to be prejudiced by the exploitation by another

person of the plaintiffs' goodwill."     (See Lynqstad -v-

Anabas Products Ltd., 3 FSLR 62 per Oliver J. at page 66).

PGA Ltd. it is said does not itself manage hospitality for

those attending Ryder Cup tournaments on or off the course

and cannot complain of the activities of the Defendants as

likely to cause confusion with its activities or to filch its

customers.     Keith Prowse is active in that field but it is

not the owner of any goodwill in the name "the Ryder Cup".

The Defendants are entitled to compete with it on equal

terms.     The licence granted by PGA Ltd. to Keith Prowse is

irrelevant, the licence has not been produced and there is no

evidence that under its terms PGA Ltd. is entitled to

exercise "quality control" or that it would be seen by the

public as exercising such a degree of control that its

reputation might be harmed if less than adequate services
 were provided by the Defendant using the name "Ryder Cup" to

 describe those services.

      The principles relied, on by the Defendants are plain,

 but the way in which the Defendants seek to apply them seems

 to me to be remote from reality.    Until 1985 PGA provided

 such hospitality as was provided on the course.     In 1985 it

 or its successor PGA Ltd. licensed Keith Prowse to provide

 those services and it has either similarly licensed Keith

 Prowse to provide those services again this year or proposes

 to do so.    Prima facie the business or activity of providing

some form of hospitality is part of the business of arranging

and supervising the conduct of the tournament.     It must be at

least strongly arguable that the business of providing

hospitality cannot be treated as something so distinct that

the goodwill of PGA Ltd. (inherited, from PGA)._will not.be

entrenched on by the use of the name Ryder Cup in conjunction

with it.     Equally it is at least arguable that the grant of

an annual licence does not disentitle PGA Ltd. from claiming

that its goodwill is infringed.     Those availing themselves of

the facilities offered by Keith Prowse may well, it seems to

me, associate PGA Ltd. which controls the tournament and

which will have an exclusive right to use the course while

the tournament is being played with the quality of the

services provided.     PGA Ltd. have put in evidence a

substantial volume of letters from companies and professional

partnerships seeking to book accommodation for the 1989

tournament.    It is significant that the overwhelming majority

of those making inquiries address them to PGA or PGA Ltd. and

not to Keith Prowse.

                              11
      But, it is said, the inclusion of the "Havana Cigar"

 proviso - reflected in the disclaimer in RCH's second

 brochure - will adequately protect PGA Ltd. and Keith Prowse.

 It is said that anyone reading the brochure if they pay the

 attention to it that is to be expected from a major company

 or partnership inquiring after expensive services (the cost

 of a private chalet for 60 is £9,900 a day) will be left in

 no doubt that there is no association between RCH and either

 PGA Ltd. or Keith Prowse.

      This submission faces two difficulties.   First, the

 impression made on the mind by the description of RCH's

activities as "Ryder Cup Hospitality" or "Ryder Cup

Hospitality Sales" may well not be dispelled by a paragraph

asserting that RCH is an independent company    distinct from

PGA Ltd.;   the impression that there is some form of

association may be reinforced by the description of the

services offered by RCH as located at an "entertainment
village".

     Secondly, amongst the facilities offered are entrance

badges or tickets, and the reader may well infer that RCH has

some arrangement with PGA Ltd. under which it is able to

obtain entry to the course from its hospitality village.     I

shall return to this point in another context later.    It is

not, of course, necessary for me at the hearing of this

motion to form any final view whether a member of the public
                                                             %


would be likely to confuse the activities of RCH if promoted

under the name "Ryder Cup Hospitality" or some such name

which similarly associates the hospitality services offered •

with the Plaintiffs, despite the inclusion of words asserting
    that RCH is an independent company with no connection with

    PGA Ltd.   But I am satisfied that it is indeed arguable that

    if the services of RCH are either (a) offered under- or in a

    way which makes use of the description "Ryder Cup

    Hospitality" or that directs inquiries to the Ryder Cup

    Hospitality Sales Office, or (b) includes in the hospitality

    offered an entrance badge or ticket there will be a serious

    risk that the services offered will be associated by those to

   whom they are addressed with PGA Ltd. and Keith Prowse.            If

   there is any risk of confusion the balance of convenience

   clearly dictates the grant of interlocutory relief.          The

   damage suffered by the Plaintiffs from such confusion'if the

   services offered by RCH disappoint their customers or, more

   importantly, if customers of RCH (some of whom have paid

/V;.;-large-, depos its) are. disappointed .in their expectation of’ .

   obtaining tickets, is likely to prove substantial but

   unquantifiable.     And if quantified there must be a doubt

   whether any of the Defendants will be in a position to meet

   it.

         No evidence has been filed as to the assets of RCH or

   OGH or Mr. Evans.    Both PGA Ltd. and Keith Prowse are of

   course in a position to meet any damages awarded under their

   cross-undertaking.

         In my judgment therefore, both PGA Ltd. and Keith Prowse

   (as a body authorised to exploit the goodwill of PGA Ltd. in

   the provision of hospitality for the Ryder Cup) are entitled

  to an injunction restraining the Defendants until trial in

  the following terms:



                                  13
      "Passing off any business or goods or. services not the

 business or goods or services of the Plaintiffs as and for

 the business or goods or. services of the Plaintiffs or either

 of them by the use in connection therewith of the names of

 Ryder Cup Hospitality Ltd. or Ryder Cup Hospitality Village

or Ryder Cup Hospitality Sales Office or that the Defendants

or any of them or any other person are solely or otherwise

authorised and dedicated or entitled to provide or organise

tickets for hospitality or any other facilities for the 1989

Johnnie Walker Ryder Cup at the Belfry Golf Course in 1989 by

making any similar representations."

     The injunction sought by the Plaintiffs is wider than

the injunction that I have just set out, because it includes

after the words "Ryder Cup Hospitality Sales Office" the

words-"or any other name which includes the;words Ryder Cup
                •*

or any colourable imitation thereof".     Similar words are of

course often included and are appropriate in an injunction to

prevent passing off.    However, in the context of this case

their inclusion may result in placing an unjustified

restriction on the activities of the Defendants.     It is not,

I think, in dispute that there is nothing to prevent British

Rail from running a Ryder Cup Special.     Equally it seems to

me that a local hotel owner might properly advertise a "Ryder

Cup Weekend".    There may similarly be ways in which the

Defendants could properly use the words "Ryder Cup" in
                                                               l
connection with some service they propose to provide without

infringing the Plaintiffs' goodwill.     I am anxious not unduly

to restrict the ambit of the injunction.    The Defendants have’

on the face of the evidence before me entered onto a course
 calculated to cause confusion.       I will therefore hear Counsel

 for the Plaintiffs further in case on reflection the

 Plaintiffs feel able to offer some alternative formulation.

 I will also give the Plaintiffs liberty to apply at any time

 before the trial with a view to modifying the injunction to

 meet any possibly unforeseen mode of carrying on the

 Defendants' business which endangers their goodwill and which

 may not be within the scope of the injunction granted.

       Apart from this injunction the Plaintiffs seek an

 injunction restraining the Defendants from slandering their

 title as organisers of and as exclusive ticket and

hospitality agents for the Ryder Cup respectively.       That

claim was not pursued before me, though of course the

Plaintiffs may wish to pursue it at the hearing of the
action. -                       ■

       The Plaintiffs also seek an injunction restraining the

Defendants from inducing breaches of the contracts between

the Plaintiffs and those to whom tickets are issued by the

transfer and resale of any tickets or the purchase of tickets

for use in contravention of the conditions subject to which

they are issued.   Since the letter of the 16th November,

1988, enclosing a copy of a condition that it was their

intention to attach to the tickets sent to the Defendants, a

brochure inviting applications for tickets has been sent

out.  It is made clear that applications will be limited to a
                                                           I
maximum of four tickets per person and that multiple

applications will be invalid.       The brochure then contains two

warnings.   The first is that tickets will be issued on the

strict condition that they will not be resold or transferred

and that, "A ticket shall be void and all rights conferred
 or evidenced by it shall be nullified if it is purchased or

 obtained from any commercial agent or otherwise than directly

 from the Professional Golfers Association or from Keith

 Prowse.   Any person seeking to use such a ticket in order to

 gain or give entry will be ejected and will be liable to

 legal remedies for trespass and other torts".           The second is

 that the tickets are said to be limited in number, and "will

 be sold only to bona fide purchasers.       It may be an offence

 to make   multiple applications".      The reference to an offence

 is of course a reference to the Theft Act.

      The claim for an injunction to restrain the Defendants

 from inducing breaches of contract by persons to whom-the

tickets are issued subject to these conditions faces

considerable difficulty.    No tickets have yet been issued and

the claim therefore is to restrain/ this Defendantsfrom

inducing a breach of a contract yet to be entered into.

Injunctions have been granted in cases where a defendant has

made it clear that he intends to procure the breach of any

contract of a particular description, for instance contracts

for the sale of oil to an hotel, entered into between the

Plaintiff and third parties.        See Torquay Hotels    I>td. -v-

Cousins [1969] 2 Ch. 106.   However, that is an exceptional

course and it can only be justified where there is a clear

intention to procure a breach of any future contract if

entered into.   On the facts of this case it is possible,

although it is very unlikely, that the Defendants will be

able to find some way of providing tickets for their clients

without a breach of the conditions.       Under the conditions an

                               16
                                                                         r
 applicant may apply for up to four tickets and although

 tickets are stated to be issued on condition that they are

 not to be transferred it is not easy to see how this

 condition is to be applied where more than one ticket is

 issued to any given applicant.     He cannot of course himself

 use more than one.    And it is not clear that an application

 made by RCH as agent for a client would be one "obtained from

 any commercial agent".    It may be that PGA and Keith Prowse

 will be able to cure these deficiencies in the conditions by

 requiring that applications (otherwise than for group

 hospitality packages) must be made on a form signed by each

 applicant and not by an agent authorised to make the

. application on their behalf, and naming any persons for whom

 tickets are sought and not on whose behalf the application is

 made'.   The conditions can then restrict the use of the

 tickets to the applicant and those for whose use or benefit

 they were obtained.   No difficulty arises as regards the

 hospitality packages offered by Keith Prowse;    Keith Prowse

 and Keith Prowse alone can licence a company or partnership

 to use a chalet or other facilities by a given number of

people    leaving it to the customers in whose probity Keith

Prowse will be satisfied to see that the use of these

 facilities is not abused.    However, although the conditions

are capable of being modified and, it may well be, will be

modified before tickets are issued in a way which will         ,

prevent the Defendants from obtaining tickets on behalf of or

for the use of customers without breaching these conditions

that has not yet been done.    And prima facie the court cannot

grant an injunction to restrain the Defendants from breaking

or inducing others to break conditions which have not

                              17.
  yet been formulated on the ground that when tickets are

 issued they will be issued on terms that will give effect to

 a policy of frustrating the activities of those who deal in

 tickets for profit, however desirable that policy may be.

      That is not all.     The Plaintiffs also seek a mandatory

 injunction requiring the Defendants to serve an affidavit

 disclosing the names of the persons to whom their first

brochures (or similar documents) have been supplied.            Mr.

Cullen submitted that it would be wholly wrong at an

 interlocutory stage to grant a mandatory injunction in a form

which (as he expressed it) would require a company to

disclose confidential information as to its customers•to a

competitor.   That with respect to Mr, Cullen seems to me to

contain a large element of forensic exaggeration.         The

Pljaintiffs- do hot seek to obtain infprmation^ bf 'the

Defendants’ customers with a view to exploiting that

information and attempting to sell their facilities to them.

The first brochure contains statements which were both untrue

and misleading.   The second in my judgment was hardly less

misleading.   There is evidence that some to whom the first

brochure was addressed were misled.     A Mr. Lear, the training

relations manager employed by Britvic Corona, says that he

was approached by RCH offering a corporate hospitality

package including tickets in August 1988.     Later he

receivedthe first brochure.  He believed that he was dealing
                                                           I
with the organisers of the tournament and would not otherwise

have dealt with RCH.     His company entered into a contract for

the provision of corporate hospitality packages and paid
  a 50 per cent, deposit amounting to nearly £13,000

          A Mr. Craig, the managing director of Bass Worthington
  and marketing director of Bass Mitchells & Butlej- Ltd         gaid
  that he also entered into a contract with RCH (he does not

  say whether a deposit was paid).      He did so because he

  believed on the basis of its name that he was dealing with

  the organisers of the tournament.      Before entering into the

  contract he enquired as to the location of the facilities and

 was told they would be on the course.       Both these witnesses,

 I should add, are persons with experience in precisely this

 sort of business.     There may well be others who have been

 similarly misled by a brochure which is admittedly misleading

 or by similar representations and who do not yet appreciate

 that RCH have no association with PGA Ltd, or Keith Prowse

 an<*       no r ight to sell; and *may well be unable to obtain -
 tickets for the tournament.      Some of them may have paid

 substantial deposits.     The existence of a number of

 disappointed clients who find that they are unable to secure

admittance to the course may well create difficulties for the

organisers of the tournament;      and moreover some may be

inclined to blame PGA Ltd. or Keith Prowse for allowing this

state of affairs to arise.      In these circumstances I think

that the Plaintiffs are entitled to information as to the

customers who have received these brochures and similar

literature so that they can clear up any misconceptions that,
may have arisen in good time.

        If any cross-undertaking as to the use made by the

Plaintiffs of any information obtained is required I will of

course hear Counsel as to the form it should take.
      Lastly the Plaintiffs seek a mandatory injunction

 requiring the Defendants (in practice Mr. Evans) to take all

necessary steps to change the name of RCH to one which does

not include the words "Ryder Cup" or any colourable imitation

of it.   Mr. Cullen submitted that a mandatory injunction in

these terms should never be granted at an interlocutory

stage.   X agree that an injunction in these terms would be

very rarely granted.    But I think I am justified in making a

mandatory order in this case.     The result of the passing off

injunction is that RCH will no longer be able to carry on the

business of operating hospitality packages for those

attending the Ryder Cup tournament under its present name;

if it wants to continue to engage in that business it will

have to change its name.    It may be that RCH can engage in

some' unrelated" business under .its present ^naae' but "there hjas

been no suggestion that there is any proposal or any real

possibility of it wishing to do so.     It follows that RCH will

suffer no injury if it is compelled to change its name;        and

if the Plaintiffs fail in the action the cost to RCH of first

changing its name and then changing its new name back to its

present name will be modest and quantifiable.      I propose

therefore to grant injunctions in those terms.
Chris

Hold for filing
latest papers
in box.
E.R.
ft   NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON 12 MARCH 1990

     TICKET TOUTS


     Present:   Home Secretary                 Dame Shelagh Roberts
                Mr Goddard                     Mr Tom Webb
                Mr Cook                        Mr Paul Burns
                Ms Dent                        Mr Peter Jackson
                                               Mr Dudley Wood


         The meeting had been arranged at the request of Dame
     Shelagh Roberts, Chairman of the London Tourist Board and
     Convention Bureau, to discuss the problems ticket touts
     were causing.

     2. The Home Secretary began by saying that Lord Justice
     Taylor had drawn a distinction in his report between the
     impact of touts at football grounds and elsewhere. Touting
     could lead to disorder both outside football grounds and
     inside, where the segregation arrangements for fans might be
     broken down. It was difficult to find public policy arguments
     to create an offence of touting, and no normal criteria could
     be identified to create a criminal offence.

     3. Dame Shelagh wished to consider touting more broadly than
     in the context of the Taylor Report. Not only were the games
     suffering (because money from touting did not return to the
     game), but 'So   was the good name of London, which was now
     described in US travel magazines as the ticket tout capital of
     the world. Mr Burns described how the US had tackled the
     problem. New York City had been first to act, but many states
     had followed suit. New York City's Consumer Affairs
     Department had introduced a system of licensing ticket brokers
     and imposing on them the terms of resale of tickets. It was
     an offence to resell tickets at a price greater than the
     licence permitted, which was about 15% of the face value of
     the ticket. He drew an analogy with taxi driversr^who, because
     of the licensing system, were not allowed to charge eg £50 to
     Hampstead.

     4. The Home Secretary wondered whether touting showed that
     tickets were offered at too low a price in the first place.
     The delegation argued strongly that the price of a ticket
     should not be dictated by the market, as ordinary people would
     not be able to afford tickets.

     5. Mr Wood highlighted the potential for disorder at places
     other than football grounds. He warned there might be trouble
     at the forthcoming International at Murrayfield if touts



                                                    /turned up
E.R.
                               2.



   turned up with tickets. Mr Burns mentioned that the promoter
   of a Rolling Stones concert at Wembley in the summer was
   anticipating that if large numbers of people were locked out
   of the stadium, the problems arising would be similar to those
   related to football matches. Mr Burns described how touting
   had become an organised business, with large sums of money
   involved. Box office employees were often bribed and
   blackmailed for tickets, and this caused them great distress.
   Mr Wood said Twickenham rugby ground could no longer post
   tickets as they disappeared in the local Post Office.

   6. Mr Goddard asked how many tickets were stolen from the
   post (which would constitute an offence) compared with the
   numbers obtained by lawful means. Mr Jackson guessed that
   most tickets were obtained by paying inflated prices. He was
   not able to say for sure, as they did not manage to retrieve
   many tickets. The Home Secretary asked what measures box
   offices had taken to curb touting. Mr Burns outlined a
   scheme which had been tried at the 1989 Ryder Cup. The PGA
   had prohibited resale of tickets, and had obtained a High
   Court injunction against a company which had advertised
   tickets. The Home Secretary asked if the delegation could
   supply details of the scheme and the court judgment, and
   undertook to study the scheme closely.




   14 March 1990                              MS S J DENT
   Private Office                          Private Secretary

   cjfc.   Ms   Snow
           Ms   Craig
           Mr   Chilcot
           Mr   Boys Smith
           Mr   Angel
           Mr   Bolton
           Mr   Goddard
           Mr   Cook
           Mr   Cogbill
           Mr   Mower
           Mr   J B Taylor
 H O M E SECRETARY’S MEETIN^
                               I s'

Time


Date MOvCfcXj J2,


         <MCr             L


S
- ^ T , c J * J t Touft

Present
   J)c*we SMC'QfV i^6te-Co

        (P<XuX ©vu-n^>
        feter 'Jcxo^bovKj
        DkoU&j     t^ovch

   'f    td x   QjX&CXCXscL)
          ^     Covk^
From:   F E Cook                       cc   Ms   Snow
        C4 Division                         Ms   Craig
        Ext 2494                            Mr   Chilcot
                                            Mr   Boys Smith
        8 March 1990                        Mr   Angel
                                            Mr   Bolton
                                            Mr   Goddard
                                            Mr   Cogbill
                                            Mr   Mower
                                            Mr   J B Taylor



Miss Murray



TICKET TOUTS: HOME SECRETARY'S MEETING WITH DAME SHELAGH
ROBERTS: MONDAY 12 MARCH

You asked in your note of 23 February for a short brief and
line to take for the Home Secretary's use at this meeting. I
attach a background brief and some possible lines to take,
drawing on material provided by F8 division. Mr Goddard and I
will attend the meeting.
Background

2.   There have been suggestions at periodic intervals over
the past few years that the activities of ticket touts should
be criminalised. There is regular concern each year at the
time of the Wimbledon Championships that touts are depriving
genuine spectators of the opportunity to buy tickets.
Mr Menzies Campbell has asked a number of Questions on this
subject, and introduced in the 1988/89 Session of Parliament a
Bill which sought to make it an offence to re-sell tickets at
10% or more above their face value. I attach at Annex A a
copy of an exchange which took place last May between Mr
Patten and Mr Campbell during oral answers.

3.   Ministers have consistently taken the view that while the
activities of ticket touts may not be admirable, they are not
criminal. There is no direct victim: the tout pays the asking
price for his tickets, so the ticket seller does not lose, and
the person who purchases a ticket from the tout does so both
knowing he is paying above its face value and willing to do so
in order to obtain a scarce commodity. The tout does not
deprive the ticket sellers of a profit - it is open to them to
raise their prices if the market will bear it - and no deceit
is practised on the purchaser. The indirect victims are those
who cannot obtain tickets for an event they wish to see
because the touts, who do not wish to see the event, have
bought them (although it is unprovable whether, had there been
no touts, sufficient additional tickets would have been
available for all those who felt that the touts had barred
there way to attending an event).

4.   Lord Justice Taylor recommended that the activity of
ticket touts at grounds on the day of a football match should
be made unlawful. He suggested a number of ways in which this
might be achieved while acknowledging that it would require
careful consideration and drafting. He did not go into the
ethics of ticket touting generally but confined himself to
arguing that football touts were a special case which needed
controlling in the interests of safety and order to the extent
that arguments in favour of allowing market freedom should be
overridden. A copy of the relevant paragraphs of the Report
is attached at Annex B.

5.   We are considering the Taylor recommendation and are
currently awaiting replies on the proposed touting offence
(and others) from ACPO and the Crown Prosecution Service. The
Chairman of Wimbledon's Committee of Management has, like Dame
Shelagh, recently written to the Home Secretary in the wake of
the Taylor recommendation to urge him to introduce new
controls over touting, but on grounds of fairness of
allocation of tickets rather than safety grounds.
Line to take

6.   I suggest the following lines:

           Tavlor argued there was a clear distinction between
           the impact of touts at football grounds and
           elsewhere. He was concerned that touting outside a
           ground on the dav of a match encouraged fans without
           tickets to arrive. This led to disorder outside the
           ground: and, by undermining the arrangements for
           segregating rival groups of fans, led to disorder
           inside the ground as well.

          We are considering the recommendation. Too soon to
          say what our conclusions will be. Taylor
          acknowledged that touting took place at other events
          (sporting and otherwise).

           While I am happy to listen to the LTB's arguments
           for a more general offence of ticket touting.
           Ministers have always taken the view that obnoxious
           though the activities of touts are, they are not a
           matter for the criminal law. There is no direct
           victim: people who buy tickets from touts do so
           knowing what the tickets' face value is and that
           they are paying a premium. It is open to them to
           choose not to buy tickets from touts.

           The problems of disorder identified by Lord Justice
           Taylor in relation to football do not affect other
           sports or activities to anything like the same
           extent. Insofar as touts cause obstruction etc the
           law is already able to deal with them. If a tout
           acts dishonestly by falsely claiming that a ticket
which he is selling above face value cannot be
bought more cheaply elsewhere, he could be
prosecuted under the Theft Act.

On the argument that the indirect victims of the
activities of touts are those who cannot obtain
tickets because of block purchases by touts, advance
or block bookings are not the exclusive preserve of
touts. and with popular events such as Wimbledon or
star operatic productions there are always going to
be people who are unable to obtain tickets.




                              F E COOK
                                                                                                        /f
987                        Oral Answers              11 M A Y 1989                   Oral Answers                   988

 inadding again to thenumber ofofficersin regionalcrime       hon. Friend is right on both counts. It shows ithe
psquads. That cannot be done simply on the basis o£           continuing seriousness of the situation and the House
 windfallprofits.The policeargue— with some force— tha        might liketo study the evidence given by my Department
 under the present system they find itdifficultto meet die    to the SelectCommittee on Home Affairsyesterdaywhich
 cost of, for example, the foreign travel needed for same     I shall be developing at the conference next weelj
 overseasinvestigations, or tofinancetherewards thatmey
 seek to pay, and the we are looking at the ideas tha/they              Police Interviews (Tape Recording)
 have put forward.
   Mr. George Howarth: Does the Home Secretary agree             9. Mr. AndrewF.Bennett:To ask theSecretaryofState
thatitisimportant not onlythatthismoney be recycledto         forthe Home Department when he intendsto laythefirst
assist the police but that it is used to help voluntary       order relating to tape recording ofpolice jnterviews; and
agencies thatprovide advice and support to dryg addicts?      ifhe willmake a statement.

    Mr. Hurd: Iagree with the hon. Gentlemafa and I am           Mr. Douglas Hogg: As Imentioned illmy reply to the
 therefore glad that spending on drug misuse services in      hon. Member’s question of 2 March, we have consulted
 England willhave risen by £5 million from if) million last   theAssociation ofChiefPoliceOfficersabout theforcesto
 year to £14 million thisyear.                                be included in the first order to be laid under section
                                                              60(1)(b ) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.
    Sir Fergus Montgomery: Ifthe American Government          We expect tohearfrom theassociationtowards theend of
 can operate a system whereby the ill-gotten gains ofdrug     thismonth. We will then bring fopvard ^n order as soon
 smugglers are put to the good use of fighting the battle     as possible.
 against drugs, why cannot we do that ijTBritain?                Forces do not require an order before they can start
                                                              tape recording. At leastfiveforcesarenow tape recording
    Mr. Hard: That question might properly be addressed
                                                              interviews throughout their areas and allforces expect to
 to my righthon. Friend theChancellor ofthe Exchequer.
                                                              be using tape recording forcewide by 19511.
 The answer isthat we try to put the resources where they
 are needed and that cannot be dons on the basis of the          Mr. Bennett:Ithank thehbn. Gentlemjain forthatreply,
 profit that happens to accrue from the legislation. For      Itseems to be taking a long time to get thispractice into
 example, we have added 229 police officers to the drugs      place. Has the Minister any evidence of roblems arising
 wings of regional crime squads on/the basis of where we      from summaries being made of tape-reccrded interviews?
 think that they are needed, and we are adding another 20     Is itnot slightly defeating the purpose ifjuries are given
 this year. It would be difficult/to do that if we were       summaries of tape recordings rather :han having an
 operating on the windfall basis.                             opportunity of hearing those parts of tape recordings
    Mr. Randall: What new or/special measures are the         which might be disputed?
 Government taking to contror the introduction into the          Mr. Hogg: Itistrjiethat when the p;irjceissstarted the
 United Kingdom of the drag crack, which is highly            summaries tended tabe a bittoo prolix, Iam glad to say
 addictive and is spreading/exceedingly rapidly in the        thatthatproblem has been tackledand tbsatitisno longer
 United States? Does the rigMthon. Gentleman agree that       happening in the majority of cases. Who:njuries need to
 the reported 14 per cent, increase lastyear in the number    listen to the tapesthey can do so. There isno doubt that
 ofregistered addicts isat leastone measure of the failure    this is a great /improvement both in terms of law
 of the Government’spolicy to combat drug abuse?              enforcement ancyofcivilliberties.
    Mr. Hard: The hon./Gentleman cannot deal with the            Mr. Lawrei b:Is my hon. Friend aware that, to my
 matter in that vein. Of«ourse, he isperfectlyrightin that    knowledge, it^ 15yearssincethismatter was firstpressed
 the warnings that we receive from the United States and,     on a Goveri fient, so that any action now being taken is
 in particular the anxieties expressed to me in Italy and     most welcomfe?’Ishe furtheraware thatduring thoseyears
 Spain inthepast few months, are among the reasons why        therehasbe«fne technologicalrevolutionitndthatitisnow
 Iput cocaine,withcrack asitsderivative,atthe top ofthe       possible to/vidjo record interviews muci more cheaply?
 agenda ofthemeeting ofMinisters that Ihave callednext        What thought is being given to introducing in police
 week inLondon.AVemust takemore actioninthegrowing            stations ydeo-iecorded interviews, whicl would be more
 countries in Latin America, and the hon. Gentleman will      effective/han tie audio type?
 know oftheUnited Kingdom’sinitiativeon that.We have
 to insist on me continuance of frontier checks at our            Mr. /Hogg: My hon. and learned FFiiiend is right to
 seaports and airports after 1992 and, as the hon.            emphasise theimportance ofthisprocedujri
                                                                                                     re.We hope that
 Gentleman /said, we have to be active within our own         by thj6 end of 1991 all forces will be tape recording
 towns and/cities. We need defence in depth in allthree of    forcewide. We have no plans to intrrdduce
                                                                                                   i       the video
 those areas.                                                 reco?iingofinterviewsatthisstage,thoui
                                                                                                   ]j;htheHouse will
                                                              knoA' that a certain amount ofwork isbang done on the
    Mr. John Greenway: Ismy righthon. Friendaware that        possibility of video recording the evidence of young
 three times as much cocaine was seized in the firstthree        rsons in sex offence cases.
 monms of this year as in the whole of 1988? That
 demonstrates the seriousness of the drug abuse problem, -
 butyfloesitnot alsoshow thattheenforcementagenciesare
 bejng successful in tackling this serious crime?
     Mr. Hurd: Yes, indeed. There have been some notable
  operations, and some operations are going on now. My
                                                              r                   Ticket Touting
                                                                 10. Mr. M*a*tes Campbell: To ask he Secretary of
                                                              StatefortheHome Department ifhe has my proposals to
                                                              introduce legislation on ticket touting.
      500 C056/6 Job 2-2
                           Oral Answers               11 M A Y 1989                   Oral Answers                   990     /

   M r. John Patten: We have no proposals for such              become involved when they heard a shindig or a fracas/
legislation.                                                    Today, they are encouraged and trained to become
                                                                involved. Iftheycannotdealwiththesituationthemselves,
   Mr. Campbell: IstheMinister aware thatthepowers of           they bring inother agencies. As that isalreadyhappening
the police, which are limited to arresting touts for            in London and elsewhere, there is no need to laugeh a
obstruction, are wholly inadequate to cope with the             campaign.
problem oftouting,which isa scaron thefaceofwestend
theatre and ofmajor sporting events such as Wimbledon                            PRIME MINISTER
and the Cup Final? Will he ask Lord Justice Taylor to
consider whether ticket touting has any implications for
crowd safety at football matches by encouraging persons                              Engagements
without tickets to go to matches in the hope ofobtaining           Ql. Mr. Archer: To ask the Prime Minister ifshe will
tickets from touts?                                             listher officialengagements for Thursday 11/May.
    Mr. Patten:Iam surethatLord JusticeTaylorwilltake              The Prime Minister (Mrs. Margaret Tpatcher): This
into account the point made by the hon. and learned             morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had
Gentleman,who isa distinguishedlawyer and has strongly          meetings with ministerial colleagues and others. In
held views on this issue. I think that most hon. Members        addition to my duties in the House, y shall be having
would regard ticket touting as pretty obnoxious—                further meetings latertoday. This evening Ishallattend a
[ Interruption.] Icarefullysaid “most hon. Members”with         banquet given by President Babangida
my hon. Friend theMember for Billericay(Mrs. Gorman)
in view. Nobody iscompelled to take part in the process.           Mr. Archer: As the right hon./Lady has drawn a
                                                                distinction between using public motaey for propaganda,
   Mrs. Gorman: Will my hon. Friend agree that ticket           which isdone by thosewho disagreewith her,and using it
toutingisa form ofbrokerage between a willingsellerand          to inform the public, which iswhat her Government do,
a willing buyer— [ Interruption.]— that it is no more           willshe seizethe opportunity to indicatewhether, forthat
reprehensible when it takes place on a pavement than            purpose, informing the public includes misinforming
when it takes place in one of our City exchanges, that          them? Will she consider into Which category she would
brokers are risk-takers and that everyone is jealous of         place the approach to sixth-foym teachers to distribute to
them when they make a profit but nobody has sympathy            their classes recruiting propaganda from Conservative
for them when they make a loss?                                 Central Office?             j
   Mr. Patten:Ido notwant togetintoideologicaltrouble              The Prime M in iste r: I Relieve that we have adhered
with my hon. Friend, but I agree with her that nobody is        absolutely to the Widdi^ombe rules [H o n . M em b ers:
compelled to takepart intheprocess, thattheperson who           “We?”]Government Departments have adhered absolute­
raises the price of a ticket to selliton the streetdoes not     ly to the Widdicombe miles, which the right hon. and
defraud the person who originally setthe ticketprice and        learnedGentleman knows have beenpublished,andcopies
that the person who pays the price isnot unaware of the         ofwhich are inthe Library. As to thecase thatwas heard
difference. Ibelieve that itispretty obnoxious and that it      yesterday, we shalluphold whatever thecourts ultimately
isextraordinary thepricespeople areprepared topay, but          decide. That iswhat me rule of law is.
itisa lawful activity.                                             With regard to theleafletand information thatwent to
                                                                schools, I see nothing wrong in sending information to
                         Domestic Violence                      school careers officers,so that they can say what jobs are
                                                                available. Ido not/know what the right hon. and learned
   13. Mr. Sheerman: To ask theSecretary< >tateforthe           Gentleman’sexperienceisatelectiontime,butwe findthat
Home Department what action his Depai; lent istaking            we are inundate^ with requests for information. I expect
to deal with domestic violence.                                 that he istoo.
   Mr. Hurd: I welcome the action taken by the                      Mr. Onslow/:Would itnot be a disasterfortheWestern
Metropolitan police and other forces in response to              Alliance ifthe Government of this country ever fellinto
increased public concern about domestic violence. There          the hands /of a party whose policy on nuclear
are now 15 specialist police/units in London that                deterrence-
investigate alleged offences ^nd offer practical help to
victims. We are also looking atpolicy and practice in the           Mr. Speaker: Order. The subjectofquestionsmust fall
light of the findings of recently published Home Office          within the responsibility of the Prime Minister.
research, and are askii^g other Departments to do the               Mr. Kinnock: Bearing in mind the Prime Minister’s
same.                  /                                         previous experience of the Department of the
   Mr. Sheerman: -Following the report of the Home               Environment, does the right hon. Lady think that the
Department that halfa million wives are beaten violently         Government’spolltaxinformationhasbeen handled “well
by their husbands each year, will the Department now             or accurately”?
launch a national campaign to highlight that problem?                 „j Prime Minister: As I indicated in my reply to the
Will the right hon. Gentleman instruct police officers to        rigtlt hon. and learned Member for Warley, .West (Mr.
take appropriate and firm actionineverycase ofdomestic           Archer), whatever the courts ultimately decide will, of
violence?'                                                         Jurse, be upheld. That isthe precisepoint atissue.As to
    Mp; Hurd: The hon. Gentleman will know that the              information, Departments have adhered strictly to the
 attijmde of the police to that problem has changed              ./iddicombe rulesand willcontinue to do so.Perhaps the
 substantially. In the old days, the police were reluctant to   /righthon. Gentleman isproud ofsome oftheLabour local

    501 C056/7 Job 2-5
Touts
  273. The recommendations in the last two paragraphs are designed to deter those without tickets from
turning up at matches and so obviating any trouble they may be tempted to cause. However, many fans
without ticketsturn up atthe ground inthehope ofbuying themJrom touts.
  21 A. During my visitsto sports grounds Ihave found universal condemnation oftouts by allinvolved in
organising and managing large stadium events. Apart from the obstruction they themselves cause, touts
attract fans without tickets to attend at grounds in the hope of getting in. Moreover, they sell tickets to all
comers regardless oftheir allegiance. Thus tickets for the home area at a soccer match fallinto the hands of
away supporters and vice versa. The result isto frustrate the efforts ofclubs and police to achieve peaceful
segregation. Pockets ofalien affiliationplanted amongst home supporters form a focus forhostilityand often
violence results. Apart from these objections, voiced by the FA, the FL, the police and the clubs, most
supporters also detest touts because they often comer the market for a popular match and offer tickets at
grosslyexcessive prices.
   275. From all these quarters the plea is to take positive action against ticket touts at football matches.
I am mindful of the need for caution before advocating a law limiting liberty to conduct oneselfand one’s
business freely and according to established practice. Ilikewise accept that market forces should, in general,
operate freely in the commercial field. Nevertheless, I am satisfied from what Lhave read, heard and seen
thatoutside football grounds the presence and activitiesoftoutshave a grosslyanti-socialeffectleading both
directly and indirectly to disorder. Directly, through obstruction and' the attraction of numbers without
tickets. Indirectly, because oftrouble from those so attr^Ted who.^'the en3rcahnot prdo not buy tickets
and from those who buy theirway intoan opposition enclave.            j
   276. Touts operate, ofcourse, atplaces otherthan football grounds. They areto be found, forexample, at
national rugby stadia, at the All England Lawn Tennis Club at Wimbledon and at countless other sporting
events. Depending on how one defines “touting”,the activity could include sellingunwanted tickets for the
opera, the theatre or concert halls. Touting usually means, however, notjust sellingat face value a ticketyou
cannot use, but selling numbers of tickets at an inflated price as a commercial venture There is a dear
mctinrtinn ftfflwwn tha ,m p?rt n£iQuting at football grounds and elsewhere. Football is the only sport at
which segregation ispractisedjoj^^ra^vj^ncet'TKTnr^^aiBFTriT the sport where violence inside and
outside the ground is,atpresent, most prevalent. There are thereforestrong grounds for regardingfootball as
a special case asthe Government has recognised by promoting the Football SpectatorsAct.
  277. Whatever the policy merits of freedom to trade and market forces, they must surely yield to the
maintenance of safety and the prevention of disorder. Touts at football matches put both at risk. At other
sports and in other leisure fields the tout does not endanger safety or order to the same extent. Accordingly,
whatever view one takes ofhim. he can be lefttoply histrade there. But s° f^asfootballi^concenrved^m^m^
view touting shouldbe made unlawful. The fastbuck should stop here.
  278. At present, police can deal with touts only by somewhat strained and stretched use ofexisting laws.
They arrestthem forobstruction-even ifthe physical obstruction caused isminimal. Alternatively, they make
an arreston the grounds thatthey suspect the tout ofcarryingforged tickets,although the suspicion offorgery
may merely be convenient conjecture. After holding the tout during the match the police release him and the
now valueless but genuine ticketsare returned tohim. Growing wise tothis, many touts now carryonly two or
three tickets at a time, relying on a runner to bring up more from a “banker'1standing off with perhaps
hundreds oftickets in hispossession. Ifthe salesman isarrested the merchandise isnot alllost.PoUce should
not have to stretchthe taw to deal with a public mischief. There should be a specificprohibitionwhich police
can then enforce.                                             —
   279. How to formulate a prohibition against touting at football grounds willrequire careful consideration
and drafting. It couid be made an offence to sell tickets for and on the day of a football match without
authority from the home club todo so. A nother way would be to prohibit such sales w ithin a specified radius
of the ground on the day of the match. Yet ano th e r would be to prohibit sales of tickets for a football match at
more than face value. This third alternative would permit any genuine purchaser of a ticket who found he
couid not use it to recoup his outlay by selling his ticket outside the match. Its disadvantage would be the
difficulty of proving a tout had sold at more than face value; ways would also be devised to evade the
prohibition. 1 tend to favour the first alternative which is simple and capable of easy proof. The genuine
ticket hoider. finding himself unable on the day to use his ticket, and not permitted to sell it outside the
ground, should be perm itted to return it to the club and recover his money. Clubs should be prepared to
accept such tickets in the interests o f fairness and of having a law which defeats touts. If touting outside the
ground is banned, fans with no tickets for an all-ticket match could have no excuse for turning up outside
hoping to get in.

                                                        47
26 Grosvenor Gardens, Victoria, London SW1W ODU
Administration 01-730 3450 Tourist Information 01-730 3488
                                                                                                  LONDON
                                                                                                  TOURIST BOARD AND
Telex 919041 LTB G Fax 01-730 9367
                                                                                                  CONVENTION BUREAU

     TACW/DCL

     7 March 1990

                                                                                                 &od(ic*5tL
     The Rt. Hon. David Waddington MP
     Home Secretary                                                                     iA\J    P& C^O
     The Home Office
     50 Queen Anne's Gate
     London SW1H 9AT




     THE TAYLOR REPORT AND TICKET TOUT LEGISLATION

     Thank you for agreeing to see a deputation from the
     London Tourist Board to discuss ticket touts next
     Monday, 12th March at 5 pm. The members of the party
     will be:

               Dame Shelagh Roberts, Chairman, LTB
               Tom Webb, Managing Director, LTB
               Paul Burns, Chief Executive, Keith Prowse
               Peter Jackson, Chairman, Ticket and Grounds
                  Committee, All England Club
               Dudley Wood, Secretary, Rugby Football Union

     I am enclosing a briefing note for your information.




     T.A.C. W£bb
     Manaqifja Director

     Enc.




THE OFFICIAL TOURIST BOARD FOR LONDON
A trading name of London Tourist Board Limited. A company limited by guarantee number 761149. Registered in London, England.
Registered office: 26 Grosvenor Gardens, Victoria, London SW1W ODU
                                                                                        LONDON
Parliamentary Factsheet                                                                 TOURIST BOARD AND
                                                                                        CONVENTION BUREAU

                         TICKET TOUTS AT SPORTING AND OTHER
                                ENTERTAINMENT EVENTS
   B ackground

   1.   Up until 1985 sporting bodies, theatres and concert
        promoters provided tickets only to those agents
        appointed by the Society of West End Theatre (SWET).
        SWET had an agreement with approximately twelve long
        established agents who had been financially vetted and
        who subscribed to the agreement which defined the basis
        on which tickets would be supplied to and could be
        resold by those agents. The OFT referred the agreement
        to the Restrictive Practices Court who in turn struck
        the agreement out in February 1985.     Since that date
        touts have become an increasing problem.
   The Problem

   2.   Before    1985   touts   were   colourful,    somewhat
        idiosyncratic operators.   Since 1985 they have become
        well organised with substantial financial backing and a
        criminal element is involved.

        Many of the touts operate from seemingly respectable
        premises and tourists form an entirely erroneous view
        of the price of tickets for West End theatre
        performances.  Since tickets traded by touts are often
        for inferior grade seats this creates a misleading
        impression of the price of London entertainment.

        The turnover of this black market is estimated at up to
        £25m in cash.   At sporting events it is increasingly
        linked with unofficial corporate entertainment arranged
        by specialist firms who obtain tickets from touts.

   3.   The difference between official ticket prices and black
        market prices is huge.    For example a Wimbledon mens
        final ticket of face value £35 in 1989 was changing
        hands for up to £650 and when packaged by pirate
        hospitality operators was being sold (with lunch) at
        £950.    This compares with the official corporate
        hospitality package at £215.    Tickets for Phantom of
        the Opera with a top price of £22.50 regularly sell on
        the black market at prices between £120-£160.       For
        Michael Crawford's last performance £22.50 tickets
        actually sold for £2,000.



                     The London Tourist Board and Convention Bureau is the official
                     to u rist board for London. It is funded by the London Boroughs
                        Grant Scheme, the English Tourist Board, and commercial
                           companies in tourism , as well as from trading income.


                 Parliamentary Consultant: Roland Freeman 01-222-5161 and 01-222-8161
•
         A complaints dossier held by SWET includes numerous
         letters from tourists who have been defrauded by ticket
         agencies with pre-paid tickets.    Arriving to collect
         their tickets, tourists find the agencies have gone out
         of business or moved to unknown premises and no tickets
         exist for the visitor.

    The Effects of Ticket Touting

    4.   Corporate entertaining is an essential funding vehicle
          for sport and the arts. The money obtained by pirate
         operators from corporate entertainment does not go back
         to the sport.    Official hospitality sales by contrast
         enable money to be ploughed back into the event.    For
         example, this money funds the RFU youth development
         scheme costing £800,000 this year.     At Wimbledon the
         money funds the LTA youth development programme for
         British tennis.

    5.   There are also instances of forged and stolen tickets
         which are released on to the market through the touts
         organisations.

    6.   The scale of the profits made by touting is attractive
         to organised crime and there is much anecdotal evidence
         of the bribery and violence associated with it.      An
         example was the recent robbery and ransom of £100,000
         worth of black market tickets for the England/Wales
         rugby international.

    7.   The image of sport, theatre and the arts is damaged and
         the consequences for tourism in London and elsewhere
         are increasingly serious.   That is especially so since
         ticket touting has been largely stopped in New York and
         other American states.      London is looking a very
         expensive city to people attracted by its entertainment
         facilities and who are frequently warned by travel
         writers in their own countries that London is the
         ticket tout capital of the world.

    8.   There is a potential safety hazard.   For example, some
         three weeks after Hillsborough tickets for the
         Pilkington game at Twickenham were being bought by
         ticket touts inside the ground for re-sale outside.
         Over 3,000 extra spectators got in this way.
         Fortunately the initial allocation was below total
         capacity and no crowd problem resulted on this
         occasion.   Similar situations apply at any event that
         has a pass out and return system.       Touts may also
         undermine the efforts of the authorities to keep
         opposing fans in separate parts of the ground.
                                 3



9.    The touts who operate on the streets or from ticket
      offices are making substantial profits almost certainly
      without paying VAT or income or corporation tax.    The
      ticket providers include VAT in the face value price of
      the ticket but tax is clearly due on the actual price
      received by the tout.     To that extent at least the
      practice is unlawful.
The Solution

10.   Sporting organisations as well as theatre managements
      and agencies have sought to curb touting by tight
      controls at the box office, checks on ticket numbers
      and so on.   Specifically the PGA in conjunction with
      their agent imposed a prohibition on resale of tickets
      to the 1989 Ryder Cup.     A company which advertised
      Ryder Cup hospitality inclusive of tickets was
      successfully injuncted by the joint plaintiffs.      At
      the full hearing on 12 June 1989 at the High Court, the
      defendant company submitted to judgment and was
      ordered to stop selling or representing itself as able
      to sell Ryder Cup tickets.
11.   The Consumer Protection Act 1987 has provided one,
       albeit limited, improvement by introducing a Code of
       Practice for Traders on Price Indications.     This was
      brought into effect in March 1989.            It is now
       recommended that those selling tickets should show the
       face value of the ticket so that the customer can
       ascertain the level of "booking fee" and then, on the
      basis of that information, decide whether or not to
      purchase.    The major limitation is that this is not a
       legal requirement and failure to do so, although it can
      be used as evidence in support of a case, is not an
       absolute offence.    Early indications are that this
      requirement is being ignored and Westminster City
      Council, for example, have been advised that the code
       is insufficient for a successful prosecution.

12.   All major sporting organisations and SWET now believe
      that the existing law on consumer protection is
       inadequate in respect of ticket touting.   Some form of
       licensing is widely regarded as essential.

13.   In America where serious problems existed for many
      years (including Mafia involvement) licensing was first
       introduced by New York City. The touts (scalpers) then
      moved to Conecticutt. Licensing then drove them to New
      Jersey where licensing has also now been introduced.
      Florida, California, Texas and many other states have
                                 4

      followed suit.

14.   It is suggested that local authorities should be given
      powers under regulations made by the Secretary of State
      to licence principals and agents to sell tickets on
      closely controlled terms.   All other ticket selling to
      the public would become illegal.


2.3.90
*5 ^
.                 -      f*vj>

    I lAAd^JSfcMj^C 0)OAVX SU&fexgl^
    WX-0 -402^, U6^       c^:

    M r (fexfKs       )*AiA&l\£jA^ +~

          <^y~eec) k       5& l     M/

    <k> dXsCAA^y? 'TUl oCtexcA^
    (€Wu-_

    i W                      )6-r

    'fo cwvcvvvjap      2 0 M/tA^o       -


             T

                            tfvw
                             <lL/t
 H O M E SECRETARY’S MEETING



Time


Date


Place


Subject


Present
                                                                             ....


26 Grosvenor Gardens. Victoria. London SW1W ODU
A dm inistratio n 01-730 3 ^ 5 0 Tourist Info rm a tio n 01-730
                                                                                                                     .LONDON
                                                                                                                      TOURIST BOARD A N D
Telex 919041 LTB G Fax 01-730 9367
                                                                                                        A'            CONVENTION BUREAU
                                                                                                                                    *7%r^-
         SR/DCL                                                                                              T   z
                                                                                                         Us S f c x er
         6 February 1990
                                                                                                          M \
         The Rt. Hon. David Wadiirsgton MP                                                                ^   R xjii
         Home Secretary        J ,                                                                         Mj
         The Home Office               (5Q it^TK^ -
         50 Queen Anne's Gate ! iatC.SOC?
         London SW1H 9AT           cwfiT&d         ^                                                    ■/ ,,
                  4; --
                                   skevJc) c^Aa H                                                            M*                              \
                                                4 W                                                                           l^ J

                                            -tevwu.vc^
                                           ^ - - 7          9                                                                                       iY*
                                            "ti*. 7                                                                                         "Vi
        THE TAYLOR REPORT AND TICKET TOUT LEGISLATION

        We noted that in his report on the Hillborough disaster, Lord
        Justice Taylor recommended a new offence in connection with the
        sale of tickets outside football grounds on the day of a match.
        Before the Government reaches final conclusions on this aspect of
        the report we^would appreciate the opportunity to put to you the
        case for a wider application of such a control on the sale of
        tickets.

        Our Board has been increasingly concerned at the growth of ticket
        touting in London not only in major sporting events, but also in
        the West End theatre. This follows the successful elimination of
        organised touting in many American states through a system of
        licensing which has largely driven out the criminal elements
        involved.   Unfortunately the indications are that they have
        transferred their activities to Britain.     London has actually
        been described in the American press as "the ticket tout capital
        of the world".

       Some of our members have considerable knowledge of this problem
       and I am writing to ask if you would receive a group from the
       Board who would outline *the evidence we have collected and
       suggest a practical solution based upon relevant American
       experience.

       I look forward to hearing from you.




       Dame Shelagtt Roberts D.B.E.
       Chairman




THE OFFICIAL T0UR;ST BOARD FOR LONDON
A trading na-re    L o n d o n T o -r-s t 5oa>c L r'.te d . A ccm oany liniited by   guarantee n u m b e r 761149. Registered in London. England.
Registered o " c? 25 5 'o s v e '-;!            v : - v ; a London SW' .V ODU
