                                                     KW-   \a ) C U ^ U T ^




NOTE OF A MEETING ABOUT THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY HELD AT
10.00 A.M. ON 27 APRIL 1989



Present:     Mr   Malone-Lee (Chairman)
             Mr   Addison
             Mr   Sandiford
             Mr   Archer (Gl)
             Mr   Durbin (FD2)
             Mr   Watts (FD1)
             Mr   McAdam (FD1)



1.   Mr Malone-Lee said that the main purpose of the meeting was
to reach a view on who should meet the costs of the inquiry to be
conducted by the West Midlands Police.   Their task was
threefold:

     (i)           to prepare evidence for coroners' inquests;
     (ii)          to look into matters which might be the subject of
                    complaints against the police (although no formal
                    complaints were known to have been lodged so far);
                    and

     (iii)         to provide information for the policy inquiry
                    itself and for the public inquiry to be chaired by
                    Lord Justice Taylor.

2.   Mr Anthony Beaumont-Dark MP (Selly Oak) had written to the
Home Secretary requesting an assurance that the West Midlands
Police would not be liable for the additional costs incurred by
them as a result of conducting the police inquiry.   Mr Addison
said that he believed there was no doubt that the West Midlands
Police had been called in by the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire to conduct the inquiry.    [Mr Whalley (secretary to
the inquiry) subsequently confirmed this].   it was in line with
normal procedures to expect the South Yorkshire Police to meet
these costs.   The Treasury view was that these should be
regarded as police costs and not something which central
government should pay.   It was understood that there had been
some statements in the press to the effect that the Home Office
should meet these costs because there would be information
obtained in the course of the police inquiry which would be
relevant to the Taylor Inquiry.   But it was agreed that the Home
Office should not be deflected from its view by such statements.

3.   It was concluded that the West Midlands Police should not
bear the additional costs incurred by them as a result of
conducting the police inquiry.   It was also concluded that on
present information it was right to look to the South Yorkshire
Police to meet these costs.   It was for separate consideration
whether the size of the cost to South Yorkshire would give them
grounds for asking for a special payment.




Finance Division 1
28 April 1989




Distribution:   Those present
                Mr Whalley
