FURNIVflL HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL N o .0742-731483                                         12 Jan 90 14:51 No.002


                                                                                                                  WG 503
                                                                                                                   ( 2 .0 9 )




 STAPLE                                                     W e s t M i d l a n d s Police
 ATTACHMENTS
 HERE                                                      F A X M E S S A G E

 FOR THE ATTENTION OF:




                                  Fax No:    £ j —     £    ^   3   —     5 .1 9 0


  Fr S ®                          W est Midlands Police                             Date:      .


    A.c.c.                        D epartm ent:    .                            /w < x — ^ > ri£ T :F i £ + - k

                                  Telephone No: 0 7 4 -2 .— " 7 5 / 3 ^ t/o ,        Extension:
        " 3 c>w 6-s
                                  Fax No:         OV+X-         7 3 1 ^ 8 3 ,
        V) M h
   Total number of pages deluding this page



   Remarks/Action required:



                                  ^      b ^o us se ^




                              A ><<• C .




        Authorised by;
                         Sergei




   I E JAN    ’ 90    14:55                                                                 074E    731483         PAGE. 0 0
                                      *¥%
FURNIV R L HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL N o .0742-731433                      12 Jan 90 14=51 No. 002 P.02
    rAV \r                                                         ^           a***' (s^ ^ ;
                       Ol-       a '^ 2        ■• a i ^ i o .       *                   <*— * C-*t

         SA12A

                                                                         ^ a s i s s e - '
         METHOD

          In examining the way in which South Yorkshire Police «®P°£deJ
          disaster at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Hillsborough, it is
          necessary to consider the following documentst-

               (1)      South Yorkshire Police Major Incident Manual/Plan?

          ^ ____       oand because Major Incident Plan was not formally implemented tkfi.

               (2)      South Yorkshire Police Order entitled Operation Support
                        Operation Maine (though for the purposes of this report operation
                        Maine which deals with the provision of mutual aid by South
                        Yorkshire Police to other forces can be disregarded).

          These documents then have to be compared against the various records of
          actions taken by South Yorkshire Police on the 15 April 1989, including.

                 (a)    South Yorkshire Police Extended Incident Log for 15 April 1989.

                        and because the latter is incomplete

                 fb)    Transcripts of tape recordings made on 15 April 1989 by South
                        Yorkshire Police force control room on multi channel audio tape
                        recorder.

                 (c)    Video film and photographic evidence both from South Yorkshire
                        Police and the media.

                 (d)    Statements/Recollections/Transcripts of actions by South
                        Yorkshire Police Officers.

                 (e)               /Recollections/Written Submissions by other agencies
                         S t a t e m e n t s

                         including Fire and Ambulance Service.

                 (£)     Statements/Transcripts/Written Submissions by civilian witnesses.

           GENERAL

           Before proceeding further it should be explained that deration * Support*'
           is primarily designed as a contingency plan to deal with incidents of
           Bnontaneoun disorder within the South Yorkshire Police area by providing
           an immediate increased police presence to a given rendezvous point. The
           Wajor Incident |jlan on the other hand contains a basic format for dealing
           with anv maior incident including action plans for specific types of
           d l w . t S , i. an air '
                                   c « .h or collier, disaster ..There 1. no separate plan
            for dealing with a football disaster.             HofcfiW

           ACTIVATION

            Operation Support is activated by the Senior
            contacting ACC operations or in his absence the Senior Duty Chief Offic
            for authority to implement certain in**force mobilisation^ procedures.
            Once authority has been obtained they are in the main carried out by the
            force control rooms working to a pre-identified action plan although some
            functions are delegated to sub division(s).




    IE   JAN ’ 9 0     14: 5G                                           0742   731483     PAGE. 0 0 2
FURNrVfiL HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL N o .0742-731483                       12 Jan 90 14:51 No.002 P.03




            The(4a jorT£ncident plajt'requires no such a u t h o r i t y , » i
            implemented by the O K of Force Control Room, as a           ofA Information
                                                                 r e s u l t


            indicating the location, size and nature of an i n c i d e n t t h e first
            officer(8 ) to arrive the scene.                                  ^3

            Again, control is exercised by the Qmtrol ftsoom, who have responsibility
            for initiating a pre-designated series of actions which include notifying
            the other emergency services and local agencies. Some functions ^are
            passed down to the sub division(s).

            Examinations of the extended incident log and tape transcripts ^vealed
            that Operation Support was initially activated at the request of Chief
            Superintendent Duckenfield with the authority of the ACC Operations - Mr              _^          7
            Jackson. As the*$£l£te^ became more apparent, there is then a move        ^
            from the Operation Support procedures and into the major incident plan.
       ^ f e h e failure to identify the correct plan possibly created some delay in                o ta ,(
       ^ ^ h e mobilisation of the other emergency services, hospitals etc. ^        1
            \rio u > Of»<*Jfcc*s.                         ^                   .
            USE OF CODE WORDS

            There is no code word necessary to implement (operation ♦'Support.* All
            that is needed is for an ’E ’ priority message authorised by an Assistant
            Chief Constable be eent to all Sub Divisions for mobilisation of available
            resources.

            Under the itfUjor ‘Incident $lan the code word CATASTROPHE should be used by
            the police to prefix initial massages to the fire and ambulance services
            to alert them that a, major incident may have occurred andthat the Police
            are implementing ■ch^majui liicidenfe plan. Eeonuoo of the way this
_-a...?     incident developed”and because mOOfficer at the scene identified the
?     ’     extent of the disaster early enough the code word ’CATASTROPHE* was not
            used. This is confirmed by the extended incident log and tape transcripts
            which do show the time the other emergency services were routinely
            requested to attend. This omission could also have added to the filay n
            the response by the other emergency services.                                \

             RENDEZVOUS POINTS

             The ’E* priority message to Sub Divisions should include details of an
             identified rendezvous point with suggested access routes under Operation
             Support. The order includes a number of pre-designated rendezvous points
             on each division and one of those for the *F* division, where Hillsborough
             Stadium is located is the South Yorkshire Police Niagara Sports Ground in
             Claywheels Lane only a short distance from the scene. It requires the
             point to be staffed by reception officers from the underwater search team
             and on arrival of Superintendent Operations and his deputy will come undor
             their control.

             The *E’ priority message was sent and initially identified the rendezvous
             point at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, A short time later this
             was qualified as The Police Room. Superintendent Marsh is the deputy in
             Operations department and he was engaged in the ground as were the
             underwater search team consequently there was no effective rendezvous
   '         point organised.




       IE   JAN   ’ 90   14:58                                             0742   731483   PAGE. 0 0 3
hjRNfVAL HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL No .0742-731483                            12 Jan 90 14:51 No.002 P.04



                                                      3.


                 There is mention of a need to arrange rendezvous points for essential
                 personnel and security of all property in the major incident plan. Apart
                 from mentioning the need for proper marshalling and disposal of vehicles
                 and to create separate parking areas for police, fire and ambulance
                 vehicles later in the plan there does not appear to be any clear direction
                 as to who within the Polir.fi has responsibility to set it up or how xt
                 would be staffed etc. This part of the plan is badly written to the point
                 it is ambiguous.                             W * W

                 Evidence at the scene shows that the Police, Fire and Ambulance Services
                 attended at both the Leppings Lane/West Stand and Penistone Road/Police
                 base at rear of the North Stand. There is no evidence of an attempt by
        0        the Police, to obtain an orderly or structured system of management by
                 Superintendent operations or his deputy (or indeed anyone else) at either
                 location. Neither is there any evidence of the Fire or Ambulance service
                  |eing directed to the Police Room. The ambulance service were clearly
                 ■aware of the gymnasium being used as a temporary mortuary/casualty
                 clearing station at a fairly early stage although how this came about is
                 unclear evidentially.

                 Dealing on a more general basis with the lack of a rendezvous point/the
                  confusion over the locations of rendezvous points, one must consider this
                  against the question of reasonableness in the circumstances prevailing at
                  Hillsborough. That is given the large number of dead and injured and the
                  urgent need for them to be rescued or treated by the emergency services,
    /            was it feasible that they should have to attend a rendezvous point for
V                documentation and marshalling prior to being deployed to the scene.

                 COMMAND

                 Under Operation Support the officer in overall command will be the
                 Divisional Chief Superintendent or in his absence his deputy. He will be
            »    assisted by heads of other divisions/departments regarding manpower,
                 eauinment etc. These mostly relate to a public order situation and can be
f W 4*'          discounted. The t ib jor 'incident tflan identifies the site commander as the
                 Senior Divisional officer or his deputy and details a series of duties
                 including;- Assuming overall control, establishing order, evacuation,
                 delegation, and liaison with other emergency services.

               First of all it must be said that because of the presence of the Assistant
               Chief Constable Operations, Mr Jackson at the match initially in a semi
               official capacity (as a guest at Sheffield Wednesday..FPPtball j^ u b ) , and
               then when the disaster broke in an advisory/operational capacity to Chief
               Superintendent Duckenfield, there is some doubt about who was actually in
               charge at any given time. The lack of detail in the written recollections
               by both officers does not help, consequently, it is difficult to conclude
               whether Mr Jackson or Chief Superintendent Duckenfield did take on,£or
e ll* * * * !* should have takerpon a particular duty as Officers in Command. This dual
               involvement from an early stage caused some difficulty and must be
               considered when contemplating the degree of culpability. W

                   That said, these duties of the Site Commander are at the centre of
                   evaluating Police response to this disaster, and whilst it io clear both
                   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Mr Jackson did instigate a series of
                   actions to try to resolve the developing situations, because of the way
                   the duties are written it remains a matter of opinion as to how effective
 Joip              their actions were. That is, any evaluation must be a subjective as
                  ^opposed to an objective one.




            IE   JAN   ’ 90   15:00                                       074E   731483   P AGE. 0 0 4
r
    f U R N l V R L HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL No .0742-731483                     12 Jan 90 14:51 N o . 002 P . 05



                                                           4.


                 Certainly it appears there is room for closer scrutiny of the following
                 areas 8-

                             a)      No one clearly identified to the force control room at an
                                      early stage the need to activate the major incident plan

                       ^     b)      Appropriate messages were not relayed over the ground tannoy
                                      system/electronic notice board.

    ftp                      C)      There was little evidence of clear delegation to those
                       ?              Senior Officers present.

    i,                7      d)      There was a lack of liaison with Senior Fire and Ambulance
                                     Services officers.

           ^ ^ T h e previous section about rendezvous points is also relevant to Command
           ^ ^ ^ 5ut as it is dealt with earlier I do not propose to comment further.


                 Applying the subjective test on a) to d) above, one could argue in
i               respect of a) activition of major incident plan, that shortly after 3
1               p.m., when the disaster started to unfold, it appeared the problem was a
f               ’pitch invaoion* which then moved towards a confrontation between rival
A               supporters. It was not until some 5 - 1 0 minutes later that it became
                 clear to Senior Officers that people had been killed or seriously injured
                 and at this point the Chief Inspector in the control room at South
                 Yorkshire Police Headquarters had moved into the Major Incident Plan and
                 away from Operation Support.

                 Applying a similar logic to b), appropriate messages were not relayed over
                 the ground tannoy system/electronic notice board is more difficult. While
                 it is clear the ground tannoy and hand held loudspeakers were used in the
                 early stages to ask supporters in pens 3 & 4 to move back to take pressure
               ^ off those at the front of the pens, there was no general announcement
                 either informing the Supporters what was happening or requesting doctors,
                 nurses etc., to come forward to assist the injured and dying and although
                 an appeal for calm was made, this was not until sometime between 3.30 -
                 3.45 p.m., which was too late.

                 Taking this a stage further, despite the fact the South Yorkshire Police
                 Match Orders 1/89 contained emergency evacuation procedures involving the
                 beeadcasfc of a coded mnnnago ovor the tannoy system, no such message was
                 put out. One of the effects of this was that Police Officers manning the
                 gate8 from pens 3 & 4 onto the pitch were initially reluctant to open
                 them.

                 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield seeks to rationalise this by explaining
                 that he did not wish to exacerbate an already difficult situation in case
                 it caused public disorder or encouraged the crowd to leave and they
0#               blocked the emergency vehicles access or exit to the scene, or caused
                 congestion of the surrounding roads.                       ^

                 Moving to c), delegation, and applying the same criteria, it is clear
                 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield did instruct Superintendent Murray to go
                 onto the pitch to see what was taking place at the front of pens 3 and 4,
                 and that he later asked for tannoy messages to be passed out over the
                 ground system.




          IE    JAN   ’ 90   15:01                                            074E   731483   PAGE. 0 0 5
fURNfVflL HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL N o .0742-731483                             12 Jan 90 14 =51 No . 002 P . 06



                                                          5.


                  Between times, whilst he probably did issue other instructions to junior
                  ranks he made no apparent arrangements for liaison officers with other
                  emergency services and both he and Mr Jackson visited the clubs boardroom


     /
    J J ,
    &   ’•
                  to explain to member, of the board                        ^

                  Effectively this left the Police Incident Post - (the Police Box) for which )
                  he has . direct responsibility. supervised by superintendent Murray for     /
                  the period of time S a t they were away. The efficiency of this post is the
                  responsibility of the Site Commander.                    a* (U*     .

                   HB. Poor radio reception could also be a feature which has to be ta^e"
                   toto account here i.e. the inability to pass out commands because of the
                   saturation of the system.

                   Dealing with (d), liaison with the other Emergency Services and applying
                   the subjective test, there is no evidence to support that liaison officers



         t
             •     were nominated by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield to assist either the
                   Fire or Ambulance Services. Indeed the evidence indicates that when the
                   Fire Service arrived officers on the ground had no idea why they had been
                   requested to attend and there was s^me_delay before they were able to
                   commence their rescue functions. S U U ^ e i l i n g with the Fire Service, when
y                  a Senior Officer sought to establish liaison by attending the Police
                   Incident Post, he was unable to make contact with anyone sufficiently
                   Senior with whom to communicate.

                   Although there is no evidence of the Ambulance Service seeking to establish
                    liaison with the Police, it seems the Police made no early        *°
         O         correct this and each Service seems to have done its own ^ " 8   in
                   ritrl? stages. This appears to be the case until Detective Chief
                    Superintendent Addis arrives on the scene after 3.25 pm when the temporary
                   Mortuary/Casualty Clearing Station was set up anditafttd to function, and
                    ambulances were directed in via Pennistone Road.

                    On a more general *ote, it will be seen that in the previous P a r a p h s
                    Chief Superintenden\Duckenfield is referred to as distinct to ACC Mr
    .^             Jackson. In part thisis because of the difficulty previously highlighted
       Jk          with dual command. I t J ^ a l s o because of a lack of specific detail in
              .    eitheTofnSjTrefcollectW, Mr Jackson in the main confirming actions by
                    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. In fact the only actions that can
■                  actually be attributed to Mr Jackson are the call out of Detective Chief
                    Superintendent Addis to investigate the cause of the incident.
                    Superintendent Torr to set up a Casualty Bureau, and later to liaise with
                    Chief Superintendent Nesbitt who had been involved^ the


                    COMMUNICATION

                    Many of the points about the use, or lack of use of the ground tannoy
                    system/elecronic notice board have already been made in the Previous
             *     chapter and there seems little point in re-iterating them under this
         y         section. Suffice it to say, that while there was an emergency evacuation
                    plan incorporated in the Police orders for the match which involved the use
              '     of the tannoy, the plan was never activated. Similarly mention has
                    previously been made of the      priority message necessary under Operation
                    Support to mobilise Officers and this has been dealt with earlier in this
                    paper.
                    Dealing with Operation Support there are a number of actions relevant, most
                    of which have been completed.



         IE       JAN   ’ 90   15:03                                         074E   731483   PAGE. 0 0 6
f U R N i m HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL No .0742-731483              12 Jan 90 14:51 No.002 P.07


                                             6   .
        Among those completed is an extended incident log, the deployment of a
        traffic car to the rendezvous point to establish a command post (the
        Extended Incident Log was already up and running for the match and the
        traffic car was not used because the Police box became the police incident
        post) and the call out of Superintendent Communications. This order also
        requires Chief Superintendent Operations and Traffic to be called out to
        attend the Force Control Room. This action was completed in bo much as
        Chief Superintendent Nesbitt, was already on duty for the match but when
        the disaster became apparent he attended the ground and played a leading
     t, role in organising the rescue of the dead and injured. To criticise his
        actions in these circumstances would seem chtirl^sh and further comment is
        unnecessary bearing in mind the major incident plan should have been
        activated in any event.

        A number of th« actions necessary under Operation Support are similar to
        actions laid out in the major incident plan, consequently they have been
     ^^jompleted. Properly identifying the type of incident to the force control
     ^^room and they in turn notifying the other emergency services has already
        been discussed and so further comment ie unnecessary. Establishing an
        incident post has also been touched on in as much that the police box for
        controlling the ground activated much earlier in the day, assumed the
        functions of the incident post when the disaster started to unfold, it
        being ideally staffed and equipped with channel 25 UHF and Channel 2 VHF
        (emergency channels) to manage such a situation. This made the
        communications vehicle which was deployed to the scene in accordance with
        the plan superfluous.

       The plan also requires that a list of identified Senior Officers with key
       roles, including Superintendent Communications, be called out by the force
       control room in the event of a major disaster. A check of that list
       confirms that those officers not already on duty in connection with the
       match that would reasonably ba required, did in fact attend, though they
       were not necessarily instructed by the control room to do so. How they
       were warned is considered irrelevant providing this was within a reasonable
       period.

       At a Sub Divisional level most of thoco aotiono which wore necessary were
       completed, and the only omissions would seem to be on *F’ Divisions in
       relation to instructing that radio silence be maintained and on ’D ’
       Division in sending officers to the Casualty Department of both local
       hospitals, the Northern General and Royal Hallam to assist in the control
       of traffic and crowds. In the latter case this was to some extent, offset
       by officers attending with deceased/casualties assisting those officers
       from the Casualty Bureau.

       Dealing with radio silence is more difficult in that there is no doubt the
       system was 'swamped* with traffic and this was the cause of some of the
       problems, (both at sub-divisions and incident post level). But the
       practicality of enforcing full radio silence in these circumstances must
       also be considered, particularly when there is no provision within the plan
       for a neighbouring sub-divisional controller to take on the existing
       workload.




    12 JAN   ’ 90   15:05                                      0742   731483   PAGE. 0 0 7
r



    ^ U R N f U A L HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL No .0742-731483            12 Jan 90 14 =51 N o . 002 P . 08



                                                   7.


             TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT


            Requirement for traffic management as laid down in Operation Support
            amounts to the use of traffic division officers to man observation points,
            carry out peripheral patrols and initial basic force cover working with
            motorway crews on VHF Channel 1. None of these duties is particularly
            appropriate to a major disaster.

            Responsibility for traffic under the major incident plan can be divided
            into two, locally to provide adequate control of all routes to allow free
            ingress and egress of all services and on a force wide area to deal with
            the problem of traffic congestion. Dealing with the latter first, it does
            not seem that force wide traffic congestion was a problem encountered at
            Hillsborough arising from the disaster as distinct to the match. Off site
            congestion/traffic problems in the area around the ground and between the


          • (ground and the main hospitals, fire stations and the mortuary was a problem
            and vital junctions were manned by traffic department (the order suggests
            Sub Divisions).

            In addition to mannning road junctions, one way systems and road diversions
            were implemented close to the ground to facilitate the movement of
            emergency vehicles, medical teams etc to and from the ground and police
            escorts were provided for ambulances and medical teams. These actions were
            co-ordinated by the force control room acting in conjunction with the
            controller at Hammerton Road and using a mixture of local officers,
            officers already on duty for the match and traffic officers.

            In general this section of the plan seems to have been properly completed
            within a reasonable time and to have coped with the situation despite the
            large amount of traffic in the area for the match. The tannoy request for
            supporters to stay in situ may in part at least, have contributed to this.

            TIMING
            In any major disaster the timing of actions by individuals, departments and
            organisations can be critical and Hillsborough is no exception. The early
            stages of Hillsborough are complicated by the activation of Operation
            Support and the move from that into the major incident plan as has
            previously been discussed. Consequently it is necessary to compare both
            the order and the plan in tandem during this stage to discover any delays.

            Before doing this it should be explained that because of the size of the
            match being held, many of the Senior Officers with roles in a disaster were
            already on duty and much of the equipment necessary was already in use.
            Also, t^at although the order and the plans are written in a particular
            8 equence| there is no requirement for the actions to be completed in strict
            sequence and common sense and the ability to complete must be taken into
            consideration together with the fact that some actions may not be relevant
            in the circumstances prevailing.

            That said, examination of those actions that were completed and the time
            this was achieved reveals that although the disaster started to become
            apparent at or shortly after 3 pm Ambulance control was not requested to
            provide ambulances to the scene until 3.10 pm and the Fire Service were not
            requested to attend until 3.23 pm. As has previously been mentioned this
            delay could be significant particularly when neither was prefixed by the
            agreed code word CATASTROPHE.




        12 JAN   ’ 90   15:07                                        0742   731483   PAGE. 0 0 8
^URNfVflL HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL N o .0742-731483                 12 Jan 90 14:51 No .002 P .09



                                                8   .

        Other delays which may also be considered relevant are in regard to the
        authorisation and implementation of Operation Support and sending the 'E*
        priority message at 3.10 pm, starting to set up the Casualty Bureau at 3.23
        pm, the obtaining of a major incident box at 3.30 pm and the establishing
        of a Casualty Clearing area at 4.05 pm. These actions with the exception
        of the first, all being appropriate under the major incident plan.

        OTHER NON-EMERGENCY AGENCIES
        Towards the rear of the major incident plan there is a list of other
        services and organisations who may be of assistance in the event of a
        disaster. This list is in the form of an aid-memoii^and includes
        organisations such as the WRVS, Red Cross, and St Johns Ambulance Brigade
       who were all mobilised. It also includes the District Council - Emergency
       Planning Officer and three local voluntary groups, REACT, RAYNET and BECON
       who have medical, rescue and communication facilities and training.
       ^Enquiries show that while the local authority were informed and Social
        Services and some other department were involved the Emergency Planning
       Officer was not. The Police, Social Services and Sheffield Wednesday
       Football Club providing much of the accommodation and other facilities
        required to deal with the large number of relatives of the dead and
        injured.

        Dealing with the three other organisations, REACT, RAYNET and BECON it
        appears that on the day of the Hillsborough disaster BECON were near to the
        scene and could have been deployed to assist the emergency services if
        requested. This is the subject of correspondence between BECON
        representatives and South Yorkshire Police. Given there is no mandatory
        requirement to call these organisations within the disaster plan it is a
        matter of operational judgement whether or not to call the organisations
        and further comment is unnecessary.


        ANACAPA

       ANACAPA Charts - Chart 4 on Communications, Chart 5 on the Extended
       Incident Log, Chart 6 on Operation Support and Chart 7 on the Major
       Incident Plan have been prepared and these should be read in conjunction
       with this paper.


        COHESION BETWEEN POLICE. FIRE. AMBULANCE AND LOCAL AUTHORITY EMERGENCY
        PCANNING PROCEDURES.                                                 ”


       Method

        The following documents are relevant!

        (1)    South Yorkshire County Fire Service - Service Order Operational
                Procedures Part 16 - Scheme for Peacetime Major Disasters.

        (2)    South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service - Major Incident Plan.

        (3)    City of Sheffield - Scheme for Major Peacetime Emergencies.




    12 JAN    ’ 90   15:10                                       0742   731483   PAGE. 0 0 9
/TORNfVflL HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL N o .0742-731483                       12 Jan 90 14:51 No .002 P .10



                                                      9.


                Broadly speaking each of the plans work within the same or similar
                definitions of a major disaster, although the ambulance service definition
                i® worded differently to that of the other services/agency. The
                contentious areas are in regard to the activation of the plans, liaison and
                rendezvous points and consequently they will be dealt with under those
                headings.

                Activation

                The Police plan indicates that on receipt of information to the effect a
                disaster may have occurred, the Force Control Room will alert the other
                emergency services that they are implementing the Major Incident Plan and
                states the recognised code word between the services is 'CATASTROPHE.' The
                Fire Service plan confirms this and takes it further by actually listing
                the Services involved as Police, Fire, Health (Ambulance/Hospital Services
                presumably) and Local Authority. In the Ambulance and Local Authority
                 'lan8 there is no mention of the use of the code word CATASTROPHE prefixing
                 he initial alert. The effect of this is that while the Fire Service would
                have recognised the code word had it been used, and responded to it, the
       ,        ambulance and Local Authority would have had no clear idea what was taking
                place. The code word would mean nothing.
    n/ > Fi     On receipt of a CATASTROPHE code call the Fire Service immediately despatch
^      ^        I® pumping appliances, 2 emergency tenders and a control unit to the
                 scene. The Fire Service plan also states the other Services will despatch
                 a pre-determined attendance to the incident. . Neither the Ambulance or
                 Local Authority plans have a first response and it appears they mobilise
                whatever is available.

                Liaison

                The Police plan indicates that they have the key po£e in control and
                co-ordination of the scene of a disaster. The Site Commander liaising with
                officers from the other services/agency. The Fire Service plan again
                complements this stipulating that each of the Services, Fire, Ambulance and
                Local Authority will detail one of its officers to act as liaison officer
                with the Senior Police Officer present. While the Ambulance Service plan
                nominates the Incident Officer and the Local Authority plan the Emergency
                Liaison Officer to liaise with the other Services there is no acceptance of
                the prime role of the Police on site.

                To some extent this reflects what took place at Hillsborough, the Senior
^ 3             Fire Officer attended the incident post to try to establish liaison with
                the Site Commander and was unable to do so. There is no evidence of any
                approach by the Senior Ambulance officer - Incident Officer and the Local
                Authority Emergency Liaison Officer, was not it appears involved, because
                he was not warned by the Police. On top of all this the Police Force
                Control Room omitted to request that a Senior Officer from each of the
                Serviced att^ncTTng 'Ehe scene liase with the Site Commander.

                Rendezvous Points

                In the Police plan the only reference to rendezvous points is at the front
                under the heading 'Site Control and Security.* This gives the instruction
                to arrange rendezvous points for essential personnel and security of all
                property. The last section of the plan deals with Site Instruction Cards -
                Card 'A' - refers to Parking Arrangements and talks about the proper
                marshalling and disposal of all vehicles not actively involved indicating
                this will be given immediate attention when the Police first arrive at the
                scene.



           12   JAN   ’ 90   15:12                                      0742   731483   PAGE.010
r?                                 -----------------------

■TURNIUflL HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL No .0742-731483                       12 Jan 90 14=51 No .002 P . 11




                                                        10   .
               The card goes on to explain that the aim is to establish separate parking
               areas for Police, Fire and Ambulance vehicles. Each parking area should be
               located preferably off the road but on the approach road to the Site and
               convenient for personnel to park their vehicles and report to the Police
               Incident Post, Fire or Ambulance Control point before entering the Site.
               Each area must be sufficiently large to enable vehicles to turn around.
               Ambulances will also park prior to the driver being summoned to the
               Ambulance loading area to receive casualties and obviously it is more
               important that the ambulance loading area should be more conveniently
               located than the police parking area. Parking will need to be supervised
               to ensure that available space is sensibly utilised and it may be
               practicable for ignition keys to be left with the vehicles or with the
               member of the service in charge of the area.

                No provision for rendezvous points is made in the Fire Service plans. They


        •      do however acknowledge the Police have a responsibility on site to control
               and co-ordinate aspects relating to the disaster so as to enable emergency
               services and other bodies to discharge their responsibilities. It goes on
               to say that each of the Services will set up their own control points from
               where they will operate, and all reinforcements will report to their own
               control immediately on arrival. These control points should be set up as
               close to each other as operational requirements will permit.

               Dealing with the Ambulance Service there is no clear mention of the
               rendezvous point in the actual plan. There is a separate action planfor a
               major disaster at each of the large football club grounds in the South
               Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service area which includes what they
               describe as a parking point. This is located at Herries Road Bus Depot
               which is off Penpfistone Road, almost immediately across the road from the
               Hillsborough Stadium.

               There is nothing even remotely referring to a rendezvous point in the Local
               Authority plan.

               In the Police plan there is confusion between the function(s) of a
               rendezvous point and an incident post. This is not helped by the
               instruction card on parking arrangements which seems in part at least, to
               be describing a rendezvous point. The Fire Service plan izhleh talks about
               a Control Point but describes some of the functions of a rendezvous point
               further adds to this confusion and this is not assisted by the Ambulance
               Service in effect, doing their own thing. The local authority unaware of
               the function of a rendezvous point.                               ?
                                                                              Or        V'e
               COMMENT

              The Fire Service plan was last reviewed in November 1976, the Local
              Authority Plan in October 1987 and the Police plan in January 1988.  The
              Ambulance Service plan in force at the time of Hillsborough is dated
              February 1985, but was under review at the time of the disaster (2nd draft)
              according to other papers in the file.

              At the time of this report Senior officers from the Services/Agency
              concerned have not been interviewed concerning the method of review and in
              particular the extent of the liaison that takes place prior to publication
     L.3"T.




              of plans. This is an area that now needs to be further explored in South
              Yorkshire and it has clear implications for the future in other
              forces/services and agencies involved in the area of emergency planning.




      12      JAN   ’ 90   15:15                                       0742   731483   PAGE. 0 1 1
    ?URNIVflL HOUSE SHEFFIE TEL N o .0742-731483                  12 Jan 90 14=51 N o . 002 P . 12



                                                     11 .


              It should be noted that in considering the tohesiCn in planning between
              these services/agency and in order to compare like with like, the Police
              Order Operation Support has not been taken into consideration.
              CONCLUSION

              Examination of the major   disaster plans for each of the four
              services/agency involved   in the Hillsborough disaster confirms that there
     s jy X      *      of cohesion in   the current planning arrangements and this needs
                 ^e urgently addressed   if it has not already been recognised and dealt
              with by those concerned.




\

\




         12 JAN   ’ 90   15:16                                        0742   731493   PAGE.012
