INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt H on Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370
Alan May Esq                                 Your Ref: AM/LS
Head of Membership Services
The Professional Golfers' Association
Apollo House
The Belfry
Sutton Coldfield
West Midlands B76 9PT
                                                 November 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

I am writing on Lord Justice Taylor's behalf to thank you for
your letter of 22 November with a detailed report upon the
arrangements for the Ryder Cup this year.  I know that Lord
Justice Taylor and his Assessors will find this most helpful.
Thank you for taking the trouble to produce such a detailed
report.

With kind regards.




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                                                                    PGA
                                      The Professional Golfers’ Association
      National Headquarters, Apollo House, The Belfry, Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands B76 9PT
                Telephone 0675 70333 Telex 338481 (PGA G) Fax No. 0675 70674



        AM/LS


        22nd November, 1989




        Mr. R. M. Whalley,
        Secretary,
        Inquiry Into The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
        50 Queen Anne's Gate,
        London.
        SV1H 9AT




            Dear Mr. Whalley,

            I refer to Lord Justice Taylor's visit during The Ryder Cup and at
            last I am able to provide details which I hope will be of interest
            to you.

            Match Days 22nd, 23rd, 24th September, 1989

            Attendance

            27,000 visitors each day, plus 4,000 staff/officials (not resident).
        ,Plus 400 Hotel residents (non travelling).

            Gates opened to the public at 6.00 am daily although off site
            car parks were open at all times and access to the complex during
            the night was restricted by the presence of security officers.

            Spectator Facilities

            The number of visitors per day was restricted by making access by
            ticket only. This was done for two especial reasons:

                   1.         To ensure visitors were able to move with reasonable
                              freedom and to be able to observe play; and

                   2.         From a safety point of view having regards to the fact
                              that on Hays l and 2 there are only four matches on the
                              course at any one time and on day 3, twelve single matches.

             On days 1 and 2 as there is an interval of 15 minutes between
             starting times it follows that during the first hour spectators




                                                                                                                              Continued . . .


Patron: Her Majesty The Queen                             President: Rt. Hon. Earl of Derby M.C.                        Executive Director: John Lindsey
-ri    r\    / ___ : ____ i      1a       I   :m :u < 4    r ' A m n a n t j IS m itaiH   K w   m   l o p a n t a a   Q a n ie t a r a H in tT nn lanH n ft 1ftA11A1
C ontinued 12.




            are confined to one specific area of the course.

            Grandstand seating for 3,000 was provided and access on match
            days by pre—purchased tickets.

             Practice Days

             Wednesday, 20th September, 1989

             Approximately 5,000 visitors plus all officials and staff as
             previously reported.

             Thursday, 21st September, 1989

             Approximately 15,000 spectators. The increase over the previous
             day being that hospitality facilities were available.

             Vehicles

             Approximately 10,000 vehicles per day on match days were parked
             with pro-rata reduction on the two practice days. The majority
             of parking was off site and the parks so situated that with long
             distant signing together with pre-attendance literature an even
             flow of traffic from all directions was ensured.

             Forward planning with the Police, Department of Transport and
             Automobile Association, proved very well worthwhile resulting in
             no serious traffic delays.

             One lesson learned is that with good weather and after match
             attractions, ie: exhibition tent and golf displays, resulted
             in a large number of visitors staying on site until dark. This
             caused problems in vehicle location on the car parks as only
             the main entrances were subject of portable lighting.

              Pedestrian Access/Egress

              With the main car parking off site, visitors had to cross two
              heavily trafficked Class 'A' roads and having regards to the
              safety factor footbridges were constructed over each of the two
              roads to ensure maximum safety. Although very expensive it was
              considered a worthwhile exercise and, should a similar event
              which is PGA controlled again be staged at The Belfry, similar
              type bridges will be used but with wider walkways than those on
              this occasion as there were, at peak access times, queues from
              the main car parks up to 100 yards in length. I am happy to
              report, however, that the queues were very orderly and did not
              need control in any form. The Police did on several occasions,
              however, to speed the access into the complex, halt the traffic
              and marshall the queuing spectators across the road without using
              the bridge. Similarly, after play finished there was a short
              period when departing spectators were again marshalled across
              the road without using the foot bridges.




                                                                                             Continued .

     Patron: Her Majesty The Queen                President: Rt. Hon. Earl of Derby M.C.    Executive Director: John Lindsey
     The Professional Golfers’ Association Limited. Company limited by guarantee.          Registered in England, no. 1861161
C ontin ued /3




                Emergency Services

                Police Officers present were as per the recommendations of the
                Chief Constable and Ambulance and Para-Medical personnel were
                on site throughout each of the days and in such numbers as
                recommended by the appropriate Authority.

                Whilst the whole of the complex boundary was surrounded by a
                portable fence there were sufficient access and egress points
                to allow immediate evacuation if necessary. There was no point
                anywhere on the complex where, if an emergency arose, spectators
                could not leave in any direction.

                Hospitality Areas

                There were three purpose built hospitality areas plus a tented
                village and tented exhibition area all of which were subject to
                inspection and approval by the Health & Safety at Work Authorities.

                On a personal note can I say that following thirty years Police
                service and involvement in major events of all types that the event
                in question never gave me the slightest cause for concern in any
                aspect where crowd control and safety was involved.

                    Should you require any further information please do not hesitate
                    to contact me.


                    Yours sincerely
                             /




                    ALAN MAY
                    .HEAD
                    jiE  of 1
                         OF
                        AD  MEMBERSHIP SERVICES




     Patron: Her Majesty The Queen                     President: Rt. Hon. Earl of Derby M.C.       Executive Director: John Lindsey
     ti   i-»   i      •     i   /*>_   ii   » a   i    P A m M A n x    K u   ni is ra n ta p   f i o n i c t o r o H in C n n l a n H   nr*
