                                             c: Mr Boys Smith

Mr Goddard


TAYLOR INQUIRY: WRITTEN EVIDENCE FROM ACPO AND HOME OFFICE
RESPONSE


You may wish to see the attached evidence to Lord Justice Taylor
from the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO). The
evidence was submitted on 29 July and copied to me at the same
time by Mr Anderton.


2. The report, from our point of view, comprises four main
sections: hooliganism and counter-measures (paragraphs 5-28);
stewarding, training and combined operations with the police
(paragraphs 71-85); a range of smaller topics (other paragraphs
before 88); and conclusions (paragraphs 88 to 93).

3. The most positive points are that ACPO conclude the main
areas for change are in the training of police commanders, the
management of crowds, and a more satisfactory understanding of
who is in charge, bringing together the theory and practice of
shared control between the police and stewards. These points
are much in line with my note of 12 June. ACPO are
also strongly supportive of a national inspectorate to ensure
best practice on all matters of ground safety, including policing
(paragraph 93).


4. Less satisfactory, to my mind, is the prominence given to
hooliganism. Without any overview of the evidence as a whole,
ACPO plunge into a long exposition of the evils of hooliganism
which rather leaves the reader wondering whether the police have
been too preoccupied with that to consider other parts of the
problem. Paragraph 17,, still expanding on hooliganism, includes
the sentences:


    "Public disorder is the occurrence most likely to generate
    frantic crowd movement. Herein lies an awesome truth.-
    Where large crowds are concerned the sheer irrational
     momentum of sudden movement can never be wholly guarded
     against..."


5. This seems almost willfully to disregard the Hillsborough
tragedy in which hooliganism may have played a part but the
public perception is of serious failures by the police (and
stewards) to manage crowds properly. Paragraph 88 actually
concedes that "... police concern with hooliganism sometimes
narrows vision on safety matters".


6. To give the police their due, hooliganism is a serious
problem, perhaps underestimatedinthepast, and full counter­
measures do conflict with other safety interests (eg over
perimeter fencing). Recent work on intelligence, including
skilled and daring undercover work by Greater Manchester and
others has revealed how much violence at football matches can be
deliberate and planned: police officers without the right
experience and insight can easily mistake orchestrated violence
for spontaneous trouble and be badly caught off guard. My
anxieties are that the ACPO report will appear to be excessively
preoccupied with hooliganism; that in part not enough attention
has been given to other issues? and that at worst the evidence
might even be read as unpersuasive that hooliganism does present
a genuine and serious problem.


7. Annex F, referred to at paragraph 86, relates to the Football
Spectators Bill and comprises Mr Anderton's letter of 27 February
to Mr Angel, and his letter of 15 May to you which looks more
favourably at the prospect of the police carrying out some
reporting agency functions. ACPO^wjill not have (formally) seen
Lord Ferrers' letter of 13 June/which answers many of their
concerns expressed in the 27 February letter and at
Lord Ferrers' meeting with Lord Harris and ACPO on 22 March.
Would you be content if in thanking Mr Anderton for the evidence
I copied to him and Mr Whalley Lord Ferrers' letter of 13 June?


8. Since this is probably the last week we share in the office
before the interim Taylor report is published we ought to
consider (as far as we can) what sort of reply is appropriate. I
assume the response would be quite brief and would rely on a
certain amount of further consideration, consultation, etc.
Depending on quite how the report is worded (and, indeed,
irrespective of the report) I see a need to establish a new
initiative with the police to identify what areas of work need a
fresh look, fresh ideas, and pulling together as good practice.
Provided the framework fits, the best opportunity might be a
seminar to follow-up the publication of the interim report: say 2
days, at Bramshill. It should include representation from the
ACPO sub-committee and selected match commanders from large
grounds, and I would consider John Dickson (ACC, Strathclyde) a
vital participant. Itseems to me this offers both a good way
forward in substance and, in demonstrating action, in
presentational terms.


9. On these and any other points it is important, too, to agree
in advance with Mr Turney the style of the response: I am ,,
conscious of the differences of approach to our evidence that
only became apparent at the last minute - for example that on
9 June in Manchester I was negotiating with ACPO a paragraph of
•commentary1 on the police/steward relationship, on lines agreed
in Police Department, while Fire and Emergency Department were
arguing (successfully) for its deletion. Particularly as you and
Mr Boys Smith will be out of the office while I am drafting our
part of the response, we should try to ensure a clearer
understanding this time.




                                                 F J SMITH
                                                 F8 Division
3 July 1989
