From:         R J Clifford                         cc      Ms   Wheldon, LAB
              ABCU                                         Mr   Middleton, LAB
              Room 970 QAG                                 Mr   Evans, ABCU
              273 3560                                     Mr   Bradley, Pr Off
                                                           Mr   Pyne, OPPU ^
               5 February 1998                             Ms   Clifford, CD

Mr Pugh

HILLSBOROUGH

Your note of 3 February copied to Rick Evans asked for a contribution to your submission
on the question of the recommendations of the report of the Home Office Working Group
on disasters and inquests.

2.      I suggest the following (inserted at paragraph 20):

        "The report’s recommendations have not formally been adopted by Ministers. This
        awaits consideration of comments from those to whom the report was made
        available on publication. Implementation of the recommendations, however, requires
        primary legislation and the main obstacle to progress has been lack of Parliamentary
        time and a suitable legislative vehicle.

        Some coroners are likely to be concerned that the medical cause of death may not
        be adequately dealt with in a judicial inquiry. Certain civil litigation lawyers may
        prefer to see a ’one-stop shop’ judicial forum for resolving all the medico-legal
        issues arising from fatal disasters. But there would seem to be no reason why you
        should not agree in principle with the points which Lord Justice Stuart Smith
        makes."

3.     I think it would be helpful for the Lord Chancellor to be consulted on this issue, if
only by means of copying him into the proposed correspondence with the Attorney General.
I have alerted LCD officials to this and they agree. I suggest that an additional paragraph
might be inserted before the antepenultimate paragraph of the draft letter, as follows:

        "Finally, one of the observations made by Lord Justice Stuart Smith is that it is
        unsatisfactory to have an inquest where there has already been an inquiry, chaired
        by a judge, into a major disaster. This issue was in fact considered by a Home
        Office Working Group on disasters and inquests, whose report was published last
        March. This recommended that, where a major disaster has occurred, and the Lord
        Chancellor is able to certify that a judicial enquiry into the disaster will also
        constitute sufficient investigation into the deaths, the role of the coroner should be
        limited by securing the adjournment of the inquest and not requiring its resumption
        except in the most exceptional circumstances.

        Although farther comments on the report are awaited, in responding to Lord Justice
        Stuart Smith’s report I propose, subject to the views of the Lord Chancellor, to
        endorse the recommendations in principle. In the absence of a suitable legislative
        opportunity, there are no early prospects of implementing the recommendations
(which require primary legislation), but I think it will be important to flag up a
willingness to remove one of the causes of delay and difficulties for the families of
disaster victims. I am sending a copy of this letter to the Lord Chancellor
accordingly."

Please let me know whether additional material will be required on this point.




                                            R J CLIFFORD
