                                   ADJOURNMENT DEBATE
                                      FRIDAY, 8 MAY 1998
                                        HILLSBOROUGH


Madam Speaker.


The disaster at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 was one of the most appalling events
this country has experienced since the war.


2.         Ninety-six people were killed - many of them children. The tragedy touched the
nation not least by its association with football, our national game. And by the fact that the
disaster unfolded via television before the eyes of the world.


3.          There is another reason why that day has been such a trauma for the relatives and
friends of those killed or injured, and for the City of Liverpool. The deaths could not be
explained by some Act of God, by some event of nature so unforeseen as to be beyond the
culpability of any human being. Instead, from the second that the Leppings Lane gate was
opened, everyone knew that this was a disaster whose root was entirely human, caused by the
error, incompetence, complacency, or worse, of people entrusted to secure the safety of those
who attend football matches.


4.         The Home Secretary of the day, Douglas Hurd, was therefore entirely right to establish
just two days’ later by a full inquiry into the disaster, under one of the most senior and
respected judges available, Lord Taylor of Gosforth.


5.         Lord Taylor’s inquiry took oral evidence from 174 witnesses at public hearings during
May and June 1989.          It considered many other statements and over 70 hours of video
evidence. In his interim report published in August 1989, Lord Taylor found that the disaster
had a number of causes. He did not attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in
paragraph 278 he concluded that “The main cause of the disaster was the failure of police
control”.


The Inquests


Sp eech:H ills8m y
6.     Inquests were held by the Coroner for South Yorkshire to determine the statutory
questions as to who each of the deceased was, and when and how he or she died. In March
1991, after hearing the evidence of around 200 witnesses, the inquest jury returned verdicts of
accidental death in respect of all the victims.


The criminal and disciplinary investigation


7.     There was also an investigation, conducted by West Midlands Police and supervised
by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for criminal
or disciplinary proceedings.


8.     The Director of Public Prosecutions considered the West Midlands report and took
advice from Queen’s Counsel. The DPP’s decision was that no-one should face prosecution
as a result of the events that day. The Police Complaints Authority, though, decided that
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary
charges of neglect of duty. In November 1990, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retired
from the force on the grounds of ill health before disciplinary proceedings could be
completed.    Under police regulations, a discipline hearing cannot proceed when a police
officer retires. The Police Complaints Authority subsequently decided to withdraw the charge
against Superintendent Murray because they considered that it would have been unfair to
pursue what in effect was a joint charge, in the absence of the more senior officer.


9.      Lord Taylor’s inquiry and report was as thorough and impartial as one would expect
of such a great judicial figure. His report has led to lasting improvements in the safety of
football grounds, in crowd behaviour and control.


10.     But there has been sustained criticism of both the coroners inquests, and above all of a
police discipline system so defective that no one was brought to book.


11.     Concern that the inquests had not properly been conducted led six of the bereaved
families to seek a judicial review of the inquests. Their application was heard in 1993. The
Divisional Court investigated the matter with great thoroughness, and looked in particular at
the 3.15 pm cut-off point, but it decided there were no grounds for overturning the 1990
inquest’s verdicts


12.    However, for many of the families, their sense of grievance only increased with the
passage of time, and they decided that more should be done to get at the truth as they saw it of
what had happened. With the full co-operation of the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
the author, Jimmy McGovern, decided to prepare a drama-documentary for Granada
Television.      Entitled simply “Hillsborough” the two hour programme broadcast on 5
December 1996 presented a powerful picture of the tragedy. It suggested that there was fresh
evidence which had not previously been considered which called into question the verdicts of
the inquests, and other decisions.


Madam Speaker,


13.     I declare an interest. For two years before I entered this House in 1979 I worked on
the staff of Granada’s World-In-Action. Some of the people I knew then, like Ian McBride,
helped put “Hillsborough” together. I knew and know them to be journalists of great tenacity
and integrity.


14.    Following the programme, my Hon Friend for Liverpool Walton (Peter Kilfoyle)
secured an adjournment debate on 17 December 1996. I attended that debate, and listened
with care to what my predecessor, the Rt Hon Gentleman for Folkestone and Hythe, said on
whether any inquiry should be re-opened.


15.    Within days of coming into office I began a thorough examination within Government
as to whether there should be any re-opening of this matter.


16.    I thought that there was, on the face of it, sufficient to warrant a further investigation;
but since there had been a very thorough inquiry by Lord Taylor, very lengthy inquests, and
the West Midlands Police inquiry, I decided that what in the first instance was needed was a
judicial scrutiny of the new claims to determine whether these formal inquiries themselves
should be re-opened.
17.    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal was
eminently qualified to conduct such an independent and thorough scrutiny of the evidence.
The terms of reference which I gave him were very wide and enabled him to establish
conclusively whether any material evidence had been overlooked and to recommend
appropriate action. His terms of reference were:


       “To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
       Stadium on 15 April 1989; which was not available:


       (a)       to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


       (b)       to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the
                 purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or


       (c)       to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
                 disciplinary matters;


       and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of
       such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
       Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their
       attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
       their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which should
       be taken in the public interest.”


18.    I appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on 30 June 1997. I published his report on
18 February 1998. I want to place on record, again, my thanks to him for the thoroughness,
and impartiality, with which he conducted the scrutiny.


19.    Anyone who has read the report through will, I believe, be bound to come to the same
conclusions as did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, namely that a re-opening of the inquiries would
serve no purpose whatsoever.


20.    Let me explain why that has to be so.
21.    There is, first, the overriding issue of who was to blame for the disaster.


22.    If blame had not so far been allocated there would, unquestionably be very good
grounds for further inquiry.


23.    But we have known since Lord Taylor’s report that Sheffield City Council, Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club and principally the South Yorkshire police were to blame.


24.    And far from resiling from this judgement - or taking part in a “whitewash”, as some
have ludicrously charged, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith repeated this conclusion in the most
strident of terms.     Indeed (paragraph 100 p. 87) he referred to Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield as having uttered a “disgraceful lie” about Gate C being opened by fans, and he
quoted with approval Lord Taylor’s “stinging rebuke” of South Yorkshire police for failing
to concede that they were in any respect at fault.


25.    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also unearthed the fact that some of the original statements
made by individual police officers had been edited by solicitors acting for South Yorkshire
police. At appendix 6 he gives one example. He considered whether these were however
covered by legal professional privilege, and so could not be made public. He concluded that
such privilege did not apply. In consequence, I have made every such statement available to
the Hillsborough Family Support Group, and placed copies in the Library of the House.


26.    The new claims put before Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by the television programme and
the Hillsborough Family Support Group fell principally into two areas - video evidence, and
that relating to the 3.15 pm cut-off point for the inquest.


27.    Let me deal with these in turn.


28.    First, there is the question of the missing video tapes. Two tapes were stolen. Their
theft - still unsolved - has understandably heightened concerns about a “cover-up”, which
were compounded by the extra-ordinary and pervasive denial of responsibility by South
Yorkshire police at the time. But the crucial thing about these tapes is that they contained no
material evidence not otherwise available. One was entirely blank as the camera concerned
had been pointing at a wall. The other showed turnstiles 9-16 at the Leppings Lane end, next
to turnstiles A-G, which themselves were monitored by police CCTV camera 1.              What
happened on these turnstiles was recorded on both the police tape (TB2) and tape RJH2,
which consists of camera output viewed in the club control room.


29.    Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group made five submissions in
relations to video evidence on behalf of the Group, listed at paragraph 33 on p. 20.


       (i)       That the police blamed their failure to see the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4
                  of the Leppings Lane end on camera 5 being defective when in fact it was
                  not.


       (ii)       That the evidence of the video tapes taken from camera 5 was deliberately
                  suppressed and concealed.


       (iii)      That the coroner deliberately failed properly to pursue the question of the
                  “missing video evidence”.


       (iv)       That police officers gave deliberately false evidence that camera 5 was not
                  working correctly.


       (v)        That evidence from Mr Roger Houldsworth, a CCTV technician in the club
                  control room, was suppressed.         Mr Houldsworth, who featured so
                  prominently in the Granada Television programme, claimed that he could
                  see from monitoring police cameras that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded
                  and that a dangerous situation was likely to arise because of the influx of
                  fans through Gate C.


30.    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith goes through each of the submissions with great care.


31.    He describes submission 1 - as “quite untenable” (paragraph 61) as it was clear that
the police could see what was happening with their own eyes. He describes submission 2 - as


                                               6
“completely unfounded” (paragraph 77) as the vital tapes, TB1 and TB2, were at all times,
together with the schedule of their contents, available to be seen by the legal representatives
of the families. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith describes submission 3 - “unfounded” (paragraph
79) as there never was any missing footage from the relevant tapes; the two missing club
tapes are not relevant to the issue; and the coroner dealt perfectly properly with the jury’s
request to see the camera of footage of the terraces. He describes submission 4 - as “evidence
wholly insufficient to warrant consideration of criminal proceedings against any police
officers” (paragraph 93) - noting that even if the extent of any defect in what camera 5 was
showing was exaggerated by the police; it was of no consequence, and Lord Taylor took no
notice of it in his considerations.


32.    As to submission 5, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith emphasises that Mr Houldsworth’s
existence, and his evidence, were known both to the Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner, and
that his evidence, even if correct, would not have had any effect on the previous proceedings.


33.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also deals with the credibility of Mr Houldsworth. He said
that he was “unable to accept that his recollection of events now is accurate”, and adds that
“the importance of his evidence has been exaggerated out of all proportion”.


Madam Speaker,


34.    The second area of new claims related to the inquests.


Cut-off point


35.    At the start of the main inquest, the coroner ruled that he would cut-off the inquiry at
3.15 pm, the time by which he considered that all those who died had received the injuries
which caused their deaths. This cut-off point has long been a matter of controversy to the
families.


36.    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found no grounds to conclude that the conduct of the
inquests was flawed. He says that the cut-off point did not limit the inquiry undertaken by the
inquest and it was never suggested by the coroner that all those who died did so before
3.15 pm. The inquest jury heard evidence about those who died after arrival at hospital and
of those who were treated and recovered. It was only in relation to how and by what means
the deceased came to their deaths that the cut-off time was imposed. Evidence that some
people died after 3.15 pm would not, therefore, effect the outcome of the inquest.


37.     Other allegations related to the rescue operation, and to alleged improper interference
with witnesses. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith noted that Lord Taylor had inquired into the rescue
operation and criticised the slow response of the police. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found no
evidence of want of care by the emergency or medical services and, in his view, no purpose
would be served by any further inquiry into this aspect of the disaster.


38.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith investigated in some depth allegations that certain witnesses
were pressurised by the West Midlands police to change the evidence which they wished to
give.   He concludes that there was no improper attempt to affect their evidence.         As I
indicated earlier, he also examined carefully the statements which the South Yorkshire police
obtained from their own officers, some of which were amended on the advice of force
solicitors.   He is satisfied that the Taylor inquiry and the inquest were not in any way
inhibited or impeded by what took place. In a very few cases referred to in appendix 7 of the
report, what was excluded was either factual or comment in which factual matters were
implicit and he says that “it would have been preferable for those matters not to have been
excluded”.


39.     Against this background, the question is what a further opening of full inquiries, or
inquests, or disciplinary procedures could achieve.


40.     A re-opening of Lord Taylor’s inquiry would serve no purpose, and since I published
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report on 18 February I have heard no convincing argument
against that view. There was no cover-up either by Lord Taylor or by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith as we know already who was principally to blame - the police - and thankfully Lord
Taylor’s recommendations about the safety of soccer grounds have already been
implemented.
41.    When I talk to the bereaved families much of their anger continues however to focus
on the inquests, and on the police disciplinary procedures.


42.    So far as the inquests are concerned, there was no evidence before Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith which could result in an application by the Attorney General to set aside the inquest
verdicts, not least since the conduct of the inquests was so thoroughly examined by the
Divisional Court in 1993.


43.    But I accept, as I believe does the whole House, that inquests of this kind turn the
screw on bereaved families without adding understanding on questions of culpability.


44.    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report underlined the need to make improvements to the
inquest system. In the case of Hillsborough, it was clearly unsatisfactory that the families
suffered additional distress as a result of the inquest proceedings and the jury’s verdicts of
accidental death when the causes of the disaster had already been established by the Taylor
inquiry and the DPP had announced that there would not be any prosecutions.


45.     I have made clear that the inquest system, in its present form, is unsuitable for dealing
with disasters such as Hillsborough. The Home Office Working Group on Disasters and
Inquests, which reported in March 1997, recommended that the role of the inquest should be
limited where a public inquiry has already been held.


46.    A comprehensive public inquiry which also addressed the questions before an inquest
would relieve the coroner of the need to resume the formal inquest.                The changes
recommended by the Home Office Working Party point the right way forward and the
Government will look for a suitable legislative opportunity to amend the Coroner’s Act 1988.


47.    It has often been asked of me, if the police were to blame, why has no police officer
been brought to book? The only answer, very far from satisfactory, is that police disciplinary
procedures have been so defective that individual senior police officers can utter “disgraceful
lies” and act with contemptible incompetence without penalty.
48.    As I said in my statement to the House on 18 February, I fully understand the public
disquiet that those who have been criticised by the inquiries into this disaster have not been
prosecuted or disciplined in respect of their actions. It is not possible, however, to turn the
clock back and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is satisfied that there is no new evidence which he
considered which should be put before the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police
Complaints Authority. I firmly believe, though, that there is a compelling case in the light of
Hillsborough and other cases for reform of the police disciplinary system.


49.    In January the Home Affairs Committee published its report into police disciplinary
and complaints procedures. The report recommended changes in a number of key areas and I
announced to the House in March that I was taking steps to implement most of its
recommendations.


50.    I have decided that the standard of proof in discipline cases should be changed from
the criminal to the civil standard and that it should be possible for officers to face both
criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. I have also accepted the HAC's
recommendation that we should implement a system of 'fast track' dismissal for use in the
most serious cases.


51.    In the light of the Hillsborough disaster, I have been particularly concerned to address
the serious defect in the present practice which allows a police officer to retire on medical
grounds before disciplinary hearings can be completed. This was quite rightly an issue of the
greatest frustration to the families of the Hillsborough victims.


52.    The procedures will be strengthened so that where accused officers claim they are
unable, through ill health, to appear at disciplinary hearings, matters can be decided in their
absence, with appropriate safeguards.      I am also concerned that the existing regulations
should be rigorously applied so that any outstanding disciplinary matters have to be
completed before any application for early retirement can be considered.


53.    These, and other changes will come into force in April 1999.


Conclusion
Madam Speaker,


54.    Ninety-six people lost their lives as a result of the disaster at Hillsborough on 15 April
1989. The lives of many others were and continue to be profoundly affected by the events
that day. None of us can begin to understand the anguish felt by the families who lost their
loved ones in such tragic circumstances, but we have shared their determination to establish,
to the fullest extent possible, how and why their relatives died. The causes of the disaster
were clearly identified by Lord Taylor in his 1989 report. It was right to consider whether
there was any subsequent information which cast doubt on earlier decisions but I am satisfied
that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has, after rigorous examination, reached the correct
conclusions.


55.    I have taken a very close personal interest in this tragedy from the start. I believe I
was right to establish the scrutiny. It is also right to accept its conclusions. I am asked to
establish yet another inquiry but it is above all out of concern and compassion for the families
that I am unable to do so. To do this would simply be to raise expectations that there lies
evidence not yet uncovered or actions not yet taken which could comfort them for their loss.




                                               11
