      casualty was unloaded and we worked on him all the time,

       giving oxygen and cardiac massage.     The patient was taken

       into the hospital and I tidied up the ambulance and then our

      trolley was brought back.   We left one of the policemen at

      the hospital and returned to the ground with the two

      doctors/ambulance men and the other policeman.        We received

      a police escort to the Penistone Road end.

15.   We joined a queue of ambulances in Penistone Road.       Mr EASON

      was organising this.    Someone took both of our trolleys and

      I followed them in.    There was no point in me waiting with

      the ambulance if I could be doing something useful inside

      the ground.

16.   I saw an extended trained ambulance man struggling with seme

      equipment that he was carrying.    He was going towards the

      gym and I carried seme of   the equipment for him.     As I went

      towards the gymnasium    the policeman whohad come back on our

      ambulance came up to me and said that splints were needed

      for another patient who was in the first aid room under the

      north stand.   I gave the items I was carrying to a policeman

      by the gym entrance and told him to take this equipment in.

      I then went to the first aid room where same people were

      loading a youth of about 19 years onto a trolley - this was

      the casualty that the policeman had been referring to.       As

      they had obtained a trolley they clearly did not need

      splints.   I ran back up to find our vehicle.       It had moved

      along the queue and I    did not see it at first.    There was an

      ambulance in the yard    and the patient who I had just seen

      was being loaded into that ambulance by the policeman and

      ambulanceman                          did not have a partner
      with him and asked if I would go with him to Northern

      General because someone had to go in the back with the

      patient.    I said that I would and the policeman and I got

       into the back of the ambulance.     I heard      radio to say

      that he was leaving the ground and going to the Royal

      Hallamshire Hospital.   The patient appeared to have a

      possible fractured pelvis and internal injuries.        I

      administered Entonox which calmed him down after a while.

17.   We vrere given a police escort to the fractures admission

      area at the Royal Hallamshire.     We unloaded the patient who

      was transferred to a hospital trolley with the help of other

      people.    I saw a doctor by the entrance to the hospital and

      told him of the patient's apparent injuries.

18.         then radioed green at Hallamshire and we were told to

      stand by at Netherthorpe Road.     When we arrived at

      Netherthorpe Road there were already a couple of ambulances

      there and another four or so turned up behind us.

19.   Later we called control and were told to go to the B road at

      the Hallamshire to transfer patients to another hospital.

      We had probably been at Netherthorpe Road for something like

      30 minutes.

20.   We arrived at B road at the Hallamshire where

      was organising the transfers.      I would estimate that we

      arrived there at about 1650.     We only had one cot in our

      ambulance and so we transferred four sitting cases.         We vrere

      waiting quite seme time before we left B road because porters

       in the hospital were engaged on other duties.    Tw d patients

      were brought down to us and I went to collect two myself who

      came down in wheelchairs.
21.   We transferred the four patients to King Edward's Hospital

      on Rivelin Valley Road.

22.   When we had unloaded the patients at King Edward we radioed

      in and were told to go back to Longley, but we were called

      again shortly after that and told to go to the intensive

      care unit at Northern General to collect and transfer a

      patient to the Royal Hallamshire for a CT scan with a team

      of doctors.     We arrived at Northern General where we waited

      to transfer the patient and Doctors team to Royal Hallamshire

      transit ward.    At this point I believe we dropped the

      policeman off at Northern General.    After delivering the

      patient to the transit ward, we radioed control and were told

      to return to base, this we did, returning the medical team

      to Northern General, en route to Longley Station.

23.   We arrived back at Longley at about 2020 and signed off at

      2030.

      Dated the 6th day of May 1989 (060589).
                                                                       STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


A£$ / DATE OF BIRTH: 36

OCCUPATION: AMBO OFFICER PARKWAY



           1.

           2   .   My occupation is an Ambulanceman with SYMAS.

           3.      I have been with SYMAS for about three and a half years.

                   I joined as DDT (part-time) for about 18 months.   After

                   that I was promoted to Ambulanceman.    I attended an initial

                   two week course at SYMAS.    This covered ambulance aid

                   including emergency procedures and use of equipment.

                   On promotion to Ambulanceman I attended a further weeks

                   course at SYMAS HQ which covered more detail of emergency

                   procedure and equipment.    The next stage will be for me to

                   obtain the Miller qualification.

                   I specifically work on out-patient duty on day shift.

                   In addition to this I may be required to do emergency

                   work for example if I am at the scene of an accident

                   or if all other vehicles are on call.    I am stationed

                   at Parkway Ambulance Station and I either work single

                   handed or with assistance.    The work includes both

                   driving and attending.

                   On Saturday the 15th (150489) I arrived at Parkway for

                   duty and booted in on the rota.    My shift was 0900 to

                    1630 hours.   My crew member was ambulanceman

                                  We were allocated vehicle Sierra 203.      We

                    riiH the usual vehicle check, both on equipment and the
     ambulance itself.

6.   On weekdays the out-patient vrork is usually booked in

     advance and we receive a print out of the vrork schedule

      for the day.    On Saturdays vrork is issued direct from

     Control.     On Saturday the 15th (150489) we waited for our

     call from Control.     Our vehicle was on out-patient

     channel 4.      In the morning I was driving and in the

     afternoon             prove and I was attendant.    As far

     as I can recall we had a couple of admissions in the

     morning.    We returned to Parkway Station for lunch at

     about midday.

7.   We had an admission to the Northern General and then

     radioed clear to Control.     Control gave us a discharge

      from casualty at Northern General to Ward 16 of

     Middlewood Hospital in Sheffield.     The transfer from

     Northern General to Middlewood brought us along

     Berries Road to the roundabout and then down Leppins

     Lane.   The traffic was fairly light near to the Ground.

8.   From the start of Leppings Lane it was very busy with

     pedestrian supporters making their way to the Ground.

     At the top of Leppings Lane the Police had cordoned it

     off to vehicles.

9.   Because of the number of people we had to make our way

     quite slowly waiting for the crowd to pass.        Just by the

      Leppings Lane entrance gates there was a Police Land Rover

     with a Senior Officer on the bonnet.     We passed slowly

      by and I noticed he was speaking to the crowd through a loud

      speaker on the top of the vehicle.     He was asking thorn to

      "Remain calm and stop pushing as they (Police) were
       trying to get the game delayed" or words to that effect.

      This would have been at about 2.50 pm (1450).

       I mentioned to           that because of the crowds it

       looked as though it would be a late start for the gams.

       I did not see any casualties at that time, there was just

      a mass of people arriving from both directions towards the

      Leppings Lane entrance.

10.   We arrived at the junction with Catch Bar Lane to turn

      right towards Middlewood Hospital.     Police were on duty at

      that end of Leppings Lam.      As we turned right the

      Police cillowed a South Yorkshire passenger transport double

      decker bus up Leppings Lane.

11.   We dropped the patient at Middlewood Hospital.    I then

      filled in the patient sheet, putting the time (town

       "Clear at 15.05.”   (1505)   There was a vehicle on

      channel talking to Control so I waited for it to get off.

      The gist of the message was for than to proceed to Police

      Control, at Leppings Lane as there had been crowd trouble

      and somebody had been crushed.     I then radioed into

      Control as clear and gave our location.    Control asked us

      to proceed to Leppings Lane Police Control. I presumed

      this referred to the Land Rover which we had seen earlier.

12.             was driving and we proceeded at speed to the

      ground.   On route I was preparing my medical bag.      The

      traffic was fairly clear and we arrived within a minute.

      A Police car blocked the other road to enable us to go

      straight into Leppings Lane.     Leppings Lane was still

      heavily congested with supporters on foot going towards

      the football ground.   As we approached the entrance I
      could see an ambulance parked just inside the blue gate.

      At that point we were on the bridge on the opposite side

      of Leppings Lane to the ground.     I told          to stop

      on the bridge with the vehicle.     I did this because I

      did not want to commit the vehicle to the ground until

      I was aware of the situation.     In particular I wanted

      to assess

      Exits and access;

      whether the other vehicle had an emergency and needed

      to reverse out quickly;

      whether the crowd was hostile.

13.   I made my way on foot straight to the ambulance already on

      site.   I was not aware of the Police Land Rover at that

      time.   I had my fluorescent ambulance jacket on and pushed

      my way through the crowd.

14.   Inside the gate was a massive crowd of people.    As I

      approached the ambulance already on site I saw two or

      three people already in the back together with an

      ambulanceman.    It was Qualified Ambulanceman

15.   As I approached a casualty was brought by tvro police

      officers and laid on the ground at the back of the

      ambulance.   The ambulance officer who came to attend that

      casualty was

16.   She was joined by            and I left than to deed with

      that casualty.    I immediately went to see to those in the

      back of his vehicle which was next to him but they had gone.

17.   I was then asked to give assistance to a person hetving an

      asthma attack accompanied by his colleague and a Police

      officer.
18.    At this point a doctor identified himself to me.       I told him

       to treat the asthmatic.     At the same time a Police officer

       asked me to follow him to survey a further scene.       He took

       me into an area (AG on the plan) at the rear of the West

       stand.   This area was packed with people and there was

       screaming and shouting and total chaos.

19-    I counted six people being resuscitated by police.      I sent

       the police officer with me to get my mate and the vehicle

       from the bridge.

20.    I then returned to the first vehicle.    I radioed Control

       frcm that vehicle.   I told than that 203 was on se m e

       inside the ground but there was a major incident and at

       least 7 people being resuscitated.     I waited for Control

       to acknowledge and then returned to the nearest casualty

       (at point AG on the plan). These events I have just

       mentioned took place very quickly, within a minute.        I

       assisted a WPC resuscitating a casualty and at the same

       time kept watch for my vehicle which arrived very quickly.

21 .            parked to the rear of the first ambulance.        I got

       the Police officer to assist in loading the casualty into

       our vehicle.   As I arrived at my vehicle a casualty had

       already been loaded on.    As far as I can recall inside the

       rear was a Policeman, a Fireman and Ambulancewanan MDFEATT.

22.    Ambulancewoman            said that they were going.    As I was

       preparing to leave I informed an arriving crew

                 where the casualties were and then we left.

       There was the patient in our vehicle and I got into the

       back to start working on him to revive him. _________ was

       not with the vehicle.     I sent a police officer to get
      who had the keys.   The policeman returned with the keys

      and I told him to drive to the Northern General (the

      nearest hospital). We proceeded to Northern General at

      speed via Penistone Road.

23.   At Northern General casualty there were two ambulances

      already there.   We offloaded the patient.   I informed the

      staff that the patient had arrested.    Somebody asked how

      many others there were and I replied to the effect that

      there were six following me.     I got back to the vehicle

      and told the police officer to return straight back to

      the scene.   I heard Control call another vehicle to

      return straight back to the scene and as far as I can

      recall informed them to save details until later. We

      made our way back to Leppings Lane via Herries Road.       We

      Hid not have problems with the traffic which was

      controlled by Police.    At seme stage on route we had a

      Police bike escort.     At this point listening to

      messages on the radio it was clear that Leppings Lane was

      not the only point of incidents.     Vehicles were also

      being requested at the gymnasium entrance.

24.   Leppings Lane was still very busy with supporters on foot

      but they now appeared to be moving away front the ground.

      We were able to drive straight into the ground.      We

      parked roughly where we had before because I now knew

      where the casualties were.     I was not aware of other

      ambulances at that time.     As soon as we arrived two

      police officers opened the back.     I went round to the

       rear.   They already had two casualties on stretchers

       and were proceeding to load them.    I said, "Don't
      load them until I check other casualties for priority."

25.   I specifically asked if there were any being

      resuscitated having regard to the numbers left on our

      last visit.   He said there were none and I therefore

      checked the two patients and considered them in need

      of emergency treatment.     I unloaded our two empty

      stretchers and put the patients on board.     As they

      were loaded             reappeared.   He joined me in

      the back and we each attended a patient while the same

      police officer drove.    Again we went straight to the

      Northern General via Herries Road South.

26.   We had a police bike escort, the passage was clear and

      quick.   We had another ambulance to the rear of us.

27.   At Northern General casualty we were met by a team of

      porters and medical staff.     There were a lot of

      ambulances in the casualty area and a lot of

      casualties from the football ground.     We off loaded

      and then returned to the vehicle.      I asked the police

      officer to continue driving while we tidied the rear

      and prepared for the next casualties.

28.   We heard Control request all vehicles to the gym

      entrance of the ground.    We knew that Herries Road South

      is a "no right turn" and that oncoming casualties

      were coming up that route.     We therefore went the same

      route as before via Leppings Lane.      It was still busy and

      there were Police vans parked near the entrance.        We

      proceeded straight down Leppings Lane and left on

      Catch Bar Lane and onto Penistone Road.

29.   On Penistone Road we were met by an officer, who I believe
      was                              He asked us to stand by

      and directed us into position in queue.     We were on the

      ground side of Penistone Road near Herries Road South.

      Ambulances were reversing in to the ground by the gym

      entrance to load casualties and then departing via

      the roundabout and Herries Road South.     At this point I

      thanked the police officer and told him he could return

      to his duty.    I took the key frcm him and got into the

      driving seat.     _______ went up to the ground entrance.

      After a few minutes I was told to bring my vehicle up to

      the gate and reverse in for loading.     I was directed

      where to park by Superintendent DALE.     Other ambulances

      were loading and departing at the same time.

30.   I parked and opened the doors at the back.     The two

      stretchers were taken out.    I stood by the vehicle and two

      casualties were loaded on.    One of them was attended by

      Qualified Ambulanceman           I told him to get in the

      back and told DALE we would make up a team and were

      leaving.

31.   We received information to go to the Royal Hallamshire. We

      had a police escort and set off turning right (town

      Penistone Road.    The traffic was fairly congested.     We

      caught up another tsro ambulances, one of which did not have

      lights and was for visiting patients.

32.   On arrival there was a doctor assessing casualties and

      directing them to different points.     We off loaded.

      contacted Control regarding his car.     He had come in off

      duty and left it near Leppings Lane entrance.

33.   Control said it was alright for him to return to it and we
      returned to Leppings Lane entrance.           went to check his

      car.     I returned a firebrigade resuscitator unit to a fireman

      nearby.     We contacted Control to tell them of our location.

      They requested we attend Hallamshire to assist in

      transfers of patients frcm F ward to King Edwards

      Hospital.           followed me in his car to the Hallamshire.

      On route I was flagged down by a car.     There was a policeman

      with a doctor and they requested we take the doctor to the

      Hallamshire.     I dropped the doctor at casualty and then

      proceeded to B road for the transfer.    There were a lot of

      ambulances there and I noticed it was about 1755 hours.

               ind I went up to the ward to transfer the patients

      to King Edwards.    We took them to King Edwards and radioed

      clear.

34.   Control told us to return to base and call in before

      leaving duty.     I dropped       at Hallamshire for his

      car and then returned to Parkway Station.     I radioed into

      Control and they told us to sign off.    We refuelled and

      tidied the vehicle and then signed off at 1915 hours.

35.   We did not use the radio unless we had to because of the

      heavy air traffic which would only delay urgent messages.
                                                                          STATION

NAME;          JANET ROSEMARY
                DOORE

ADDRESS:       33, NORTHERN GENERAL HOS, HERRIES RD
                SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:     SENIOR HOUSE OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050589                                             JANET DOORE (SIGNED)



        On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) between 1545 (1545) and 1600

           (1600) I examined nine male casualties and one female who had been

        brought to the Hospital frcm Hillsborough Stadium.    During my

        examinations, one further male casualty was brought in and I also

        examined him. I found no signs of life in any of the eleven casualties

        and in my opinion they were all dead on arrived at the Hospital.      They

        were Northern General patient numbers:

           001 (body 92)    008 (body 93)     009 (body 88)

           02C (body 89)    021 (body 91)     030 (body 86)

        061 (body 87)       062 (body 84)     063 (body 90)

        064 (body 83) and 099 (body 82)
       DOORE              JANET   ROSEMARY                        2


                                             JANET DOORE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:     050589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                      57
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          JANET ROSEMARY
                DOORE

ADDRESS:       33, NORTHERN GENERAL HOS, HERRIES RD
                HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE, S57AU

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:     SENIOR HOUSE OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


J3ATED: 260789                                             Janet Doore (SIGNED)



           Further to my previous statement dated 05/05/89 (050589) I would like

           to add the following :-

           I em a senior house officer in Renal and General Medicine MB ChB

           (Bristol 1986). (000086).

           On Saturday 15 April, 1989, (150489), I was telephoned by the Northern

           General Hospital Switchboard at approximately 1530 (1530)   whilst on

           call from home. I was asked to ccme into the hospital as there had

           been an incident at Hillsborough. I reached the Northern General at

           1550 hours (1550) and was informed by a colleague, Dr N ERJUNSKILL,

           thet there appeared to be fatalities from television pictures. I

           reached the accident department at 1555 (1555) approximately. I went

           to the triage point and was asked by Dr WARDROBE (Consultant in A&E)

           to count fatalities in the Plaster Room. I initially, in error, wait

           to the A&E plaster area; this was being used as a resuscitation area.

           Three teenaged male casualties were present. I assisted Dr Stuart

           CALDER in resuscitating a male patient approximately 12 years old - at

           thct stage there were no signs of life in the patient. I left that

           area after 1 - 2 minutes as further medical help became available. I
DQC'RE                 JANET   ROSEMARY                                   2


went to the Orthopaedic Plaster Rocxn. Here, I examined the bodies of

nine male victims and one female victim, assisted by I              1

         ]There were no signs of life in any of the victims, in that no

major pulses were palpable, no respiratory effort was observed. The

pupils were fixed and dilated and heart and breath sounds absent. I

certified these bodies as dead. No form of indentification was present

on the bodies of any victim. I later learnt from media coverage the

fenrale victim to be Victoria HICKS. Whilst I was present a further

male victim was brought in I also examined and certified him to be

deed. I again went to the triage point and was asked to attend

stretcher casualties. I saw between five and ten teenaged male victims,

all of whom had soft tissue crush injuries. I returned to the

Orthopaedic Plaster Room at approximately 1640 hours (1640). No new

fatalities were present. Three Police Officers were present. A female

officer gave me a verbal description obtained from a male relative

consistent with the appearance of Victoria HICKS. At this stage the

majority of stretcher victims had been cleared from the A&E Department,

having been transferred to Ward 60. I went to Ward 60, most beds were

occupied by victims each with an attendant Nurse. A large number of

irecical and nursing staff were present. None of the patients required

urgent treatment. I examined a male casualty with severe bruising of

 his right thigh and arranged for X ray. He was enquiring of the

 whereabouts of his ten year old son from whom he had became separated.

 All the remaining casualties had been re—assessed by the staff already

 present. At approximately 1700 hours (1700) I returned to the A&E and

 finding no casualties requiring treatment went back to Ward 60. Most

 medical staff were redundant by virtue of their number. The casualties

 were awaiting investigation or transfer to other wards. I re-attended

 A& E at approximately 1220 hours (1220) Nursing Staff were tidying the
            DOORE                JANET    ROSEMARY                                   3


            department. A non- Hillsborough casualty was in the department, a

            middle aged lady with fractured humerus. At 1730 hours (1730) I went

            to the Physiotherapy Department where the 'walking wounded'

            casualties had been sent. I found no one still requiring medical

            attention, as was also the situation in A & E and Ward 60. I left the

            A S E Department at 1815 hours (1815) and returned to my duties in the

           medical wards. I had no further direct contact with any of the

            casualties.

                                                     Janet Rosemary Doore SIGNED

S    tatement taken
              FLACE:

              TIME:            DATE:     260789

    WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

    OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      JULIE APPLETON PS7844
                                                                          STATION

NAME:           JANET   ROSEMARY
                DOORE

ADDRESS?         LEEDS GENERAL INFIRMARY, GREAT GEORGE ST
                LEEDS, W YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:     SENIOR HOUSE OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120190                                               JANET DOORE (SIQflED)
►


        States:

        Since making my previous statements I have moved hospitals and now

        work in Leeds at the above address.

           In respect of   my previous statements I   wouldlike to       statethatIhave

        been as accurate as possible under the circumstances and alltimes

        given are approximations.

           I now accept that the times stated in my first statement dated 5.5.89

           (050589) are inaccurate as I did not arrive at the Northern General

^       Hospital, Sheffield until approximately 15.50 hours (1550).

           In relation to my second statement, dated 26.7.89 (260789) these times

        are also approximations and are as accurate as I could re call at the

        time.     I do however accept that they may be incorrect.    The reason

        being that throughout the course of events that afternoon the time did

        not appear important as I was more concerned in the treatment and

        welfare of the patients.

           I did during the afternoon of Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489)

           initially examine the bodies of nine male victims and one female

        victim, at the request of Dr WARDROPE, in the orthopedic plaster
       DOORE                JANET   ROSEMARY                                  2


       rocm all of whom I certified dead.

       An additional male was brought to the plaster rocm whilst I was

       present.   I am unable to state what time this occurred but I did

       examine this body and certified him dead.

       At the time I did not know the identifications of these persons but

       later learnt via the West Midlands Police that they were the following

       pecpie, Phillip STEELE, John Paul GIIHDGLEY, Paul BRADY, Gary JONES,

       Steven O'NEIL, Barry BENNETT, Victoria HICKS, David THOMAS, Stephen

       HARRISON, Arthur HORROCKS, and Phillip HAMM3ND.

                                                         JANET DOORE SIGHED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE

         TIME              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE      APPLETON WPS 7844
                                                                          STATION

NAME:           BRIAN
                HAMMOND

ADDRESS:


ACT! / DATE OF BIRTH: OVER 21

OCCUPATION:     MANAGER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 160489                                                  B HAMMOND (SIGNED)



           I em the Uncle to Phillip HAMMOND who is 13 years old.    He was b o m

           on the 8 December 1975 (08121975), having been b o m in Liverpool, his

           father being my brother Phillip HAMMOND of



           Phillip lives with his parents at that address.

           I was aware that on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) Phillip came into

           Sheffield                                          They had cane to see

           the F.A. Cup Serai Final.

           Because of the tragedy at the Football ground we travelled to

           Sheffield and the following morning I attended in the Sports Hall and

           there identified the body of Phillip to PC 1927.

           I em unable to give any other details about Phillip.
        HAMVDND           BRIAN                      2


                                  B HAMMOND SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                         64
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POL
                WEST BAR, CID, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 040589                                                             (SIGNED)



                                                         of the South Yorkshire

           Police.    During the evening of Saturday the 15 April 1989 (150489),

        continuing into Sunday the 16 April 1989 (160489), I was on duty at

           the Medico Legal Centre, acting in the capacity of receiving

        officer.       During this time PC 1927 TAYLOR identified to me the body of

           Philip HAMMOND labelled Body No 93.

           I later identified the body of Philip HAMMDND to the pathologist Dr

           SLfJTER.



                                                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

             TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:        POLICE HQ, SNIG HILL
                SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21 100

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110789                                                          (SIGNED)



           At 5.30 pm on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), as a result of a

           message from Detective Inspector Eggleston, I attended at the Sports

           Hall, Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, Penistone Road, Sheffield,

           anc there assisted other Scenes of Crime Officers in the identifcation

           photography of the deceased.



           At 8.30 am on Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489), I attended at the

           Medico Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield, and there took

           photographs as directed and received blood samples of the following

           deceased from the pathologists as shown:



           Doctor Slater   14; 20; 24; 27; 29; 39; 40; 45; 47; 51; 64; 67; 93.

           Doctor Underwood:   57; 60.



           On Monday 17th April 1989 (170489), I again attended at the Medico

           Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield and there took photographs as

           directed and received blood samples from the pathologists as shown.
       Doctor Slater: 48; 49; 55; 91.

       Professor Usher       63.



        I later handed the films and blood samples to

                   of the South Yorkshire Police Scenes of Crime Department, at

       the Medico Legal Centre.



                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

I         TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                  72
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:        S YORKSHIRE POL
                SNIG HILL, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH;

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 260789                                                            (SIGNED)



           I em a Detective Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police, Scenes of

           Crime Department, at present stationed at Steffield Headquarters.

           At 9.00 am (0900) on Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489), I attended the

           Mecico Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield, where I supervised and

           co-ordinated the work carried out during that day by the following

           Scene of Crime Department personnel in connection with the

           Hillsborough Disaster:

           Detective Constable

           Scenes of Crime Officer

           Detective Constable

           Police Photographer

           Police Photographer

           In order to provide a record of samples and photographs taken of

           each Post Mortem examination I adopted the following procedure:

           Each deceased had previously been allocated a number.   When a body was

           brought into the Post Mortem roan that body number and the name

           was given to me.   I recorded these on a Post Mortem record

           sheet, together with the member of the Scene of Crime Department
        responsible for taking photographs at the direction of the

        Pathologist.

        On completion of each Post Mortem the Scene of Crime Officer handed

        to me a blood sample, together with the exposed film used during that

        particular Post Mortem.    I then ensured that each blood sample and

        exposed film was correctly identified and then recorded this fact.

        At 9.00 am (0900) Monday, 17th April, 1989, (170489) I again visited

        the Medico Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield where I handed the

        Post Mortem record sheet, blood samples and exposed films to



        At 8.30 am (0830) Tuesday 18th April 1989, (180489) I received fran

                                     all the 94 blood samples taken during the

        Post Mortem examinations held over the previous two days.

        At 9.30 am (0930) that same day I handed the 94 blood samples to Dr

        Forrest at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.




                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACES

•         TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                       STATION
NAME:


ADDRESS:        S YORKSHIRE POL
                SCENES OF CRIME DEPARTMENT, SNIG HILL, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIKIH: 21 100

OCCUPATION:              H


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 260789                                                         (SIGNED)



        I em a Detective Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police, Scenes of

        Crime Department, Police Headquarters, Sheffield.

        At 8.45 am (0845) Monday 17 April 1989 (170489), I attended at the

        Medico Legal Centre Watery Street, Sheffield, my duties being to co­

        ordinate the work carried out    by the following Scenes of Crime

        Department personnel in connection with the Hillsborough Disaster.




        At this time I took possession of the Scenes of Crime post mortem

        record sheet and quantity of samples and exposed films from



        The system used in carrying out the post mortems was that each

        deceased had been given a number and as each body was brought into the

        post mortem room, the number and the name of the deceased was given to

        me.   I recorded these on a post mortem record sheet together with the
       marker of the Scenes of Crime Department responsible for taking

       photographs at the direction of the Pathologist carrying out that

       particular post mortem.

       On completion of each post mortem, the Scenes of Crime Officer then

       handed to me any samples removed from the body, which were mainly

       blood samples together with the exposed films used in the photography

       of that particular post mortem.   I then ensured that each

       sairple and exposed film was properly identified and then recorded this

       fact. At 5.00 pm (1700) that date, on completion of all the post

       mortems, I took all the samples, together with the exposed films, to

       the Scenes of Crime Department at Force Headquarters where I placed

       all the blood samples in a refrigerator and the exposed films were

       submitted for processing.

       At 8.30 am (0830) the following day, Tuesday 18 April 1989 (180489), I

       removed the blood samples from the Scenes of Crime refrigerator and

       handed them to                            for transportation to the

       Royal Hallamshire Hospital.




                                                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIMES           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          ALEXANDER    ROBERT WALKER
                FORREST

ADDRESS:       ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL
                SHEFFIELD S102JF

AGE / DATE OF BIRIH: 21 100

OCCUPATION:    CONSULTANT CHEMICAL PATHOLOGIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me,   is true tothe best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.




•
DATED: 200489                                                 A FORREST (SIGNED)



           I em a registered medical practitioner and a chartered chemist.      My

           qualifications include the degrees of bachelor of Science, bachelor of

           medicine and bachelor of surgery, and the Mastership in Clinical

           Biochemistry.   I am a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistryand a

           menber of the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal College of

           Pathlogists.    I hold the posts of Consultant in Chemical Pathology at

           Royal Hallamshire Hospital and Honorary Lecturer in Forensic

           Toxicology to Sheffield University.

           On the morning of 18 April 1989 (180489) I was handed a box by an

           officer who identified himself to me as                   of South

           Yorkshire Police. The box contained 94 samples of blood each in a

           container with an appropriate preservative and each container being

           enclosed in a plastic bag labelled with a decedents's name and

           identifying numbers. The blood containers themselves vrere also

           labelled appropriately.




                                     On the April 18, 19 and 20(180489)(190489)
FORREST                ALEXANDER   ROBERT WALKER                          2


(2C0489) these samples were analysed under ray direct supervision for

ethanol with the results given below.    Ethanol is the alcohol present

in alcoholic beverages.

                                                   BLOOD ETHANOL




1.        HOWARD Thomas Anthony           ACJ8     20 mg/100ml

2.        SHAHSIDES Inga                  DC7      None detected

3.        HARRISON Gary                   DC12     None detected

4.        RIMMER David                    DC4      Less than 10 mg/100ml

5.        ASHCROFT Colin Mark             PHR15    None detected

6.        WHELAN Ian                      PHR13    None detected

7.        HENNESSY James R                PHR11    35 mg/lOQml

8.        HAWLEY David                    PHR6     None detected

9.        ASPINALL James Gary             PHR16    None detected

10.       BROWN David S                   ACJ5      15 mg/100ml

11.       HARRISON Peter Andrew           TIB5     21 mg/lOQml

12.       HAMILTON Roy                    TIB16     118 mg/lOQml

13.       WAFER Colin                     DC8      None detected

14.       CHURCH Gary                     DMS3     None detected

15.       RIMMER Carl William             ACJ3      144 mg/100ml

16.       MURRAY Paul                     TIB4     None detected

17.       DEVONSIDE Christopher Berry     PHR3      32 mg/100ml

18.       SMITH Paula Ann                 AFW1     None detected

19.       COX Tracy                       TIB10    None detected

20.       McCABE Marion                   DM32     None detected

21.       FITZSIMMONS Vincent Michael     TIB14    None detected

22.       MATHEWS Brian                   TIB17    None detected

23.       BURKETT Peter                   DC5       99 mg/lOQml
POFREST                ALEXANDER   ROBERT WALKER


24.       ROGERS H C                      DM315    None detected

25.       CLARK Joseph                    TIB3     177 mg/100ml

26.       McALISTER Francis               TIB6     None detected

27.       MCCARTHY Daniel Joseph          DM36     18 mg/100ml

28.       ROBINSON S J                    TIB12    141 mg/100ml

29.       HANKIN Eric                     DM39     132 mg/100ml

30.       JOHNSTONE Alan                  DC6      34 mg/100ml

31.       BURKE Henry Thomas              PHR10    16 mg/lOOttil

32.       McGRATH Keith                   PHR17    None detected

33.       DELANEY J P                     ACJ9     38 mg/lOOttil

34.       OWENS Jonathon                  PHR12    None detected

35.       JONES Christine Anne            PHR2     None detected

36.       TYRELL Kevin                    TIB2     None detected

37.       GLOVER Ian                      DC3      None detected

38.       EDWARDS C                       ACJ2     None detected

39.       TOOTLE Peter                    DM35     None detected

40.       MCDONNELL P                     DM312    172 mg/lOQml

41.       HUGHES Eric                     RCWl     32 mg/100ml

42.       HEWITSON Paul Anthony           PHRl     88 mg/ 100ml

43.       WRIGHT Graham Shawn             TIB19    Less than lQmg/lOQml

44.       HEWITT Darren Carl              AFW2     Less than lQmg/lOQml

45.       JOYNES Nicholas                 DMS1     72 mg/lOQml

46.       BROWN Carl                      AFW4     83 mg/100ml

47.       BIRTLE David William            DM34     42 mg/ 100ml

48.       COLLINS Gary                    d msis   29 mg/lOQml

49.       THOMPSON Patrick John           DM319    93 mg/lOQml

50.       BROOKES Andrew                  PHR5     89 mg/100ml

51.       WILLIAMS Kevin Daniel           DM38     56 mg/100ml

52.       BELT. Christopher Michael       DCl      Less than 10mg/ 100ml




                                                                           79
POFREST                 ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER                          4


53.       THOMPSON S                         TIB8     78 mg/lOQml
54.       KELLY Anthony Peter                PHR14    None detected
55.       HEWITT Nicholas M                  DM316    None detected
56.       MATHER D W                         ACJ4     None detected
57.       TRAYNOR Martin Kevin               DM314    60 mg/100ml
58.       CLARK Paul                         TIB7     67 mg/lOQml
59.       HORN G                             PHR4     55 mg/100ml
60.       TRAYNOR C J                        DM313    54 mg/100ml
61.       SEFTQN Colin Andrew                MWL2     None detected
62.       GLOVER Barry                       AFW3     138 mg/100ml
63.       JONES R                            DM320    Less than 10mg/100ml
64.       HICKS Sarah Louise                 DM37     None detected

65.       PEMBERTON W Roy                    TIB9     None detected
66.       FOX Thomas Steven                  DC10     82 mg/lOQml
67.       CHAPMAN Raymond                    DM310    91 mg/100ml

68.       McBRIEN John                       PHR7     None detected

69.       BARON Gerard                       ACJ1     None detected

70.       McGLONE Alan                       DC9      75 mg/100ml

71.       COPOL Stephen Paul                 RDW4     49 mg/lOQml

72.       KELLY Michael David                TIB20    None detected

73.       CARLISLE Paul                      PHRl 9   61 mg/100ml

74.       BALL Kester Roger Marcus           ACJ7     None detected

75.       GODWIN D G                         DCll     None detected

76.       ANDERSON John Alfred               ACJ6     76 mg/lOQml

77.       WILD Martin Kenneth                PHR8     None detected

78.       THOMPSON Peter Reuben              TIBI     None detected

79.       ROBERTS G J                        TIBll    79 mg/100ml

80.       BENSON David John                  MWLl     Less than lOmg/lOQml

81.       HOWARD Thomas                      TIB21    34 mg/lOQml




                                                                                 80
POFREST                ALEXANDER   ROBERT WALKER                          5


82.       STEELE Philip John              MWL3     None detected
83.       GILLHOOLEY John Paul           TIBI 3    None detected
84.       BRADY Paul                      PHR21    13 mg/100ml
85.       LEWIS Carl James                FHR20    None detected
86.       JONES Gary Philip               RDW2     None detected
87.       O'NEILL Stephen Francis         PHRl8    None detected
88.       BENNETT Barry                   DC2      78 mg/lOQml
89.       HICKS Victoria Jane            TIB15     None detected

90.       THOMAS David Leonard           TIB18     48 mg/100ml

91.       HARRISON Steven                DM317     30 mg/100ml

92.       HQRRQCKS Arthur                RDW3      92 mg/100ml

93.       HAMMOND Philip                 DMS11     Less than lQmg/lOQml

94.       SPEARRITT Adam                 PHR9      None detected

(Nctes mg/100ml means milligrams (of ethanol) per 100 millilitre of

blcod)




It is very difficult to more than make broad generalisations about the

likely alcohol consumption that would produce a particular blood

alcohol concentration in any one individual, or to predict whether or
POFREST              ALEXANDER   ROBERT WALKER                          6


not that blood alcohol level would be associated with intoxication.

As a broad guide, an average man who consumed two pints of average

beer over 2 tours might well have a blood ethanol concentration, at

that time, of about 50 milligrams per 100 millilitres.    The state

corrmonly recognised as being drunk is associated with large variations

in the blood alcohol concentration.   For example whilst it is unlawful

to drive a motor vehicle when the blood alcohol concentration

exceeds 80 milligrams per 100 millilitre, I have examined individuals

with few objective signs of intoxication although their

blcod alcohol concentrations vere in excess of

20C milligrams per 100 millilitre.    Such individuals usually have

problems related to the habitually excessive consumption

of alcoholic beverages. On the other hand, I have seen many

individuals who were obviously impaired when their blood alcohol

concentration was below 100 milligrams per 100 millilitre.      It should

be noted that the degree of intoxication associated with a particular

blcod concentration of alcohol in a particular individual is usually

greater when the concentration is rising rather than when it is

falling. (Signed)   A FORREST

A F . W FORREST, BSc, MRCP, MRCPath, CChem, FISC.
        FOFREST           ALEXANDER   ROBERT WALKER                      7


                                                      A FORREST SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   200489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                             S3
                                                                          STATION

NAME;          ALEXANDER   ROBERT WALKER
                FORREST

ADDRESS:       DEPARTMENT OF CLINICAL CHEMISTRY,
                ROYAL KALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL, SHEFFIELD. S102JF

AGE / DATE OF BIKIH: 21 100

OCCUPATION:    CHEMICAL PATHOLOGIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 013 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 090589                                                A FORREST (SIGNED)



           I am a registered medical practitioner and a chartered chemist.    My

        qualifications include the degrees of Bachelor of Science (with

        honours in pharmacology), Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery

        awarded by Edinburgh University, and the Mastership in Clinical

        Biochemistry.      I hold the Diploma in Obstetrics of the Royal College

        of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists together with a Joint Committee

        Certificate in contraception and family planning.       I am a fellow of

        the Royal Society of Chemistry and a member of the Royal College of

        Physicians and the Royal College of Pathologists.       I hold the posts of

        Consultant in Chemical Pathology to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital,

        Clinical Lecturer in Human Metabolism and Clinical Biochemistry and

        anc Honorary Lecturer in Forensic Toxicology to the University of

        Sheffield.

        This statement is intended to supplement my statements of 20 April

        1989 (200489) and 2 May 1989 (020589) and should be read in

        conjunction with them. In the process of analysing samples of blood

        ethanol, other volatile compounds may be serendipitously detected.

        The conmonest of these is acetone, although others may also be seen.
FOFREST               ALEXANDER    ROBERT WALKER                            2


It was apparent, in the course of analysing the blood samples obtained

at autopsy frcxn the 94 individuals who died at or near the

Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April (150489), that many of thorn contained

significant concentrations of acetone and sane contained significant

concentrations of aceltadehyde.

Acetaldehyde is a difficult conpound to measure accurately in blood

samples.   It may be generated spontaneously fron ethanol after a

sairple has been taken, and it is quite volatile so even if the sample

has been taken with appropriate precautions it may be lost from the

container in which the blood sample has been placed.    There are

also problems with the standardisation of the assay.    These aspects of

the matter are discussed more fully below.

After the ethanol concentration had been measured in the 94 blood

samples, an attempt was made to quantitate the acetaldehyde and

acetone concentrations.     The results obtained are presented in tabular

anc graphical form below.     Note that all the concentrations are

presented in milligrams per litre and that where the concentration of

ethanol is low, either less than 10 milligrams per 100 millilitres

or "not detected" in my original statement, the results may be

expressed differently here.    Where the concentration of ethanol is

less than 100 milligrams per litre but more than a trace is present, I

have here expressed it arbitrarily, for purposes of statistical

analysis as 50 milligrams per litre.    Where only a trace is present I

have expressed the concentration as 1 milligram per litre.    For all

purposes, other than the purely scientific, the results given in my

statement of 20 April 1989 (200489) should be used.    Measurements of

love concentrations of ethanol in blood, below 10 milligrams per 100

millilitres, are quite imprecise.

Acetaldehyde is virtually only found in human blood samples after the
FORREST                 ALEXANDER   ROBERT WALKER                          3


consumption of ethanol.    Ethanol is metabolised by the body first to

acetaldehyde and thence to acetate.     Tables 1 and 2 and figure 7 show

the close correlation of the blood acetaldehyde and ethanol

concentrations.

It will be seen that the concentrations of acetaldehyde found are

quite high.    It is quite unusual to see substantial amounts of

acetaldehyde in blood samples submitted for ethanol analysis either

in living or dead patients.    Peak blood acetaldehyde concentrations

in normal subjects drinking ethanol might be as much as 2 milligrams

per litre.    After drugs such as carbimide, which inhibit the

metalbolism of acetaldehyde to acetate, the concentration might rise

to 10 milligrams per litre.    Seme subjects here have acetaldehyde

concentrations that are significantly higher than that (Figure 5).The

question obviously arises; "could the presence of such large amounts

of acetaldehyde in certain samples be an artifact?" The main

mechanism by which acetaldehyde is generated in a blood sample

containing alcohol is as follows:     A proportion of the oxyhaemoglobin

in a sample is converted to methaemoglobin with the generation of a

superoxide radical.     This can in turn oxidise ethanol to acetaldehyde.

The stochicmetry of the reaction is:

HbC2 -> MetHb + 02.

02 + 2 CH3CH20H -> 2 CH3CH0 + 2 H20

One haemoglobin molecule, fully oxegenated, contains 4 Hb02 subunits.

Blcod contains about 2 mmol/1 of haemoglobin.       1 mole of

oxyhaemoglobin could theoretically generate 8 moles of

acetaldehyde. Thus theoretically, the ccnplete conversion of all the

oxyhaemoglobin in a blood sample containing an excess of ethanol would

generate acetaldehyde at a concentration of 16 mmol/1.      That is 704

milligrams per litre.     In this instance, there is likely to have been
POFREST              ALEXANDER    ROBERT WALKER                           4


little oxyhaemoglobin present after death.   However, even so, it is

quite possible that a substantial proportion if not all, of the

acetaldehyde present in the samples could have generated post mortem

by not metabolic oxidation of alcohol, particularly as

the samples were placed in plastic vials with a large dead space,

containing air, above the blood sample.   It is still surprising that

one does not usually see such large concentrations of acetaldehyde in

the course of normal case work.   The reason may be that post mortem

sanples are usually submitted in 20 millilitre universal containers,

filled to the brim and containing little dead space, whilst clinical

sanples are submitted in "vacutainers" with a significant dead space

alteit with a low oxygen content. In both cases there may be less

oxygen available to promote acetaldehyde formation.The acetone

concentrations found are probably not artifacts. Acetone can arise as

a product of metabolism at times when glucose is not read ily available

to cells or when stress hormones mobilise fat stores which are then

metabolised.   Normally, the presence of ethanol tends to inhibit the

production of acetone from the metabolism of fat, its presence

favouring the production of beta hydroxy-butyrate instead. However

there are theoretical reasons for believing that, under circumstances

of extreme hypoxia, this mechanism would not operate and acetone would

be produced even in the presence of ethanol.      It is noteworthy that

there is little correlation between the concentration of ethanol and

the concentration of acetone in the blood sanples examined here.

Acetone can be produced in large amounts during fasting. It is

unlikely that this was a significant mechanism in this case.

Conclusions:

1) Whilst there are theoretical reasons for believing that significant

concentrations of acetaldehyde might accumulate in the blood as a
POFREST               • ALEXANDER    ROBERT WALKER                      5


result of the metabolism of ethanol during severe hypoxia, it is not

possible to state that the unusually high concentrations of

acetaldehyde found in some of the samples examined here are not an

artifact of sample collection.

2) The relatively high concentrations of acetone found here are likely

to be an indication of significant metabolic stress during the agonal

period.



Case No   age Years   ethanol   acetaldehyde acetone (mg/1)

 1         14           200          0         20

 2         39             0          0          10

 3        25              0          0          10

 4         39            50          8         48

 5         19             0          0         46

 6         19             0          0         30

 7         29           350         41         45

 8         39             0          0         84

 9         18             0          0         74

10         25           150          6         40

11         15           210          6         40

12         34          1180          8         23

13         19             0          0         25

14         19             0          0         20

15         39          1440          9         39

16         14             0          0         43

17         18           320          8         69

18         26             0          0         49

19         21             0          0          76

20         21             0          0          99




                                                                            38
         FOFHEST              ALEXANDER             ROBERT   WALKER        6

         21             34             0            0                  7
         22             38         10               3              22
         23             24     990              10                  8
     24                 17          0           0               30
     25                 29    1770          13                  29
     26                 27          0           0               23
     27                 21     180          15                  30
     28                 17    141           25                  61
     29                 33   1320           25                  75
0    30             28        340           14                  89
     31             46        160               2              20
     32             17             0            0              21
     33             19        380           18                 40
     34             22             0            0                  0
     35             26             0        0                  44
     36             15          0           0                  53
    37              27          0           0                  59
    38              25         10          17                  31
    39              21          0           0                  34
^   40              21       1720          24                  89
    41             43        320            1                  20
    42             26        880           16                   8
    43             17         50            3                  32
    44             17         50            4                  15
    45             26        720           69                  13
    46             18        830           52                 31
    47             22        420           19                 96
    48             22        290           17                 26
    49             35        930           30                 73




                                                                               89
POEREST        ALEXANDER    ROBERT WALKER


50        26    890        23          34

51        16    560         4          36

52        17     50         1          28

53        17    780         9          60

54        29      0         0          73

55        16      0         0          48

56        19      0         0          56

57        16    600        39          94

58        18    670        24          76

59        20    550        20          63

60        26    540         9          97

61        23      0         0          11

62        27   1380         6          13

63        24     50         3           7

64        19      0         0          16

65        23      0         0          30

66        22    820        12         48

67        45    910        21         30

68        18      0         0         43

69        67      0         0         93

70        28    750        10         27

71        20    490        5           18

72        39      0         0          8

73        20    610        34         56

74        16      0        0          25

75        24      0        0          24

76        62    760        34         11

77        29     0         0          41

78        30     0         0          42
POFREST              ALEXANDER    ROBERT WALKER


79          24        790        16          65

80          22            50      7          85

81          14        340         5          14

82          15            0       0           0

83          10            0       0          18

84          21        130        20          29

85          18            0       0          33

86          18            0       0          35

87          17            0       0          39

88          26        780        27          13

89          15            0       0          22

90          23        480        33          25

91          31        300        0           32

92          42        920        10          28

93          13         50        0           33

94          14            0      0           15



Note: all results, including ethanol, expressed as milligrams per

litre.

Where ethanol is less than 100 milligrams per litre it is recorded

either 50 milligrams per litre, if there is a trace present, or 10

miligrams per litre if it is barely detectable or zero if none is

detected.



TABLE 2



Correlations between measured parameters



                    AGE        ETHANOL   ACETONE   ACETALDEHYDE
POFREST               ALEXANDER    ROBERT   WALKER


AGE                  1         0.1750       -0.110   0.1317

                                  (.0021)   (NS)     (.0264)

ETHANOL              0.1750    1            0.0508   0.7014

                     (.0021)                (NS)     (.00001)

ACETONE              -.0110    0.0508       1        0.1117

                     (NS)      (NS)                  (NS)

ACETALDEHYDE         0.1317    0.7014       0.1117   1

                     (.0264)   (.00001)     (NS)



(Significance level) NS = not significant.



None parametric method used (Kendall Rank Correlation).



NB.   Partial correlation analysis suggests that the apparent

association of acetaldehyde with age can be explained by the

association of age with blood alcohol concentration.
        POFREST           ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER                      10


                                                        A FORREST SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   090589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                93
                                                                           STATION

NAME;           ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER
                FORREST

ADDRESS:        DEPARTMENT OF CLINICAL CHEMISTRY, ROYAL
                HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL, SHEFFIELD S102JF

Affl / DATE OF BIKIH: 21 100

OCCUPATION:     CHEMICAL PATHOLOGIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be     false or do not believe to be true.


^DAIED:                                                              (SIGNED)



           Further to the three previous statements I have made concerning this

          matter which I understand have been submitted to Lord Justice Taylor's

           Inquiry through H.M. Coroners Office I should like to state the

           following.

           I had no direct contact with the events of Saturday 15th April 1989

           (150489) but through rtty role as Medical Officer to a Voluntary

          Organisation I attended at the Medico Legal Centre, Watery Street,

           Sheffield on the 16th April (160489).   Incidental to my visit there I

           had converstions with Professor USHER, Dr John CLARK and Professor

           Laurence HENRY who were carrying autopsies on the deceased.     I also

           spcke to the Coroner and his Officer who both indicated to me that

           there would be a number of blood samples sent to me for analysis

          within the following couple of days.

           On the morning of 18th April (180489)                         of the

           South Yorkshire Police brought a box of 94 blood samples and one

           container with two tablets to rtty department at the Royal Hallamshire

           Hospital. All the containers were appropriately labelled and

           identified and I have no reason whatsoever to believe that any mis-
FOF.REST                 AU3XANDER   ROBERT WALKER                           2


identification has taken place at any stage.

However, I did notice immediately that the blood samples were

contained in plastic 5 millilitre containers usually used for blood

sairples taken for blood glucose analysis.     This poses of itself a

nurrber of problems:

(a)        It has been shewn a number of occasions that a volatile

           substance such as ethanol (the alcohol in alcoholic

           beverages) can diffuse relatively rapidly frcm such

           containers.     This might be over a period as short as a few

           days.   This is because the container is plastic as opposed

           to glass and is I think caused by permeation through the

           plastic.    In other vrords over a period of time there could

be            a drop in the measurable alcohol content of the sample

           without the container being opened.

           Over the period of tvro or three days frcm these samples

           being taken to being analysed in my department I would not

           think that such a drop could be very great.     I would be very

           surprised if in any individual case it had exceeded 10

(b)        The particular container used is marked and designed to

           leave a considerable dead space above the blood sample -

           that is to say that the tube is filled to only about 50      of

           its capacity.    This leaves in comparative terms a

           considerable amount of air in the gap between the sample and

           the top of the container.     Ethanol could evaporate into that

           air and would thus be lost every time the container was

           opened. Further the oxygen in the air by virtue of a

           complex reaction with the haemoglobin in the blood and

           the ethanol present can lead to a significant reduction in

           the ethanol concentration by a process of oxidation.     I
FOFREST                ALEXANDER    ROBERT   WALKER                          3


            regret to say that there is evidence that such oxidation

            took place because the blood samples were found to contain

            an unusually high proportion of acetaldehyde. This is an

            oxidation product of ethanol.    Hcwever, it seems to me

            unlikely that this oxidation could account for a loss or

            more than 5   of the ethanol concentration during the period

            between the samples apparently being taken and being

            analysed in rtty department.

(c)         The particular type of container used tends to leak once it

            has been opened and closed more than a few tiroes.   This is

            generally undesirable frcm both the analytical and safety

            point of view.   Obviously if blood can leak out, air can

            leak in which would further increase the process of

            oxidation and thus alcohol loss.

It is of interest to comment that when I was at the Medico Legal

Centre I did not see any of the tubes that I have referred to in

evidence in the post-mortem room.      I can only speculate that blood

sairples were taken by the Pathologist and held in glass universal

containers (this would be the normal course) and then transferred in

part into the type of container that I have referred to by either

Mortuary attendants of Scenes of Crimes Officer frcm the Police.         I

die see a Pathologist taking one sample into a universal container

which leads me to believe that rtty supposition is in fact probably

accurate.

Despite rtty reservations about the type of container used for blood

sairples I would like to stress that in rtty opinion the results achieved

by rtty analysis are sufficiently accurate for general conclusions to be

drawn about the alcohol contents of individual blood samples at the

tirre of death.   In other words although I would not wish to claim that
        FOFREST                 ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER


        the results of the analysis obtained must be absolutely accurate they

        are certainly not going to be very far wrong.

        I crew the attention of H.M. Coroner to the question of the blood

        sairple containers at an early stage.

        I should also like to say that in relation to my first statement it

        will be noticed upon a careful scrutiny that the numbers accorded to

        the deceased on three occasions are in fact exactly the same numbers

        as the blood alcohol content in milligrams per one hundred

        millilitres.    This was notice immediately in my department and has

        been carefully checked.      It is pure coincidence however bazaar that

       may seem.      I have also drawn this matter to H.M. Coroner's attention.



                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                            STATION

   NAME:           MICHAEL
                   LAYTON

   ADDRESS:            NECHELLS GREEN PSTN, FOWLER ST
                       NECHELLS, BIRMINGHAM, W.MIDLANDS, B7 5DA

   AQ3 / DATE OF BIRTH: 21 100

   OCCUPATION:     POL INS9364     VIDEO SECTION


   Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
   by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
   it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
   prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
   to be false or do not believe to be true.


^ D A T E D : 280190                                              M LAYTON (SIGNED)



              I am a Police Inspector with the West Midlands Police and since 19

             April 1989 (190489)1 have been engaged in the identification of

              persons who died in the disaster at Hillsborough Football Stadium on

              Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489).

             My specific duty has been to supervise a team of Police Officers

              locking at all video and photographic evidence provided to the Inquiry.

             With regard to the deceased I have attempted to identify each persons

              position in the ground before and after their deaths using video and

              photographic material, obtained frcm a variety of sources.

              In seme instances it has been necessary to confirm the identification

              of the deceased by reference to the clothing vrom by them.

              On 28 January 1990 (280190) I viewed material in relation to Philip

              HAWOND b o m 8.12.1974 (08121974)



              Having viewed this material I prepared a schedule shewing reference

              nurrbers and the nature of any identification.

              I produce this schedule together with the relevant video/photographic

              foctage.
        LAXTON              MICHAEL                            2


                                             M LAYTON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   280190

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   M LAYTON INSP 9364

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                   99
     West Midlands Police
  Evidence Continuity Chart
               For
      DR STEFAN POPPER
             Coroner
South Yorkshire (West District)
        HILLSBOROUGH
      DISASTER INQUIRY
    Saturday 15 April 1989
               By
           J M JONES
   Assistant Chief Constable
     West Midlands Police


 Deceased Reference No 93
 Name    hammond   Philip
4




        Inform ation


                Witness name
    Statement
                Date I Time
    dSbnteu



     Loss of continuity
15 APRIL 1989



0920




       my son Philip went to watch
       the semi fmal at Sheffield.    Philip HAMMOND call
       He went to the match with      my house, we got a b
       his friend Ian SOUTHGATE.     Speke, where we oaug
         Philip left the house at    coach to take us to Sh*
        approximately 0920 a.m.
              to call for Ian.
                 M r .P.HAMMOND                 Mr.I.SOUTI-

       S 101    15.4.8910920app       S 626     15.4.891 OS
1000                                   1300                                     1330




        At Speke coach station I met                                                   the Leppings Lane turnstiles.
            Philip HAMMOND. Ian                                                         Ve walked down the tunnel,
       SOUTHGATE and                            Ve arrived in Sheffield,
                                                                                       went into Pen 3 and stood on
       we were on different coaches,           Philip and I then walked to
                                                                                       the terraces about half way
       so f arranged to meet them in                   the ground.
                                                                                       down, near to the fence that
                 the ground.                                                             divided Pen 3 and 4. This
                                                                                         would be about 1.50 pxn.


        SI 561   15.4.891 lOOQapp
                                                  I
                                               S 626
                                                         M r J.SOUTHGATE

                                                        15.4.8911300apo                 S 626
                                                                                                  Mr. I.SOUTHGATE

                                                                                                  15.4.89




                                               1arrived in Sheffield, 1met                      and I met with Phil
                                                          we walked to the             and San inside the ground. We
                                                     grottnd together.                           sat talking.




                                                  I
                                              JS1561    15 .4 .8 9 1 1300appJ          S1561     15.4.89 |l5 5 0 a p p j
1400   1430




              rBy 2.30 p.m. it was quite
              fu ll, and by about 2.50 pjn .
                    It was packed solid.




                         M r. I.SOUTHGATE

              S 621.     15.4.89! 1 4 3 0 0 )



              By 2 .30 p.m. the crowd in
               this pen got unbearable, I
              was sweating, and by 2.45
               pjn. you oould not move.




              SI 561   115.4.891 1430O )
                                                                                                 | K ic k -o ff |




1438:44                                               1455                                    1459:30




                          ?sBw5qf             ^                                                                       About a minute of the game
                                                             I was standing with Philip my
                                                             feet were o ff the ground and                          starting there was a big push
                           1in Pen S.                                                                                 from behind. I was holding
                                                              I could not move one way or
                                        states,                                                                     Phil's hand and with the force
                                                              another. By this time Philip
               I can Identify myself and                                                                              of the crowd pushing Phil's
                                                             had been pushed forward and
                    on tills s till, and Philip                                                                      hand slipped from my grasp
                                                              I did not see him again after
              HAMMOND would have been                                                                               and he fell away. I did not see
                                                                        2.55 pjn.
              just next to me. (S I 561 A)                                                                            Phil after that. When I lost
                             VIDEO STILL                                Mr.I.SOUTHGATE                               my grip on Phil's hand I was
                                                                                                                      about a me third way into
               MAP 1                                         S 626     15.4.8911455app                               the stand and near to where
                                                                                                                         the barrier collapsed.
                                PLAN              |                                                                     |
          ^    MP1        15.4.89|            J                                                                      SI 561    15.4£9|
1503                                    1504




       PhotographsPR1 /1 0 A and
         PR1 /15A taken bet ween
          1503 and 1504 hours
       showing Philip HAMMOND in
       Pen 3. Positive identification
       by Philip HAMMOND (father)
             ( SI 01B refers)

                   PHOTOGRAPHS

                  15.4.8911503/04

       Photgraphs PR1 /1 0 A ,1 1A,
                  and17A.
                              states,
        I can identify myself and
              in these photographs,
         I had lost sight of Philip
       HAMMOND by this tim e, but
       he would have been in front
        of me. (S I 561A refers)

                   PHOTOGRAPHS

                  15.4.8911503/04
1510
                                    ^lacedth^oyTin^eTear
                                   an ambulance. We then tried to
                                   ' e v i v e the boy with assistance
                                   from an ambulancewoman. We
                                    cleared his airways and gave
 ^/a^nsfruetSnomak^y                 him heart massage and were
                                       able to restart his heart, a       It was decided the boy should
 tfay to the ground. On entering
                                     pulse could then be fe lt, P.O.       be taken to hospital, but the        Ve arrived at the Northern
 the ground I ran M o toe tunnel
                                        SHIEL left and found some           driver could not be found.         General Hospital and took the
   I approached a youth I now
                                   oxygen for the lad. One of the          P.C. SHIEL got the keys, and           boy into the casualty
  know to be Philip HAMMOND.
                                     ambulance's own crew came            drove the ambulance, whilst          department, where I assisted
  He was laid on toe ground and
                                             and we continued to work        the ambulanceman and 1                 the hospital staff.
  appeared to be unconolous. I
                                                 on the boy.              continued to work on the boy.
   picked him up and made my
  way out of toe tunnel, I was
    joined by P.C. SHIEL who
           assisted me.             S475A
                                                P.C. 1927 TAYLOR

                                                15.4.891
                                                                              |
                                                                           S 475A
                                                                                     P.C. 1927 TAYLOR

                                                                                     15.4.89|          j
                                                                                                               ~r
                                                                                                               ^S 475A
                                                                                                                         P.C. 1927 TAYLOR

                                                                                                                          15.4iji|
            P.C. 1927 TAYLOR
                                                P.C. 2662 SHIEL §
 S475A      15.4.891 1510+
                                   1& 622A      15.4.89|            J    1 S622A
                                                                                      P.C. 2662 SHIEL |

                                                                                     15.4.89|          J
Is
            P.C. 2662 SHIEL j

     622 A 15.4.891           J
                                        ?n I got to toe rear off
                                               imbulance there was
                                    already a person lying In toe
                                     oot, with a policeman with
                                                                         f    1
                                                                         ^ S 10 14   15.4.89|              1
                                       him. The patient was not
                                      breathing. Ve cleared his
                                    airway. I saw a fireman with
                                   resuscitation equipment which
                                     I started to use. I then left.



                                    S1022      15.4.891
                                  1600                                    1900




                                         I was on call to the Northern
Doctor decided ve could do no                                                       1returned to the Northern
                                            General Hospital and was
more for him as v e could not                                                       General Hospital with P.C.
                                           called in as a result of the
    gain any pulse or signs of                                                      SHIEL. Ve labelled the 11
                                           incident at Hillsborough. I
  life. I then took the body to                                                    bodies in the mortuary and
                                             arrived at the accident
 the plaster room which was                                                       then returned to Hillsborough
                                           department at about 1455
   being used as a temporary                                                             with the bodies.
                                          hows and shortly after this
            mortuary
                                          I examined 11 bodies in the



         i
 S4T5A |1 5
             X . 1927 TAYLOR             orthopaedic plaster room and
                                         certified death on all. Ora of
                                          these todies was allocated
                                          identification number 009.

                                                     Doctor DOORE
                                                                                       1
                                                                                  JB475A
                                                                                              P.C. 1927 TAYLOR

                                                                                              15.4.891 1900 A

                                                                                              P.C. 2662 SHIEL |

                                          S575A    15.4.891 1555+                IS 6 2 2 A   15.4.89|        J
APRIL 1989




345




                                                   I escorted the body of              In the presence of Detective
                                                  Philip HAMMOND to the               Inspector TIMMS I identified    I carried out
        I Identified the body of my                                                                                   examination
                                                Medico Legal Centre where             the body of Philip HAMMOND
       nephew Philip to P.C. 1927.                                                                                               H
                                                 the body was over to the                to the pathologist Doctor
                                                       reception team.                           SLATER.


                 M r £ .HAMMOND                         PJC . 1927 TAYLOR

                                               8 475A                                 S128QCJ 16.4.89

                                              AMBULANCE LOG
          M r. Brian HAMMOND          D 854   16.4.89| 0448
       identified to me the body of
      his nephew Philip HAMMOND.
                                                     [Between 15.4.89 and 16.4.89
                                                        I was aoting as a receiving
                                                        officer at the Medico Legal
                 '.C. 1927 TAYLOR                        Centre. During this period
                                                       the body of Philip HAMMOND
      8 475A     1 M J W | 0345                           was identified to me by
                                                            P JC. 1927 TAYLOR.



                                                     IS1280CJ116.4.891
a post mortem
on the body af
AMMOND.




-ootor SLATER




                 t
