             THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
             Room 1106
             50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
m            Direct Line 0171273 2512 Fax 2007



 Dr S L Popper                                                   Your reference:

Nottingham                                                       Our reference:
NG4
                                                                 Date:              December 1997




Thank you for your letter of 3 December. In Section 4 of your letter you refer to certain papers
in the interim inquest and refer to them by page numbers. Unfortunately we only have copies of
 mini-inquest transcripts which are individually named and dated but are only paged for that
inquest and are not paged sequentially for all of them. Is it possible for you to assist us by
reference to the documents which we hold?

I am also interested in a letter, dated 3 January 1991, from the Steering Committee. This refers
to a letter, dated 13 November 1990, from Mr Hicks which relates to his daughter, Victoria.
There is part of a letter on file from Mr Hicks (signed pp                   which is not dated
because I think part of it is missing. It would help me if you could confirm that this is the letter
or else send me what it referred to.

My apologies for troubling you with these requests. I look forward to hearing from you.
         O VjlvO         I /v e e /*


    jzm
         JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




G :\fll LLSBOH\MAIN\DRPOPPER.2<m
0115 987 9002

                                                             Nottingham,
                                                             NG4

                                                             3rd December 1997


Mr. C.F. Bone,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 528,
50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
London, SW1H9AT

Dear Mr. Bone,
                                       Hillsborough

I will try to deal with the various matters arising out of the meeting with Sir Murray
and the subsequent letters which I have had from you. No doubt you will arrange to
convey the information to the Sir Murray . I hope that I will have dealt with these
issues adequately but as I have already mentioned before a long time has now passed
and this letter must be read subject to the caveats which I have mentioned in my earlier
letters.

To assist I have tried to split the letter into sections and I hope this helps.

Section 1. Video TB1 and TB2

This is not a point which you have raised but I have been reflecting on this.

On 19th May 1989 Mr. Jones sent me a copy of the video tape compilation. I assume I
viewed this at some point but cannot recall it. There is no suggestion in that letter that
he sent me any of the other tapes.

Looking at the length of the TB1 & TB 2 i.e. about three hours each I think that is
more probable than not that I did not view them in their entirety. I may have seen
parts (and indeed must have done of part of TB2 as that forms exhibit C539) but I
cannot remember as I said at the meeting on 17th November 1997.

Perhaps I should say (unless I did see it when I was dealing with the matter in 1989-
1991) that with regard to the events from 14.18 -14.23 I still have not seen this clip
except for short extracts which were shown on national TV some time ago (and then I
may not have seen all the broadcasts). It may be that if I did view it it would jog my
memory but I doubt it and in any event such recall may not be reliable.

I have looked swiftly through parts of the transcripts of day 1-12 but I have not been
able to spot the reference which I refer to at the foot of page three of the shorthand
note. If it is not there I must be mistaken over this unless we did it informally.
Perhaps the representatives who were at the inquest would be able to recall this.


                                                                                         1
On page three at 6-9 of the short hand note of the meeting on 19th November 1997 I
refer to a video which the jury had not seen. The reference for this remark is on page
100 of day 77 where I say:

        ‘You know that in fact he was identified on video at just before kick-off
        when Mr. Clough comes out, and he is seen looking in towards - well, you
        did not see the video so you don’t know this but he is at that position
        one- minute -to -3.’

Although it does not say I viewed that video I think this is a reasonable assumption. I
do not of course know which video this shot is on.

The remark about Mr. Bernard Hytner on page 4 line 9 of the shorthand note is based
on a comment in paragraph 10 of a minute which Mr. M. Jones sent me of a meeting
held on 19th July of a discussion with me. The relevant part of this note reads :

       41 advised Dr. Popper that Mr. Benen (sic) Hytner QC approached Lord
       Justice Taylor through Mr. Andrew Collins QC for permission to show
       some or all videos recorded on the 1989 Semi-Final. The reason for this
       was that the relatives of the deceased wanted re-assurance that there was
       no cover up and they felt that this can be best achieved by viewing of
       video material. Lord Justice Taylor had agreed that this could take place
       and I have been advised accordingly by Mr. Andrew Collins QC. I am
       decidedly unhappy about this aspect not least of all the distressing nature
       of much of that film....’

 The note goes on to discuss a request for the release of photographs by Miss Steele.
The note continues:

       ‘ Dr. Popper and I agree that this is rather like the statements and the
       request should not be acceded to at this stage. A good point at this tim e,
       made by Dr. Popper was that in the light of the suggestions of “unlawfully
       killing”, it would be highly inappropriate to release material during the
       course of an investigation. Our views also coincide over the showing of
       video material although that may create a lot of difficulties, should we
       refuse, now that the request has already been agreed. (Detective Chief
       Superintendent Foster will meet with Miss Steel and discuss next week.
       He will not be in a position to agree anything at that time for what we will
       be able to do will have to be subject of discussion with Dr. Popper and
       possibly the DPP’s Office). ’

I cannot help you on what eventually happened as I cannot recall this.

Mr. M. Jones Assistant Chief Constable of the West Midland Police as he then was
kept a Policy Book (this minute and Miss Steele’s letter is number 883 in it). I do not
know whether you have seen it but it might help. I knew about this book but it had
nothing to do with me and I do not think that I had or wanted access to it.




                                                                                          2
Section 2, Intra cardiac in jections etc.

During our discussion about Novus Actus at page 13 of the short hand note of the
meeting on 19th November 1997 I mentioned one case with an intra cardiac injection.
I have found another instant of an intra cardiac injection. It involves Adam Spearitt.
In this case I wrote to Detective Superintendent. S. Beechey on 30th March 1990 after
I had reviewed the body file of inter alia Adam. I draw several point s to his attention
including the following:

       ‘ b. Can you please send as soon as possible a copy of Dr. Quartley
       statement to Prof. S. Jones and ask him to consider whether he wishes to
       reconsider his stated cause of death in the light of what is said on page 60
       about the intra cardiac injection and his findings of severe pericardial
       effusion and myocardial haemorrhages.’

If you look at the evidence of Prof. S. Jones at page 223 -224 of the interim inquests
he talks about increased fluid in the pericardial sac I say to him at 224 B that I had
asked him to reconsider the fluid and he confirms that he had given the correct
answers. Apart from anything else I think it illustrates the extent of the inquiry into the
cause of death.

I have not enclosed the copy letter which I quote from but can send it to you if you
wish to see it.

I have also found a file note dated 24.10.90 with Mr. M. Jones and other members of
the team held at Birmingham. (The first quoted paragraph refers to the cut off point
and the second to in effect a Novus Actus).

‘....... Weagaindiscussed the scope of the Inquest and decided that a
convenient point at which we ought to draw the line would be the arrival of the
first ambulance on the pitch. This was really intended as a marker. We agreed
that we would have to be fairly firm to avoid too much straying into post
incident.

I explained that the only problem I could see was that if somebody had alleged
that the medical treatment had caused the death. I felt that if that was put
forward as a serious suggestion, one might have to take that inquest out, making
it plain that no-one (sic) deal with it on that basis and not as part of the
Hillsborough Disaster. We thought that it might be a good idea to make this
point at the procedural meeting.’

As you know we did not take any inquests out. We discussed the question of Novus
Actus on 17th November 1997.

Section 3. Mr. Wardrope

 I have looked again at what I have available of Mr. Wardrope's evidence

He gave evidence twice:

                                                                                          3
       a. On 18th April 1990 at pages 72-81 of the interim inquests

        b. On 23rd April 1990 at pages 353-355 of the interim inquests

I referred to his evidence in my summing up on Day 75 of the main Inquest at Page 70.

He was also in court for the Inquest on Stephen Francis Harrison page 249 and pages
252 - 253. You will see that Mr. Fraser confirmed that he did not wish to hear from
him personally that morning P 252 (G) but Mr. Wardrope at Mr. Fraser’s request had
a private word with Mrs Harrison.

With regard to ‘a’

Mr. Wardrope speaking of the number who went to intensive care says at page 73H to
74 A

       ‘ And of the patients how many went to the coronary care unit - 1 mean
       intensive care or coronary care? - A. There were 17 patients went to
       intensive care units.....

       In addition to that there were also patients who never made it to coronary
       care, unfortunately, who were dead? - A That is correct.’


 At Page 75 D he confirms that 11 patients died excluding Adam Spearitt and Lee
Nicol i.e. a total of 13 dead at the Northern General Hospital.

Mr. Wardrope deals with what happened to people who came in in cardiac arrest at
page 79 D-E ;

       ‘ Some people who came in in cardiac arrest we were able to get the heart
       going, but unfortunately in the three cases we did that none of these
       patients survived. The longest that one survived was the young boy Lee
       Nicol, who unfortunately was brain dead.

       Would it be fair to say that everybody who came in in cardiac arrest in
       fact died?
       A. - Yes.’

With regard to ‘b \

This referred to the Inquest of Gary Philip Jones. Dr Wardrope was recalled because
there was a problem about a conversation which he had had with the family about the
deceased reviving and then dying. Mr. Wardrope explained that in Dr. Marsh’s notes
there was a reference to bradycardia . He was asked to try to reconcile the account if
possible. At page 354 C to D he says :

       ‘A. I did see Gary’s parents and talked to them about his treatment in the
       Northern General Hospital. Gary was brought to the Northern General

                                                                                         4
       Hospital in a state of cardiac arrest, that is, his heart was not going , he
       was unconscious. He had - resuscitative measures were begun. During
       that resuscitation the notes from Dr. Marsh state that he was
       bradycardic. That would indicate that the heart was temporarily
       restarted but later the heart stopped again, and at that stage resuscitation
       attempts were stopped, and he did, according to the notes receive a fairly
       full resuscitation effort but inspite of those efforts the heart could not be
       kept going. So I think he was at no time conscious. The heart
       temporarily was started, as it was in some other cases from the
       Hillsborough incident, but that improvement could not be sustained.’

Later on at 354 F he says:

       ‘...Certainly our experience from Hillsborough and my experience
       generally has been that in a number of cases brought in in cardiac arrest
       we did get the heart going. In fact, two of these patients were admitted,
       but both of those later died because the amount of brain damage was such
       that life was not possible to continue, unfortunately.’

Mr. Wardrope’s evidence states that the three persons in cardiac arrest who were
resuscitated but then died. From the evidence I think one can conclude that these were
Lee Nicol, Adam Spearitt and in the light of the above quote Gary Philip Jones.

I do not know on what basis Dr. E. Walker has been identified with Philip Hammond
but assuming that is correct and that one accepts his evidence which Sir Murray read
out to me and what is in his statement then this person was also in cardiopulmonary
arrest when he came to the Northern General. That would make it four people who
were resuscitated but unfortunately subsequently died.

I think there may in fact be some more. Another one Mr. Paul Brady No 84, whom I
have noticed while working on this letter. In his statement of 6.6.89 speaking of this
young man Mr. Wardrope says that he thinks that it is likely that he was triaged as
dead. This was explored with him at the inquest (p78) and although he maintained
that he had triaged at least 4 people as dead he could not really explain the situation
with this young man but did agree that if resuscitation was undertaken he could not
have been triaged as dead. You will recollect that from the transcripts of the inquest a
P.C Foster felt he could detect a faint pulse and decided that he would seek further aid
(Page 1227 D). Incidentally P.C. Foster was identified carrying the deceased across the
pitch on BBC tape MAP 7 timed at 1530.17.20. Dr. Jacobs was called to the inquest
and gave evidence of resuscitation attempts. He mentions cardiac massage which may
indicate no cardiac output and he also mentions a junior anaesthetist joining him and
undertaking various activities. You will find this at pi 229 F-G of the interim inquests.

If one looks at Dr. Walker’s statement ( I will deal with Dr. Walker in more detail
later on) he indicates that he dealt with 10 persons from Hillsborough. The first two
are Lee Nicol and the now identified Philip Hammond. The fourth patient he mentions
he says was in cardio-pulmonary arrest and he again says that he got the heart beating
but the patient re-arrested and resuscitation in the end had to be abandoned. The fifth
patient mentioned is described as receiving cardiopulmonary resuscitation. He does
not say he is in arrest (but he might have been if he has receiving cardio pulmonary

                                                                                       5
resuscitation). He does not say what happened to Mm. I think judging from the
statement patients 6 and 7 were not in arrest when seen by Dr. Walker but the position
is not entirely clear. The eighth patient he describes as asystolic and he thinks
resuscitative measures were abandoned. Apart therefore from patient five where the
position is not clear (and if you wish patients six and seven ) all the patients who were
in cardiac arrest who he dealt with irrespective of whether a rhythm was restored did
not survive.

Looking at the two immediately preceding paragraphs I wonder if he was the junior
anaesthetist mentioned by Dr. Jacobs.

I am not saying that this is an exhaustive reassessment of the deceased who were
 admitted to the Northern General Hospital and subsequently were certified dead. If
you think it necessary no doubt you will reassess the evidence. I suppose if one
wanted to one could look at the hospital notes of the 15 or so who were admitted to
the intensive care units and who survived to see how they presented. I was on the
 11* April 1990 supplied with a list of names and addresses and outcome of the people
who Mr. Wardrope said were on the Major Disaster List. As coroner I did not have
jurisdiction over those who had not died.

On the available evidence it seems to me that whether there be three or six or even
more people who arrived in cardiac arrest the core statement of Mr. Wardrope namely
that they did not survive despite resuscitation still applies and this, subject to what I
have said above about patients five, six and seven, seems borne out by Dr. Walker. I
am conscious that I may be trespassing on Sir Murray’s ground. It is obviously a
matter entirely for him as to what conclusion or inference he draws.

Mr. Wardrope in his evidence before the jury indicated at Page 75 E-G that initially he
had participated in the resuscitation of individuals but when more help was available he
undertook triage.

As you will remember at the meeting of 19* November 1997 there was some
confusion with regard to Mr. Wardrope’s statements. One of these is dated 6.6.89.
This is the one you sent me (unfortunately I seem to have left that copy at your offices
after the meeting). I do however have a copy of it which has some of my handwriting
on it. I also have a typed version of another statement from Mr. Wardrope which is
undated.

It is in the statement of 6.6.89 that Mr. Wardrope deals with the outcome of the fifteen
patients with severe traumatic asphyxia (these being additional to those who died).
He says on the last page of this statement that of those who were admitted with
cardiac output and breathing but deeply unconscious or fitting two had severe brain
damage, three had significant brain damage and ten made good recoveries.

My reply on page 20 line 6 of the shorthand note implies that the information about the
survivors was in the evidence (by which I think I meant the transcripts of the inquests)
but that is not in fact the case: - It is in his statement of 6.6.89 as indicated above.

I think however it is important to note that Mr. Wardrope in that statement seems to
draws a distinction between those who were in cardiac arrest and despite resuscitation

                                                                                        6
attempts did not survive and those fifteen who although asphyxiated had a heart beat
and he says were breathing who were admitted to intensive care units and survived as
described above.


 The jury would not have known which of the survivors who had been on intensive
care units came to give evidence. The names of the survivors are on the major incident
list. The had however heard evidence from people who had lost consciousness and in
fact I refer to it in my summing up where on Day 75 at page 72 G I say:

       ‘....Indeed ,we have seen several people who were unconscious, who told
       us so, and who are here and who seem perfectly all right because the cells
       in their case fortunately had not been so severely damaged as to be
       irretrievably harmed....’

Turning to the undated statement of Mr. Wardrope it might be of interest that
towards the end of that statement he says:

‘....By the following morning I was able to calculate that ninety-three patients
had been through the Department, of whom fifty-live were admissions
twenty-seven discharges and twelve dead. (Note there was a thirteenth namely Lee
Nicol on 17thApril 1989.) Of the admissions fifteen were in intensive care ...’ (I
think this should actually be 17 based on his other evidence mentioned earlier).

If for some reason you do not have a copy of this statement please let me know and I
will send you a copy.

I had thought that the above might give the definitive number of patients dealt with
arising out of the major disaster but if you add up the names of the patients on the
major disaster list the number comes to 88 so I am still unsure of the total number
involved.

Section 4. Mr. Bruder and Inspector Sawyer

 I have been puzzling about what Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said about Inspector
Sawyer and or Mr. Bruder contacting my office to discuss the medical evidence. I
have looked at the transcripts for 3rd May which I think was the day of the visit by
Inspector Sawyer and the pathologist involved in the inquests on that day was
Professor Usher. It was also my impression that Dr. Slater initiated the contact with
Mr. Bruder rather than the other way round though this does not preclude more than
one conversation.

As I have already said I cannot remember such a conversation but I suppose it could
have occurred and I have forgotten it. Even if Mr. Bruder is entirely correct that my
office was telephoned I cannot see quite what turns on who Inspector Sawyer or Mr.
Bruder spoke to at my office particularly if you bear in mind that the decision making
body in these inquests were the jury I see no objection to me speaking with my
coroner’s officer (and indeed had obviously spoken to him the previous evening).
Speaking to a witness was not as I recall my normal practice (though I did speak at


                                                                                         7
times to some of the relatives of some of the deceased e.g. Mr. Devonside who
subsequently gave evidence).

 It occurs to me that if this is important that perhaps Inspector Sawyer might be able to
help. Another thought is that Mr. Bruder could be asked if the person he says he
spoke to had a particular accent. You will no doubt have noticed that I do have one.
If the answer is in the negative it would confirm my recollection. If positive it would
not necessarily disprove it as unfortunately the drama documentary had an actor who
also spoke with a pronounced accent. Its a thought if you think it is worth following
up.

There will be more on the Kevin William inquest when I deal with your letter of 19th
November.

Section 4. 3.15 cut off point

  I am not sure whether you wanted a copy of the document I had which listed a
number of matters occurring after 3.15p.m. which were included in the evidence before
the jury. I have tried to tidy this up and make it a little neater and enclose a copy. It
was intended as an aid memoir for me so I hope it makes sense and that it helps. I
must stress that I am not saying that it is comprehensive and there may be other cases
as well.

You will find one or two other references to the cut off point in this letter. We also
discussed it at the meeting and of course it was dealt with by the Divisional Court at
the judicial review.

Section 5 Brian Houldsworth

On 30th October 1997 you sent me a copy statement of Mr. R Houldsworth. This
statement clearly comes from the DPP submission as the page numbering of a copy I
collected from the Coroner’s office is identical (620 -629). It carries two dates. On
the front 27.05.89 and at the end 16.05.89. I have checked my copy against the
Holmes printout of this statement enclosed with your letter of 24th November 1997 and
the text and dating is the same.

I had also brought to the meeting another statement of Mr. Houldsworth which also
carries two dates. Both are 28.04.89. My copy comes from the DPP submission and
is numbered 617-619. I have checked this statement against the Holmes print out
enclosed with your letter of 24th November 1997. The two documents appear to be
the same except that the Holmes version omits the sentence ‘ I locked the room and
set the alarm and left the ground’ immediately before the paragraph which begins
‘ I returned to the ground at about 9 am ...’.

 In other words the documents which I had with me were substantially the same as
those which you have now referred me to. I do not think that I have seen the
statement made to the club solicitors but Sir Murray said that it was the same as the
police statement. I hope this clears up the confusion as to which documents we were
looking at (page 27 of the shorthand note)..


                                                                                         8
  I think however there is one correction that I would like to make. On page 9 line
 12-14 and at pagel 1 at line 3-4 of the short hand note of our meeting on 19th
November last I say that Mr. Houldsworth left the room after noticing something
going on at 15.50. In fact that is not correct because he stayed in the CCTV room till
after he heard the order to open the gate. We had prepared a main event timing and
this indicates that the estimated first opening when someone was ejected was 1448.04
and the main opening following Supt Marshall request was at the estimated time of
 1452.06. Mr. Houldsworth says that at that point he realised that a dangerous
situation was being created. He goes on to say that he left the room and went down
the players tunnel. The match was stopped at 1505.24. My computation of time
should be about 13 minutes (page 11 line 8 of the shorthand note) assuming of course
that he left forthwith upon the opening of the Gate C and that the timings are correct .

Section 6. Review of Interim Inquests

  Sir Murray drew my attention to the claim that I misled the families at the interim
inquests as to getting further answers at the main inquest, (p 31 of the shorthand note
of our meeting). He asked if I could find documentation relating to this. (Page 33 -34
of the shorthand note). Sir Murray indicated that he could not find anything to support
this. It seems to me a bit unfair that someone should be able to make such an
allegation particularly after seven years or so since the interim inquests without
supplying chapter and verse to support the claim. Or indeed that they should raise it
with Sir Murray as after all this is something which surely must have been known at
the time.

However I think I will be able to demonstrate in a few moments that I do not think this
charge can be justified.

Following out meeting on 19th November I have been back to Sheffield and looked
through at least some of the documentation and I have found quite a lot of
information. I cannot however say that there is not more which I have missed as I only
had a very limited amount of time.

I would remind you that I did not initially wish to proceed in the way we did but
following a letter from Miss Steele and after correspondence with the DPP. I agreed to
deal with the ‘who, when and where’ in the spring of 1990.

Once the decision was taken there was a meeting in March 1990 and following that
meeting Mr. Fraser of the Hillsborough Steering Committee wrote to all solicitors
acting for the bereaved on 9th March. (I think that I saw this letter in draft and
suggested a few small revisions). Although the letter is long I think it may be useful if
I enclose a copy and covering letter. You will see that even at this stage Mr. Fraser
says that after discussion with me if there were any queries on the post mortem or the
summaries they should be put in writing to him on a form attached and copied to me.
I have not searched to see if there are any such forms so cannot say to what extent if at
all there was any uptake but I have no reason to believe that I would not have dealt
with them (subject to the parameters of an inquest and the conditions applicable to
these interim inquests.) In any event Mr. Fraser makes it clear that he would put the
questions in the applicable inquests and again I have no reason to assume that he
would not have done so provided of course that they were proper in the context of an

                                                                                       9
inquest and subject to the limitations imposed as a result of the continuing criminal
investigation which was still proceeding. I assume you have a copy of the transcript s.

Towards the end of the letter Mr. Fraser writes:

        ‘ For our part we believe that this move by H.M. Coroner to impart
        information to families is to be applauded and we have taken the liberty
        of making that point in open Court and through the press. The Coroner
        is under no obligation to act in the way that he is and we believe that his
        stated intentions to assist families in any way he can by providing this
        information are entirely genuine and we trust that those families who you
        represent will accept this move on his behalf in the way in which we
        believe that it is intended.’

On 19111September 1990 I wrote to the Hillsborough Steering Committee (and I
suspect others as this appears to be a standard letter Hills/Sol/ 4/SLP/JT/2) notifying
them of the resumption and reminding them of evidence taken and the limitations of an
inquest. I invite them to draw names to my attention for consideration. You will
remember from the Business meeting this did not work very well. I enclose a copy of
this letter for information.

On 20* September 1990 Mr. M. Jones wrote to the Assistant Director of the Family
and Community Services Department. I enclose a copy of this letter with Mr. Jones’
note to me. You will see that Mr. Jones indicates that it was unlikely that the
individual inquests will be opened as far as the deceased are concerned unless I was
convinced that there were good grounds for this.

On 29* September 1990 I have a file note of a conversation with Mr. Frazer. The
relevant part of my note reads:

       ‘We talked a little bit about the interim inquest. Mr. Frazer said “     it
       went very well. We finished within a few minutes of the scheduled time
       over a two and a half week period”. He also confirmed that there were a
       few families who had expected more and they were not entirely happy
       with the way that he had asked any questions, but he had deliberately
       tried to phrase the questions so as to get some answer rather than to get a
       negative response, but he confirmed that the vast majority of families
       were very satisfied with the way the inquest had been done.’

There is also a file note of a conversation with Mr. Fraser dated 12.10.90 . In this case
I enclose a copy of it as it interestingly also deals with the scope of the inquest. As
far as the interim inquests are concerned Mr. Fraser mentions that there are one or two
people who had small queries about the individual inquests. I indicate that I had not
intended to deal with this but would think about it. He goes on to say that he did not
think the points were substantial as far as he could recollect.

I have found another file note which is undated but must I think have been in October
1990 as it refers to coming to the meeting on the 30tk with Mr. King. In this note I
write (it is I who am speaking)


                                                                                       10
              It was regrettable that it would not be possible to please everybody.
        Indeed, I had had another letter from somebody who wasn’t very happy
        with the interim Inquests despite the fact that he Mr. Fraser had made a
        special submission on his behalf.....’

If we now turn to the Business meeting of 30tk October 1990 a copy of which you
now have. Mr. King at page 13 raised the question of matters arising out of the
interim inquests and asked if the points could be put before me in written form.
My reply is in the third paragraph of that page where I say:

             I will use the word justified, that is not intended to be rude at all -
       justified and legitimate, and proper to be dealt with, then of course I will
       consider that sympathetically. However, there may be matters which may
       be raised which I feel have either been adequately dealt with, in which
       case I will say so, or alternatively which I feel are outside the scope of the
       inquiry, in which case I will also say so.’

On 16th November 1990 I received a letter from Mr. Fraser in which he uses the
expression “would be prepared to consider reopening a number of the interim inquests.
This letter with its enclosures is number 2 in the bundle fasten together with a treasury
tag. This bundle contains the bulk of the documentation which I have found relating
to individual enquiries. I have tried to make a sort of list of what is in this bundle and
have highlighted the letters which I think are more important though of course
assessment is matter entirely for you.

You will see that attached as number one is the schedule of names which had been
enclosed with the letter of 16th November 1990. There are 21 names on this schedule
and against each I have written some comment. In addition by a letter of 1 Itk February
1991 matters relating to Paul Carlisle, Michael P. Kelly and Peter McDonnell were
raised and there is also a letter from Miss Kennah dated 28th January 1991 which is
headed Peter Tootle. Also included in the bundle are requests for the calling of some
additional witnesses and my response to these.

I do not think it is necessary for me to analyse in detail the documentation as it is
before you but I will just make a number of comments on what you have in front of
you.

               1. If you look at item 1 on the schedule i.e. the list of 21 names you
                  will see that every one has a comment made against them in my
                  handwriting. It does not follow that my decision always pleased the
                  parties but I had at least made an indication of what I was proposing
                  to do and that I had applied my mind to the individual concerns.

               2. By the 3ld of January 1991 this list had reduced to eleven names as
                  Miss Kennah for the Hillsborough Steering Committee indicated
                  that her letter listed the outstanding queries .

               3. Miss Kennah’s letter of 28th January 1991 headed Peter Tootle
                  refers to a letter of mine of 17th January. There is such a letter in the
                  bundle but it makes no reference to Peter Tootle. I do not know

                                                                                         11
   what this refers to . Perhaps there is another letter which I have not
   retrieved. You will recollect that Peter Tootle’s family were parties
   to the judicial review proceeding.

4. On the 13th Februaiy 19911 wrote and dealt with every one of the
   eleven cases raised by Miss Kennah on 3rd January 1991.

5. There was some forther correspondence and there appears to be a
   definite letter from Miss Kennah about these eleven names.

6. In a letter of 11th February 1991 there is a request for additional
   witnesses in respect of three deceased;- Paul Carlisle, Michael David
   Kelly and Peter McDonnell. Two of the witnesses Mr. Atkins and
   Mr. Feams I was calling anyway. The request to call_________was
   effectively withdrawn (see letter 18111February 1991). I rejected
   another witness (see my letter of 19.2.91).

   You will recollect that the families of Paul Carlisle and
   Michael David Kelly were parties to the judicial review proceedings.

7. With regard to Paul Carlisle there were three approaches. The first
   was as item 3 on the list with the letter of 16tk November 1990.
   Mr. A.W.Langley was called as a witness (day 26 witness 108).
   Please check the transcript to see if this is the one Mrs. Stringer
   refers to. In fairness to Mrs. Stringer she actually says that she is
   aware that the cause of Paul’s death happened before 3.15. You will
   of course be aware from the judgement in the judicial review
   proceedings that there was another witness Mr. Hollinghurst (day 26
   witness 105) in respect of Paul. The second request I have referred
   to above about additional witnesses. The third was on 18th March
    1991 via Miss Kennah. You will see that it relates to why Paul was
   situated at the rear of the stands at 16.35 and Miss Kennah points
   out that this was raised earlier. She goes on to explain that she had
   circulated a list of families with outstanding queries to prevent such
   an oversight but that Mrs Stringer had not contacted her to set her
   straight. She asks whether one of my officers can help as it was too
   late to deal with it in open court. The file note of Supt Beechey
   indicates that he discussed this with Mrs. Stringer and she appeared
   to accept his explanations.

8. You will notice that a number of names on the original list are not
   mentioned by name namely Ian Glover, Philip Hammond, Gary
   Jones, Richard Jones, Roy Pemberton Graham Roberts and Martin
   Traynor and Christopher Traynor. These do not appear on the
   updated list and so presumably had been resolved but I will just say
   a few words on each.

9. As to Ian Glover I think you will find that his brother was called to
   give evidence. You will also note that my note reads “dealt with
   several times.” This case was judicially reviewed.

                                                                           12
               10. Philip Hammond I have indicated on the schedule of names that the
                  complaint related to the practice at the hospital and that I would
                  check the transcript. I do not recollect what further steps were
                  taken in this case but it seems to me from the letter that the family
                  themselves seems to have given a reason to Dr. Slater for the injury.
                  As Mr. and Mrs Hammond did not give evidence this conversation
                  with Dr. Slater did not take place in court but as you know the
                  pathologists did speak to the families privately in many instances
                  after they had given evidence.

               1l.Gary Jones. I do not now know how these queries were dealt with
                  but there was quite a lot of evidence at the interim inquest regarding
                  the matters raised. In any event he does not appear on the 3rd
                  January 1991 list.

               12. Richard Jones Mr. King referred to this man on 19thNovember and
                  summarised what Mr. and Mrs Jones were concerned about. I dealt
                  with Mr. King’s submission in my ruling. I was not minded to
                  acceded to their request as to the additional witnesses and you will
                  recollect that this point was dealt with at the judicial review. I cannot
                  remember any more except that there was an exchange of
                  correspondence I think about the witnesses but I do not have this to
                  hand

               13. Roy Pemberton’s questions were also put to me by Mr. King and
                  The nature of the complains may not have commended themselves to
                  me as I have written No against the name. I also dealt with the Mr.
                  King’s submission.

               14. Graham Roberts. A Mr. A Best (I presume this is P.C. B est) was
                  called on day 21 witness 76 but I cannot remember his evidence and
                  do not have the transcript to hand. You have the transcripts and so
                  can check the position to see if I am correct.

               15.Martin and Christopher Traynor. These were two brothers. I believe
                  that the witness requested was in fact called (Mr. N.G. Langley day
                  26 number 108.) I cannot remember what if anything I did about
                  her other complaint about the jury.

I also received an unsolicited letter from Miss Steele dated 30th April 1991 (a copy of
which I also enclose) In this she says:

       ‘ The care and sensitivity and in particular the arrangements made for
       the families at the individual Inquests was very much appreciated both by
       them and by us.

       As far as the lawyers are concerned your unfailing courtesy and
       consideration to the advocates and ready response to various problems


                                                                                        13
        that we, as Solicitors, have had to burden you with have been appreciated
        by us all.’

This I suggest does not indicate dissatisfaction or a perception that I misled the
families.

Section 7. Dr. Edward Walker

This section also deals with your letter of 19th November on this matter.

Following out meeting on 19thNovember 1997 I went to Sheffield on Monday 24th
November and in the light of what I had read in the statement which Sir Murray
showed me I decided just to check the Lee Nicol body file. In it I found a copy of Dr.
Walker’s statement. I phoned on 25* November to tell you. I have now checked this
statement against the Holmes copy you sent me and they are the same.

 I also found a reference to him in a statement by a Dr. Miles J. Davidson where he
says

       1 The boy was taken into the resuscitation room and attempts to
       resuscitate him were made by myself Dr. Glendening, Dr. Walker
       Anaesthetist, and one of the Paediatric Doctors.’

I also checked Lee Nicol’s transcript and there is a reference to various doctors
including a someone named Walker.

I was clearly wrong when I said that I had not seen his statement before. I am sorry
about this but would remind you that seven and half years have passed since the
interim inquests and in fact I have been retired from being Coroner for about six of
these. At least the presence of the statement in the file indicates that the system
functioned and that his evidence was available at the time.

Before I deal with the effect of this there is one other matter which I wish to correct.
At pages 24 -25 I am ruminating about the use of drugs as opposed to defibrillation.
I want to make it quite clear that whilst it is true that defibrillation is I believe the
preferred method of dealing with ventricular fibrillation the administration of drugs is
the treatment of choice in asystole and electromechanical dissociation. Dr. Walker was
with the patients and would have known in what cardiac state the patients were.

Having now found that I had seen the statement albeit perhaps only in the Lee Nicol
file (I do not know as I have not checked all the other body files of the patient who
were at the Northern General). If I had wished to call Mr. Walker in this case I could
have done so but I did not probably because I was satisfied that I had more cogent
evidence in the form of Dr. Appleyard and of course the pathologist. In other words I
would maintain what I said at page 25 line 17-19 of the shorthand note.

Turning to the second person in his statement. On the copy statement which was in
Lee Nicol file I have written against this one ‘? Who?’ You have informed that this
person has now been identified as Philip Hammond.


                                                                                       14
Dr Walker in hi s statement gives a description of the patient. He then describes his
physical condition and I summarise:

               1. gross inhalation of stomach content
               2. gaseous abdominal distension suggest ‘mouth to mouth’
                  resuscitation
               3. cardiopulmonary arrest
               4. fixed dilate pupils throughout
               5. medical intervention including venous access
               6. establishment of sinus rhythm
               7. belief that he has since died

 I have had another look at the transcripts of Philip Hammond’s inquest. It is on
pages 1043 - 1057 of the interim inquests.

There are discrepancies.

 For example I specifically ask Dr. Slater whether there is evidence of cannulae in situ
and Dr. Slater firmly says that he would have seen these if there had been. In fact he
goes further than that in the reply previous to this (Page 1049 A and says;

       ‘     if needle marks had been placed in the body I am quite confident I
       would have found those. There were certainly no needle marks that I
       found in Philip, sir, and so clearly there had been no injection of anything
       into Philip.’

 The evidence of the police officer referred to at page 1052 is that after 20 minutes
effort the doctor treating this young man found no signs of life. I enclose a copy of this
officers statement dated 3.5.89 and his ? recollections which I have received from
Sheffield. Please note that the jury would not have seen this statement but would have
had heard the evidence contained in the summary. In contrast the implication of Dr.
Walker’s statement is that he left him in sinus rhythm.

 I notice that the statement of Dr. E. walker is dated 20th July 1989 i.e. three months
after the event. Provided of course that Dr. Slater is right then Dr. Walker must be
mistaken about the cannulation and indeed Sir Murray said as much. If he is mistaken
about this he could also be mistaken as to whether he left this young man with a heart
beat or whether in fact he did what he describes for patient four i.e. abandon
resuscitative measures.

 I think however the thrust of both Dr. Walker’s evidence and Dr. Slater’s is that this
young man was very seriously compromised and unfortunately he demonstrates (even
assuming that sinus rhythm was established) Mr. Wardrope melancholy conclusion that
those who came in in cardiac arrest did not survive

Having said all this had I linked Dr. Walker’s evidence to Philip I think I would have
put what he had to say to Dr. Slater just as I did with the evidence of the police
officers who also felt that they had found a pulse. I cannot say what Dr. Slater would
have said but I doubt whether it would have made the any difference to his conclusion
as to the cause of death. I do not think that I would have called Dr. Walker as a

                                                                                        15
witness as I do not thmk it would have helped the jury. He confirms in this case what
was already in evidence that people who came in in cardiac arrest even if resuscitated
did not survive. This you will recall is what Mr. Wardrope told us. It may be that had
Mr. and Mrs Hammond requested that I call him I might have considered it because of
the hope that this would in some way help them but it is of course now quite
impossible to say.

  I think my reply to you at the meeting that not knowing about Dr. Walker (in
relation to this case) is a lacuna but I did not think that it is fundamental and it does not
actually add very much to what we already knew is substantially correct.

Dr. Walker mentions various other persons who he worked with and who apparently
died. Have you any information as to who these might be?

Finally on this I do not know whether Sir Murray has or intends to see Dr. Slater
but in view of what I have said above you may feel that it is advisable to see him to
give him an opportunity of expressing his view on this. It would also be an
opportunity for him to comment on Kevin William’s pathology as by chance he was
the pathologist in that case too.

Section 8. Point 2 of your letter of 19.11.97 re Julie Appleton/ Debra Martin

I now turn to points 2 - 4 of your letter of 19th November

The short answer to your question is that I cannot remember whether I specifically
asked Julie Appleton to re interview SPC Martin. I have no recollection of this but
that does not mean did not happen.

On looking through the papers I have found a couple of examples where I did make
some such request.

I found a file note dated 4th April 1990 in which I record a telephone conversation
with D C           and Superintendent Beechey where I record that having looked at
statements from doctors and nurses I say I felt that at least in some o f the cases it was
worth looking into them a little bit further. I cannot now say whether this was in fact
done.

On 30th March 19901 wrote to Supt. Beechey about some summaries In the one
relating to Adam Spearitt I am concerned about the evidence of a Mr. William and I
say

        ‘ I think that it might be worth reinterviewing Mr. William and
        showing him photo’s(sic) in case he can recognise the lad.’

I have to say that neither of these examples would I have remembered if I had not by
chance found some documentary evidence about it.

Finally I do not think that it was that uncommon for persons to be re-interviewed . I
think there are many examples were this happened though of course the reason for the
re-interview would have differed. I enclose for example three statements by Dr. Doore

                                                                                          16
dated 5.5.89, 26.7.89 and 12.1.90 where she was re-interviewed because there was
some concern about her timings relating to death certifications.

I know that we were very concerned about Kevin William’ case. I remember that it
was discussed I think on several occasions and although I cannot recollect the detail I
feel pretty sure that there was discussion how best to proceed and how to deal with
the evidence. I am pretty sure we realised the potential for distress.. It would be
quite possible that following such a discussion a re-interview might well have been
considered appropriate.

I have extracted 4 statements of SPC D. Martin from the file. The first is dated
08.05.89. The second 12.07.89. This one was taken by Sgt. Killoch. The third
05.09.89 and the last is dated 17.03.90 which is the one taken by Julie Appleton.
Although Sgt Killoch said he saw her twice I have only one statement of his in this
bundle. Copy statements are enclosed.

I did not investigate events at the Spion Kop end of the ground (i.e. the Nottingham
supporters end) but I was not and indeed am still not aware of any serious crowd
problems at that end of the ground. SPC Martin in her first statement describes serious
disturbances at that end of the ground. She recounts opening her eyes and finding
herself at the Spion Kop of the ground. She then describes leaving the ground and she
says she ran to the Leppings Lane end of the ground. She describes the ambulances
rushing to that end of the ground and that there were vast crowds outside the turnstiles
trying to get in. She says she cannot remember how she got into the ground but says it
was through the large blue gates. This account is difficult if not impossible to
reconcile with most of the other evidence and this alone would have given cause for
concern about her evidence relating to Kevin. If you decide to deal with this matter
you will no doubt come to your own judgement in relation to SPC Martin evidence.

  In retrospect I think had I thought about I would have thought it a sensible thing to
re-explore with this witness her evidence and consequently if Julie Appleton feels that
her instructions came from me directly or indirectly I do not think I would argue
against that. It has also to be remembered that by this time the coronal team had been
together for a long time and the officers knew the objectives and the scope of my
inquiries..

There are six other points that need making arising out of the interim inquest but
before I make them I think it is necessary to summarise some of the aspects of the
Kevin William inquest..

The interim inquest of this young man was dealt with on two days on 2nd and 4th May
and the transcript are paginated from 1007 to 1042. Dr. Slater was called three times
to give evidence. I intend to extract various matters from the interim inquest. I hope
that when you check the extracts against the transcript as a whole you will feel that
they are not misleading.

As was my practice I had reviewed the summary and on 4th April 1990 wrote to Supt
Beechey making 8 comments or questions. The last one of these reads:



                                                                                      17
        ‘h. We need Dr. Slater for this case. Can he be shown the statements of
        Craighill Bruder and Martin (Highlighting the relevant sections) and ask
        him to consider in the light of his PM findings whether the account of
        SPC Martin is possible’.

On the first occasion when Dr. Slater was called starting at the foot of page 10111
put to him (though I do not appear to identify SPC D. Martin by name) the evidence
which she gave in her first statement namely that she tried resuscitation and that the lad
opened his eyes and said a word and died.. Dr. Slater then comments on this and the
degree of severity of the injury. You will see the strength of his opinion for example at
 1012 D final sentence and his reply 1012 at F. I then put a hypothesis to try to explain
the evidence. He accepts this as to the speech but notes that it does not explain the
opening of the eyes. Dr. Slater is recalled and at page 10161 rather directly put to him
the evidence regarding the convulsions (which is of course Mr. Bruder’s evidence). I
then put to him whether in the light of that, the evidence about breathing and speaking
is more or less likely given that Mr. Bruder’s evidence is closer in time to SPC Martin.
He says that the evidence of opening eyes and speaking is not really conceivable.

When he is recalled on 4th May I am intending to examine him about Mr. Bruder’s
evidence. I give the reason why this is necessary at page 1023 E - G. At page 10321
say:

       ‘We established to everybody’s satisfaction what had happened in the
       gymnasium and the account, we dealt with that as to whether this lad
       could have spoken and so on, so we don’t need to be concerned about
       that. What we are interested in this afternoon is the evidence relating to
       Mr. Bruder.’

In other words SPC Martin’s evidence was not further considered on 4th May 1990
except to the extent that one could say the generic evidence of Dr. Slater and Dr.
Gumpert applied to it.

With reference to her credibility at the foot of page 1011 I say speaking to Dr. Slater:

       ‘ Now the reason why I asked you was this, and I want to put this to you
       because I would like to get your view on it, one Officer will be dealing
       with the value of this evidence in a moment but she says....’

At page 1015 D the following exchange takes place between me and Sgt Killoch who
is giving evidence:

       ‘Q. We have already mentioned the evidence of Special Constable Martin
       who said about the lad speaking. In no way do I want to run poor Special
       Constable Martin down because she had a very hard day but it is right
       she was obviously from her statements very distressed? - A. I also
       wouldn’t want to criticise WPC Martin in any way but I have interviewed
       her twice, sir, and she was particularly upset as indeed many people were
       but it affected her particularly badly the events of that day.

       The Coroner: Well I won’t ask you to draw a conclusion. Mr. Fraser.’

                                                                                       IB
That seems to be the only evidential reference to her credibility apart of course the
pathological evidence. I think it is also the only place where there may be a reference
to Julie Appleton’s re-interview as I use the word ‘statements’ in my question. In
addition as set out in the two quotations below I express my doubts as to the
possibility with regard to speech and opening of eyes and I comment on mistaken
recollections.

At page 1013 B-D I say:

       ‘....We spent a lot of time thinking about this sentence because it was
       difficult. I didn’t think it was possible from what I knew of the evidence
       but, on the other hand, we didn’t want you to feel that we weren’t telling
       you what was in the statements. We felt it better for you to hear it and
       have it explained rather than for us to keep it under wraps , so to speak,
       and you might possibly find out some other time. I hope I have taken the
       right decision. I don’t know       ’

At page 10191 come back to this again:

       ‘ As I said to you in the middle of the hearing we spent quite a lot of
       time wondering what we should do for the best            I am sure that will
       help you - not to come to terms with the loss of your son but it is very
       difficult to come to terms with that loss at all but just to appreciate in the
       stress situation in which people found themselves recollections tend
       sometimes to be mistaken and indeed there are lots of mistaken
       recollections not only in relation to Kevin but also in relation to many
       other people of whom we have heard. That is not at all uncommon and
       occurs in normal fatal incidents as well. It is exceedingly difficult when
       you are suddenly confronted with a situation to then recount exactly what
       happened.’

       1. From the extracts above and I believe the evidence as recorded in the
       transcript you will see that the only evidence of Debra Martin which was put
       to the jury was what she had said in her first statement about Kevin. In
       particular that he spoke and opened his eyes. I did of course explore with the
       pathologist the likelihood of the event described in the light of his pathological
       evidence and re-explored his views in the light of the evidence of convulsions.

       2. Mr. Bruder you will recollect was quite definite in his evidence following
       the visit of Inspector Sawyer that resuscitation was not stopped till he was
       satisfied that the young man was dead.

       3. So even if you were to reject Julie Appleton’s denial and find that there was
       truth in Debra Martin’s claims that she was pressurised to change her evidence
       that evidence I hope you will agree was not put before the jury. The evidence
       which was considered was what was contained in her first statement. I think
       (though I cannot say for certain) that I decided that we had to put SPC Martin
       account at its highest though of course it had to be tested and I did comment
       on it.. As can be seen I did explore how she felt (as far as I can see on the one

                                                                                          19
        occasion only) and even if one studies her first interview only I think one can
        justify the question and indeed the reply.

        4 .1 made it clear that I had difficulties with her evidence but that I was
        determined that we would put her evidence before the jury and indeed the
        family.

        5. As I have said earlier I think it would be desirable for Dr. Slater to be given
        an opportunity to explain and go over his evidence again but this is obviously a
        matter for Sir Murray.

        6. Even if some one were to accept that SPC D. Martin’s evidence as to
        speech and eye opening were entirely correct it would not I suggest make any
        difference to the cause of death for reasons which I think we have gone over
        before and so I do not need to repeat them again now.

I have gone over the ground again in case Sir Murray decides that this is an aspect
that he wishes to deal with. I would however remind you that this matter was
considered by the Divisional Court in the judicial review proceedings.

Section 9. Dr. Bull

I have had extracted out of one the files (Simon Bell) a copy of Dr. Bull’s statement
dated 5.5.89. You will see that he lists 20 names whom he certified and he says it was
approximately between 3.50 and 4.15 p.m. I therefore must have known about the
number of cases he dealt with. I do not recall any concerns about this though as you
will know Dr. Doore was re-interviewed because there was some concern about her
timings. As you will see Dr. Bull says the timing is approximate. In fact if you look
at the transcript of Sarah L. Hicks at page 501 you will see that it is stated that Dr.
Bull certified her dead at 16.20. Unfortunately I cannot say as I do not have the body
files to hand on what basis the evidence regarding the times of death certification were
calculated.

Dr Bull in his statement refers to a Dr Redgrave and I think Dr. Bull’s statement
indicates that they started examining the bodies together. I have had a copy of Dr.
Redgrave’s statement dated 05.05.89. faxed to me. It comes out of Mr. Pemberton’s
file. He says that he estimates the time of each certification to be between 15.30 and
16.35. Again if these times are correct and they started together Dr. Bull would have
begun 20 minutes earlier than stated.

  Unfortunately Dr. Redgrave’s statement may contain at least 2 errors which I have
spotted namely he says he certified John McBrien No 68 and Thomas Steven Fox No
66. In fact if you look at the transcripts you will see that the certification is attributed
to Dr. Ashton. The body files would have to be examined to see whether the transcript
is in error or the statement. Dr Redgrave certified 12 (or 14 bodies) depending on the
above.

I also enclose a copy of the statements of Dr N.C. Curpen. which I have had faxed
down to me out of one of the body files. . The first is dated 27.4.89 and in it at the
foot of the penultimate page he says that he remembers that the first body certified

                                                                                          20
was at 16.00. In his second statement dated 11.05.89 he lists nine bodies. He lists
these and then goes on to say that he did this between 16.00 and 16.10 which would
be a slightly faster rate than what you have referred me to with regard to Dr. Bull..
Unfortunately in at least one case ( Kevin Tyrrell) according to the transcript he
certified him at 3.45 p.m. see page 462 B. You may wish to check the transcripts of
the other 8 cases to check the time given in evidence but if my schedule (referred to in
the next paragraph) is correct his timings for the rest fall between the times stated by
him..

Incidentally I do not have an encyclopaedic recall of the times of death certification or
the names of the certifying doctors. It is just that I happen to a have a schedule to
hand which inter alia lists the names and time of certifications.

Using this schedule Dr. Redgrave is shown as having certified 5 persons between
16.04 and 16.06. The are Stephen Paul Copoc at 16.05 : David George Rimmer at
16.05 : Colin Mark Ashcroft at 16.05 : Alan Johnston at 16.04 : Keith McGrath at
16.06.

I looked at the transcripts and the times are as stated except that I have not been able
to check Alan Johnston’s transcript as it seems to be missing from my set.

The reason why I looked at the statements of the other doctors mentioned was that
they too certified a fairly large number and I was interested to see at what rate they
were recorded as dealing with the certifications.

  Looking at Dr. Bull statement he explains how he proceeded and states that he
performed a normal examination on each body. Strictly speaking bodies should, I
think, be undressed wholly or at least partly to exclude for example violence like a stab
wound but it may well be that in the circumstances prevailing he did not do so. Had he
done so I do not think the time is sufficient unless of course someone was doing it for
him. He indicates that he was assisted and that someone took notes which again if he
had to do would have taken time but it seems that he was able to concentrate on the
certification itself. One has also to take into account the ‘presentation’ of the bodies.
They were lying on the floor I presume, in rows and I expect that they were motionless
and subject to checking the post-mortem descriptions (or photographs) cyanosed.

Reading Dr. Bull’s statement does not give me the impression that the certifications
were not done entirely properly.

I do not have a great deal of experience in certifying death and it would not surprise
me that if I had had to do it I might well have taken longer so I express an opinion with
a degree of caution. A lot of course depends on the clinical skill, experience and
indeed the confidence of the doctor involved.

However if one thinks about it, it only takes seconds to shine a light in a person’s eyes
and establish that the pupils are fixed and dilated and it does not take very much longer
to establish that there are no breath sounds respiratory effort or a heart beat or cardiac
output.



                                                                                         21
Having looked at these statements for the purpose of this letter I have pointed out that
the times may not be as reliable as one might wish but I acknowledge that they are
enshrined in the transcripts.

It would seem that assuming that the times are correct all the doctors seem for at least
part of the time to have been recorded as going at about the same rate which you may
feel is an indication that it is possible to undertake certification at the stated rate.

 My initial reaction when I saw your question was that I thought that the time stated
was on the quick side but on reflection and having considered the above I think it is
possible to certify people quite fast given that the bodies were laid out in rows and he
had note t aking assistance. On balance I think it is possible to certify the deaths of that
number of persons in the time stated.

You might wish to check this with say an A & E consultant if you think it is necessary.
If you do I think it is necessary t o make sure that he understands the circumstances
adequately and has access to the documentation.

Section 10. Inter relationship between Public Inquiries and Inquests.

I mentioned that I had written a letter about the holding of inquests when a public
inquiry has been ordered. The letter is dated 1st May 1991 and the relevant schedule is
“C” a copy of which is enclosed. I made several suggestion but point 5 about
extending Section 16 of the Coroners Act 1988 would enable the coroner to deal with
the matter in the way outlined by L.J. Stuart Smith on page 40 lines 1-4 of the
shorthand note. Actually in Section 16 cases the Coroner is not prevented from
resuming the inquest and I think in (but I could be wrong) the Marchioness case the
coroner had to hold a full inquest despite two criminal trials. In other words one
would have to consider whether one wishes to make the restriction mandatory or
leave it to the discretion of the coroner. I also enclose a copy of the reply form the
Home office for interest.


I am afraid this letter has turned into a monster. I hope it is clear and that it assists.
I am sending a copy of it (excluding the enclosures) to Mr. C. Domes and Mr. M.J. C.
Burgess




cc. Mr. C. Domes
    Mr. M. Burgess.


Enc.


                                                                                          22
