                  Hillsborough Disaster       C* k      2-/»
   31. Mrs. Maureen Hicks: To ask the Secretary of State
for the Home Department if he will make a statement on
the estimated costs of the Hillsborough police inquiry and
the means of funding the West Midlands police
responsible for that inquiry.
   Mr Douglas Hogg: It is not clear at this stage what the
total additional costs of the Hillsborough police inquiry
will be. With regard to the means of funding the West
Midlands police I refer my hon. Friend to the answer my
right hon. Friend gave to my hon. Friend the Member for
Birmingham, Selly Oak (Mr. Beaumont-Dark) on 28 April
at column 702.
   Mr. Corbett: To ask the Secretary of State for the
Home Department whether the West Midlands police
authority will be fully reimbursed for the costs of the West
Midlands police inquiry in support of the judicial review
into the Hillsborough stadium tragedy; and if he will make
a statement.
   Mr. Douglas Hogg: I would refer the hon. Member to
the answer my right hon. Friend gave to my hon. Friend
the Member for Birmingham Selly Oak, (Mr.
Beaumont-Dark) on 28 April at column 702.
   Mr. Shersby: To ask the Secretary of State for the
Home Department what is the estimated cost to public
funds of the police inquiry into the Hillsborough football
disaster; and if the costs will be met by his Department.
   Mr. Douglas Hogg: It is not clear at this stage what the
total additional costs of the police enquiry into the
Hillsborough football disaster will be. With regard to the
means of reimbursing the West Midlands police I refer my
hon. Friend to the answer which my right hon. Friend gave
to my hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Selly Oak
(Mr. Beaumont-Dark) on 28 April at column 702.



                  Hillsborough Disaster               Jf 6 f
   Mr. Blunkett: To ask the Secretary of State for the
Home Department, pursuant to his answer to the hon.
Member for Birmingham, Selly Oak (Mr. Beaumont
Dark) of 28 April, Official Report, column 702, what steps
he is taking to reimburse the South Yorkshire police
authority for the costs arising from the public inquiry into
the Hillsborough disaster.
   Mr. Douglas Hogg: A meeting is to be held between
Home Office officials and officers of the South Yorkshire J
police authority shortly to discuss the representations^
made by the authority over the costs of the inquiries beinjJ
undertaken by the West Midlands police.                   T
