                      cc Miss Dent
                         Miss Nicholson
                         Mr. Yates
                         Mr. Hammond                           1 7 GOT 1589 l o il3
                         Mr. Boys Smith
                         Mr. Turney                   H o m e O ffice
                         Mr. Bolton                  QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                         Mr. Clayton                 LONDON SWIH PAT
                         Mr. Goddard
                         Mr. Osborne
PARLIAMENTARY UNDER      Mr. Mould
SECRETARY OF STATE      Mr. Lidington                1 6 OCT




  As you know officials of our two Departments have been discussing
  but have been unable to reach agreement on the question of appeal
  rights against terms and conditions in safety certificates where
  these arise from a requirement of the Football Licensing Authority
  (FLA), a subject on which the Football Spectators Bill is at
  present unclear.

  I realise this is a difficult area and I shall not rehearse the
  arguments with which, I am sure, you are already well aware.       I
  do wish to make the point though that appeal rights were always
  considered to be an integral part of the arrangements which would
  be worked up between our two Departments on the relationship
  between the FLA and the local authorities responsible for safety
  certification. The Home Secretary has referred in his letter of
  21 June to the need for bridges to be built and for appeal where
  there is conflict.    Admittedly all this was at a time when the
  relationship between the new authority and local authorities was
  still to be fully settled. We are not proposing that an appeal
  right should exist for the local authority against an FLA decision.
  The absence of a specific right or avenue of appeal in these
  circumstances would not prevent a challenge against             the
  reasonableness of the Football Licensing Authority's requirements
  by way of an application for judicial review.

  What we are more concerned with is the possible removal of the
  avenue of appeal for those who are affected by the terms and
  conditions of safety certificates, either to the magistrates court
  or to the Crown Court. The effect on them (including the emergency
  services) is the same whether the terms and conditions which
  concern them have been imposed (or omitted) by the local authority
  themselves or following a requirement of the Authority.

  What we seek to do is to amend the Bill to remove any implications
  that the existing appeal rights under the Safety of Sports Grounds
  Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) are diminished by the Bill.




                                           /I do understand


  Hon. Colin Moynihan MP
todinterfe?«aw(df h ° ^ conct ™ s b“t "e do believe that we ought not
I? ™     t           , existing rights of appeal under the 1975 Act
rea^abl^ ^h® ™                 "2 to judge by, provided the FLA acts
provision to                   should be few and far between and
p   ision to retain them would not undermine the FLA's authority.
We must resolve this quickly.




                           PETER LLOYD
