              SOUTH YORKSHIRE  SENIOR
                 ATTENDANCE CENTRE
                                                  c/o Police Headquarters,
                                                  Snig Hill,
                                                  Sheffield S3 8LY

                                                  T.N.

Mrs. M. Sadi        ari                           5 March,   1990
Cl Division,
The Home Office                                   Ref: CHN 90/401/11/3
Queen Anne* s Gate,
LONDON SW1H 9AT


Dear Mrs. Sadler,

ATTENDANCE CENTRES - Lord Tavlor Inquiry

I refer to your letter of 7 February, 1990 regarding the recommendations
concerning the wider use of Attendance Centres contained within Lord
Taylor's Report.

My personal views of the proposals are that in general terms they have nueh
merit.   However in practical terms I have several reservations concerning
the practicality of the implementation of a scheme designed purely to deal
with the so called "football hooligan".   My reservations are as follows:

1.RESOURCES

The catchment area for this Centre,      includes Sheffield,   Chesterfield,
Barnsley and Rotherham all of which have teams in the Football League, so
that during the football season several will be playing 'home'fixtures each
Saturday.   To cater for this it would be necessary to have the Centre open
on a weekly basis and this would possibly present difficulties in respect
of the availability of staff and equally as important - premises.

2. ENFORCEMENT

If such a scheme is to be implemented, its impact would have to lie in the
knowledge by the offender, that failure to comply with an Order will result
in immediate retribution.       The present Court system, with its delays,
and adjournments,   is in my view,     ir^acapable of that immediacy,    and
especially so where the Crown Court is involved.     The period between the
initial breaching process and finalisation is usually measured in months.

3. ATTITUDE OF COURTS

In eight years of involvement with Attendance Centres I can remember only
one person being sent to the Centre for a public order offence within a
football ground.          Considering that Magistrates already have the
necessary powers to impose an Attendance Centre Order on the appropriately
aged offender, on that basis, would they make any further use of extended
powers?    I doubt it.
4. EXTENSION OF AGE GROUPS

If the Attendance Centre system were to be extended to allow persons over
21 and to include "a more challenging type of offender” <Para. 330) then I
consider that the present type of regime at most Centres would be totally
inappropiate to deal with this category.      Staff are presently serving or
ex-police officers and operating a system designed to cater for a
particular age and class of individual.          The suggested extension is
mainly one of containment and in my view, neither the existing staff, nor
the type of premises we use,  are appropiate.

Yours sincerely,




A. HIGHFII
Of ficer-ln-Charge
