                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE Cc-
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                         P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                        Regent Street
                                                                                        Barnsley
                                                                       South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
                                                                Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222

                                                                      Date:
                                                                             25 January 1990
This matter is being dealt with by   |\/|p $ Walker                  Telephone ext: 262




             Dear Mr Waghorn
             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
            I refer to our telephone conversation yesterday regarding the request
            by the Hillsborough Steering Committee to the Police Authority to consider
            making a payment to improve on the statutory bereavement figure of
            £3,500.
            Of the 95 people who died, 32 died without dependants and there were
            12 infants, all of whom are entitled to bereavement damages of £3,500.
            There were 16 adults with no dependants and they do not attract bereavement
            damages. Unfortunately beyond this the picture is somewhat confused
            because there are 25 other deaths where the information is insufficient
            to ascertain the level of bereavement damages and there are yet 10
            more where no claim has yet been made. However, I am told by the
            Authority's insurers that the Steering Committee have indicated that
            at least four families have no intention of pursuing any claim on the
            part of a deceased relative.
            Beyond this I can tell you that when the issue of the level of damages
            for bereavement was first discussed by the Authority's insurers and
            the Steerig Committee, a figure of £10,000 was mentioned. I am told
            that it has not been mentioned again and therefore beyond this there
            is no real indication what the people concerned would consider adequate
            compensation under this head of damages.


                                                                     /




  r
            Mr S Waghorn
            Home Office
            Queen Anne's Gate
            LONDON
            SW1M 9AT
  L                                                    J
<




                                     -   2-


    I now look forward to hearing from you whether any payments beyond
    the statutory requirement which the Authority considered to be
    appropriate would be grant-aided.
    Yours sincerely




    S Walker
    Solicitor to the Authority
