J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                      MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                               Watery Street
 H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                             Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                                        Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5

WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                 KNOWSLEY HALL
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                  Prescot
Colmore Circus Queensway                                                Merseyside L34 4AF
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                       Telephone: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 3871
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                                        Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                       Our Ref:           JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                        Date:              3 August 1989



               Miss Elizabeth Steel
                                                  -«--K   -w 'fl'-U ,
               Hillsborough Steering Group
               C/0 Castle Chambers
               Cook Street                                   l?»W
               Liverpool

•              L2 9SH

                                                     7/s                              £.h .
                                                                                                         to   •




               I understand from Detective Chief Superintendent Foster that whilst I
               was away you had a most useful meeting with him and David Alexander. I
               am sorry I was not there to join you, but I think Mick Foster explained.

               I am glad that you felt the visit was worthwhile and that- progress was
               made on the lines you have recorded in your letter of 31 July. Can I
               formally agree the decisions made in respect of the showing of the video
               to the relatives of the deceased.

               Secondly, I have noted that Mr Alexander will be writing to me with
               regard to the injured and showing them material. I must confess at the
               outset that this is more problematic, given that we are still in the
               middle of the investigation as far as the Coroner's Inquests are
               concerned. However, I await David Alexander's request.

               Thirdly, I noted your comment about the photographs which were on display
               at the Inquiry. You refer to your letter to me on this subject which I
               assume is your letter of 3 July 1989.

               The photographs on display at the Inquiry were the property of the
               Inquiry and we do not have any copies ourselves. The photographs which
               were on display are in the hands of the Secretary to the Inquiry,
               Mr R M Whalley, Room 662, Home Officer, 50 Queen Anne's Gate, London
               SW1H 9AT. Of course, many of those photographs may have originated from
               those we seized from South Yorkshire Police. If that is the case then
               at this time I would not want to start releasing copies of those
               photographs whilst they are still part of an unconcluded investigation




                                                          Birmingham
     PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
as far as the Coroner is concerned.  I am also mindful, for Mr Benen
Hytner QC has raised the question of possible criminal charges and,
therefore, it seems to me appropriate, at this time, to tread carefully
as far as the release of material is concerned which is germane to the
current investigation and any other that might follow. I am sure you
will understand my concern and I hope the demonstration of our good
faith with regard to the release of video material will stand us in good
stead in declining this aspect at this time. Whether the Secretary of
the Inquiry would want to hand over his retained photographs which were
on display is a matter for him and accordingly I have copied this letter
to him.

I trust this is of some assistance to you and if I can be of any further
help please do not hesitate to contact me.




                            Birmingham
