                           St. William’s Foundation
                           5   College Street, York YO l 2JF.
                               Telephone York (0904) 642744.
                                Chairman: Sir Donald Barron, DL.
HGW/PJB                                                            3 May, 1989




    sonal for:-       Mr. Justice Taylor,
                      Sheffield Town Hall
                      SHEFFIELD




I am writing on behalf of the Council of the St. William's Foundation
and I enclose a general information sheet about our aims and activities
in order to establish our bona fides.  I also know and respect
Oliver Popplewell whom I have known for many years and with thorn we
were in touch at the time of his inquiry into the Bradford disaster.

On 11 January, 1989 the Foundation organised a one-day Consultation in
Sheffield on the theme of "Strategies for Youth in the Next Decade",
and I have pleasure in enclosing a copy of the summary report. You will
note that the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Mr. Peter Wright,
and the Chief Education Officer of Sheffield, Mr. William Walton, both
addressed the Conference.   The Foundation's Working Party on Future
Strategy at their recent meeting considered that it would be very
appropriate to send you this report.  It is not directly relevant to
your inquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy, since it took place three
months before, but we believe that you might find it helpful as a back­
ground indication of attitudes amongst those with responsibilities for
law and order, and for leadership and education in the community.




M a j . Gen. HV G. Woods
Secretary


                                   Reg. Charity No: BJ/514817/R
                                                Revised Edition - .January - 1989

                          ST WILLIAM'S FOUNDATION

                  GENERAL INFORMATION - AIMS AND ACTIVITIES

The St William's Foundation, the equivalent of St George's House, Windsor Castle
in the North of England, was instituted in March 1983.  The aims of the
Foundation are to discern emerging issues, explore their implications, invite
those with responsibility to respond to fresh ideas, and to develop
opportunities for action, across all professional and social boundaries.

The following key activities have been developed from Conferences /Consultations
organised by the Foundation:-
a, "Transpennine" arose from a series "Earning a Living and Creating Wealth ,
   and then from a partnership of industry, business, local authorities, banking
   and public relations' organisations.   This partnership has developed the
   concept of a Transpennine M62 Mersey Humber Strategy.   Transpennine is now a
   Company limited by guarantee, and organises a wide range of activities to
   revitalise the image of the North, and enhance economic growth.

t  "Our Future Needs Technology'' began with a series of consultations in 1985,
   and brought about a major Technological Education Project, funded by the
   Manpower Services Commission and the Local Education Authorities in Yorkshire
   and Humberside.   Since 1985, this three year programme has produced 19
   Research Papers (now widely used in LEAs and schools throughout the country),
   a newsletter (TECHNET),   and has developed extensive active and effective
   networks of mutual support for teachers.    From January 1989, a partnership
   of Local Education Authorities in Yorkshire and Humberside with the
   Foundation is providing a Joint Support Activity for the Technical and
   Vocational Educational Initiative in this Region.

The following themes have been identified and are being pursued in the
Foundation's programmes of Conferences (one-day) and Consultations (week-ends).
a. "Celebrating Industry1* series;  further consideration of the key issues
   raised at the first Consultation (April 1988) dealing with the Single Market
   in 1992;  Infrastructure problems (Channel Tunnel etc);   and the development
   of favourable investment policies in the North, leading to recommendations
   to appropriate authorities and organisations.
b. "New Partnerships in Society" series;   research and consideration of the
   problems of Industry and Education in the 1990's; Coherence between
   Prosperity and Caring to meet the changing conditions of life in the North
   over the next decade;   Ethics and Values at Work;  in the family and in the
   community, in order to develop guidance.   "Strategies for Youth in the next
   decade" was explored at a one~day Conference in Sheffield.
c. "Population Changes and Employment" series;   discovering the effects of
   demographic changes, a reducing workforce and resulting changes in employment
   patterns and the skills requirements of industry, in order to identify
   possible action programmes.
d. Other crucial issues to be included in the programme are the social
   implications of energy;   pollution (food, water, airborne etc);  leadership
   and moral values;   and how to enhance the extension of Industry Matters
   throughout the North.

The Foundation, as a catalyst, is therefore active in both consultation and
action, and is guided in its work by the Council, a list of whose members is
attached.    As a registered educational charity, the Foundation depends on
corporate and individual subscribers.    For more details, copies of reports and
membership forms please apply to the:
Secretary of the Foundation,
5 College Street, YORK Y01 2JF                   Tel: 0904 - 642744
                          LIST OF MEMBERS OF COUWCTI.


 SIR DONALD BARRON          CHAIRMAN
 MAJ GEN H G WOODS          SECRETARY (NON-VOTING)
 MR M HOLROYD               HON. TREASURER
 MRS M BAILEY               MENSTON,     ILKLEY,    W YORKS
 MR R BARKER                DTI (YORKS & HUMBERSIDE)
 MR G BROWNE                REGIONAL TVEI, LEEDS
 CLLR M COPPLE              KNUTSFORD,     CHESHIRE
 MR A R CAMERON             HUMBERSIDE FORUM,        HULL
 PROF G COLE                UNIVERSITY OF HULL
 MISS B DOCKRAY             DURHAM
 MR P E DUTTON              TRAINING AGENCY,        SHEFFIELD
 MR R D FIELD               CHAIRMAN,     DYSON REFRACTORIES,          SHEFFIELD
 LORD M FITZALAN HOWARD     NORTH YORKSHIRE
MR A GRAHAM                 INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY,        LONDON
MR D GRADY                  WARDEN,     EDUCATION CENTRE,       HULL
DR J GRIGOR                 Cl BA GEIGY INDUSTRIAL CHEMICALS,             MANCHESTER
MR D HALL                   CHIEF CONSTABLE,       HUMBERSIDE
MISS J HALL                 YORK,    N YORKSHIRE
DR M HALLAWAY               TRINITY & ALL SAINTS COLLEGE,              LEEDS
MR J HAMPSON                NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE
MR G M A HARRISON           TRAINING AGENCY,       SHEFFIELD
DR K W HILLIER              HARROGATE,    N YORKS
MRS J KEMP                  CHESTERFIELD,    N DERBYSHIRE
MR M LOWES                  DURHAM
MR D MORGAN REES            ILKLEY
MRS E ORME                  GEO JOWITT & SONS,       SHEFFIELD
MR M SMITH                  EDUCATION DEPT,    SHEFFIELD
MR S ROODHOUSE              CREATIVE ARTS DEPT,       NEWCASTLE POLYTECHNIC
VERY REV J E SOUTHGATE      DEAN OF YORK
REV V SPROXTON              RICHMOND,    N YORKS
MR D SUTTON                DEPUTY SECRETARY,        ST WILLIAM'S FOUNDATION
CANON J TOY                CHANCELLOR,     YORK MINSTER
DR W D WALSH               RECKITT & COLMAN,        HULL
DR J V WHEELOCK            UNIVERSITY OF BRADFORD
PROF E WILKES              CURBAR,    SHEFFIELD
DR M H WILLMER             UNIVERSITY OF LEEDS
RT REV D G SNELGROVE       BISHOP OF HULL
DR A J WARREN              UNIVERSITY OF YORK
MR A WATSON                BANK OF ENGLAND,        MANCHESTER
             s F° ^ / >



                         ii   ■      ■




"POLICE AND EDUCATION STRATEGIES FOR YOUTH


             TEN YEARS HENCE"




              Summary Report

                    of

             the Consultation

                 held at

         Halifax Hall,   SHEFFIELD

                    on

        Wednesday 11 January 1989
                        ST WILLIAM'S FOUNDATION SEMINAR

           "Police and Education Strategies for Youth Ten Years Hence”


1.   The St William's Foundation Seminar on the above quoted subject was held on
     Wednesday, 11 January 1989, at the Halifax Hall, Sheffield.  It was organ­
     ised and chaired by Professor Eric Wilkes, OBE, DL, and a copy of the prog­
     ramme and a list of participants is attached.

2.   Mr Peter Wright, CBE, Chief Constable South Yorkshire and President of the
     Association of Chief Police Officers, gave the first address.

     a. All were involved in strategies for youth as in policing the community.
        But today, as changes occurred in society, perceptions and realities of
        young constables 'on the beat' and subject to increasing violence and
        greater social pressures were often far apart. Nevertheless a partner-
        ship of Police and education is needed to improve communications with
        young people.  The current review of police training aims to reflect the
        skills and knowledge required, has a modular structure and is based on
        learning around case studies (legal, social and practical). TV and
        assessments by peers and instructors link these experiential elements to
                  understanding social implications
                  achieving more objective assessment during two years' probation
                  enabling students to gain clusters of appropriate skills
     b. A 1987 survey of young people found that conflict is regarded as almost
        inevitable, alcohol and drugs pose major problems, while divided families
        and family discords all lead to crime and violence.  The statistics show
        a steady increase in cautions, indictments and trials.  95% of young
        under 14 were cautioned, but compare this with 1977 which showed that
        the peak ages for males were 15 for cautions and 18 for convictions.
        Soon 100% of young under 14 will receive cautions, and 1 : 100 of all
        young are given custodial sentences. There is no doubt that prevailing
        attitude to crime in schools is a major factor. Many people do not
        understand that police take no part in what happens after cautions or
        sentences.
     c. The following measures should be taken
        (1) An essential part of the curriculum in schools should be instruction
            about freedom under the law, the constraints of democratic society
            and the understanding that policing is by consent of the community.
            These are defined in the basic rights and obligations of all citi­
            zens, and the work should generate consideration by pupils of moral
            values and the common interest of members of any community.
        (2) Equally, the young needed full briefing about the dangers? safety
            (power lines, motorways, railways); and the most common causes of
            crime (drugs, alcohol, motorcycles and offensive weapons). These
            need to be discussed by all parties (including parents) starting in
            Primary Schools, and should also create understanding about the law-
            enforcement effects of fighting, vandalism and hooliganism.
        (3) Police must respond to teachers seeking help, and the process needs
            joint planning, and programmes of secondment to education as well as
            the investigating role of police inquiring into crime. After school
            the emphasis shifts to the role of youth forums and youth clubs, as
            young people's perceptions of police alter. Within an Urban Action
            Programme, set up as a result of lessons learnt and recommendations

                                                                         /continued
                                      - 2 ~

2 c (3) continued

            after the Toxteth riots, special projects based on local areas bring
            cultural, sporting and educational challenges to young unemployed
            and disadvantaged.
        (4) Lead priorities for police remain prevention and detection of crime.
            Can the police play an even more active and extensive role in educa­
            tion? Limits of time, effort, people and money mean that police
            Liaison Officers must be as efficient and effective as possible in
            securing the real support of young people, and go into schools by
            invitation.

3.   a. Mr W S Walton, Chief Education Officer, Sheffield City Council, emphas­
        ised that Education is for all, and all are involved. The preamble to
        the Education Reform Act 1988 stresses that education is more than know­
        ledge and memory. The National Curriculum, in both core and foundation
        subjects means that skills and knowledge are the ingredients of good
        behaviour.  The theory of Democracy means that all are weighing and con­
        sidering issues and policies, and coming to a balanced judgment and deci­
        sion (apart from the internal aspects of party politics). Education is
        the opposite of indoctrination, but is concerned with good behaviour.
        In the light of the very high crime rates, has Education a responsibility?
        Examinations and competition may lead to conflict and, if care is not
        taken, an educational experience leading to good qualities but ignoring
        personal responsibility within society is created. Criteria for success,
        and the attitudes to them, may also create for many a sense of failure.
     b. If we ask young people to investigate way out, seemingly anti-social
        groups, they may discover that not all bad people are bad all the time,
        and understand about levels of responsibility and leadership within a
        group. Humanity is often greater in hardship than in affluence, and
        good behaviour depends on EQUAL consideration and respect.  But in schools
        the young may see that all are treated hierarchically and do not receive
        equal consideration and respect. We therefore need to establish value
        systems in schools which emphasise interdependence as well as independ­
        ence.  In Sheffield the Duke of Edinburgh’s Award is run under a Joint
        Industry Education Council. Measures to extend Enterprise in Higher
        Education are under way, seeking the commitment to and ownership of aims
        and objectives among students. A partnership of the CEO & the Chamber of
        Commerce are examining further ways to enhance the total regeneration of
        Sheffield (including the environment, anti-social behaviour and events).
        The aim is to create a sense of value of all.

4.   a. Mr Robert Niven (Training Agency) spoke of his role in the transition
        from school to work (16 plus) as regards systems and materials for train­
        ing, and enabling with money courses of vocational relevance (TVEI), YTS
        and vocationally relevant learning. He also supervises field organisa­
        tions and networks, seeking to put assets to good use, but we have not
        yet got this quite right.
     b. During the transition phase, we are concerned with the development of
        young people which is important for the individual locally and nation­
        ally. Most people want to work, while all seek self-development and
        social equity as 16-plus school leavers.
     c. Internationally, too many young people leave educated, while in the UK
        young people are undereducated and under-trained, the latter lacking
        formal qualifications and skills, and hence drifting into poorly paid
        jobs
          - despite guarantee of 16-18 YTS, only 20% of young age group take up
             this option
                                                                      /continued
                                      - 3 -

4 c continued

         - out of the balance (80% of age group) very few get good training
         - too many move into black economy jobs.
       Against the background of the demographic drop (affecting lower social
       classes), a slow increase in those staying on in education and an econ­
       omy which in the decade 1985-1995 is doing a little better, manufacturing
       industry needs higher skills, while catering for example is likely to
       need fewer skills. The Government's White paper sets out a policy of
       giving all an opportunity for education and training, an integrated
       approach, and invites industry to cooperate fully. The problem remains
       that young people are attracted to jobs with good initial wages but no
       training development opportunities.
       Nevertheless the objectives will be better standards of numeracy and
       literacy, with vocational and social contents added, in order to provide
       broad-based competencies which ally qualifications to flexibility and
       adaptability. A partnership approach implicit in formal COMPACTS
       involves industry through the national network of Training and Enterprise
       Councils (TECs), which can contribute to motivating young people into the
       desire to learn, which help and advise educators and trainees, and take a
       part in the records of achievement.

5.   Discussion Points arising from groups
     a. The dilemma for the Police in the training of Liaison Officers lay
        between the problems of too frequent changes of people and the specialis­
        ation of a professional corral out of which the Liaison Officers could
        not escape.  There is also the dilemma for the Liaison Officers of the
        boundary between policing and education, if the latter is restricted to
        explaining the role or to go beyond containment of crime and law enforce­
        ment. The civilised frame of reference whose goal is to see disputes and
        conflicts resolved meant changes in attitudes leading to a culture of
        good citizens.
     b. The climate seemed to be changing, with a less harsh view of the indivi­
        dual as being IN society rather than VERSUS society. Parental attitudes,
        given the understanding that there were good and bad parents, were not
        changing. Maybe there was too much emphasis on the individual to the
        detriment of society, which created conflict in the classroom and hence
        the attitude of the individual as being opposed to society. Much of
        this stemmed from people being regarded as an inanimate resource. When
        like 'Opening Windows on Engineering' there was a genuine attempt to
        work with young people, their enthusiasm could be aroused and their
        motivation enhanced.
     c. The police, like many other occupations/professions, needed more retrain­
        ing to avoid becoming insular and out of date, and to keep in touch with
        people and communities.  Otherwise poor behaviour patterns and conflicts
        worked against the role of the police. The very good new training
        courses were vital to assist the police in retaining the good will of
        the public.
     d. The question of penalties and what effect they had remained top of the
        league.   In ten years' time, many hoped that peer pressure on the indiv­
        idual and his sense of responsibility would help young people. Custod­
        ial penalties are believed to be a deterrent, rather than alternatives,
        especially community service based on a measure of restoration for harm
        done.   95% of 15 year olds were cautioned rather than charged and taken
        to court. The system was actually more tolerant than it seemed.

                                                                      /continued
                                       _ 4 -

5 continued

     e. 85% ~ 95% of all crime was alcohol-related, and the image of adulthood
        (as freedom to drink to excess) needed to be changed, perhaps the con­
        cept of pubs which either are free of alcohol or sell only low-alcohol
        drinks ought to be encouraged.  In this context education had a major
        role in raising issues about the responsibility of the individual for
        himself/herself, and about anti-social behaviour and stereotyping, as
        part of the causes for such problems.
     f. The negative possibilities of the next decade needed emphasis.  The
        problems of bad housing could create ghettoes. The impact of the
        National Curriculum might only help 80% of the academic non-achievers.
        Attitudes towards society could harden in favour of taking rather than
        giving to the community. Records of achievement might become catal­
        ogues of weakness undermining thin seams of nascent self-confidence.
        Authority needed to be more open and frank in its dealings with the    m
        public in ordinary life and in education, and professionals needed more®
        retraining if they were to cope with tomorrow's realities.
     g. Respect for young people is as necessary as respect by young people. For
        ittany of the young, the. way their outlook is" formed-has been affected by
        lack of communication.     TV is becoming the enemy of communication. Too
        often high ideals among the young can be shattered by reality, if that
        is different from the image of reality they have formed. Within commun­
        ities, there is often a lack of agreement about what is 'good', and a
        distaste for structures imposed by Government. Today Sheffield does not
        feel the need for a Training and Enterprise Council, but tomorrow the
        implications (especially skills shortages and resources) of such deci­
        sions may need reappraisal.

6.   Chairman's Concluding Remarks
     Very stimulating addresses had been given, and the response of stimulated
        thoughts from participants had come from being together and sharing
        ideas. The fact that senior and very busy people had spared the time to
        come and join the discussion was evidence, if any were needed, of the
        real problems and the difficulty of finding solutions to them except
        through partnerships.
