                                                                                       rv
                                  1   ,
                                                                                       H CUu-cot
                      THE TREASURY SOLICITO
                      Queen Anne’s Chambers
                      28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
                      Telephones Direct Line 01-210 3 1 0 9
                                  Switchboard 01-210 3000
                      Telex 917564       GTN 210
                      Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488


        R M Whalley                                                   Please quote
        F6 Division                                                    L89/2117/DB
        Home Office                                                   Your reference
        LONDON
        SW1                                                           Date
                                                                      Dictated 21 Aoril 1989




        INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER

        I am writing to let you know that Peter Whitehurst and I had a very useful meeting
        this morning with Chief Superintendent Pemberton of West Midlands Police Authority.
        Mr Pemberton is playing a key role in organising the evidence-gathering being
        undertaken by the West Midlands Authority.       It appears that the Authority are
        committing an impressive amount of resources to the taking of statements from
        witnesses in Sheffield, Liverpool and elsewhere. (A total of some 250, it would
■
        seem, for Sheffield and Liverpool together).   I understand that these Officers will
        be starting their task on Monday next, 24 April.

        This is obviously going to be of invaluable assistance for the purposes of the
        Public Inquiry. However, I should be grateful if you would confirm my understanding
        of the basis on which the West Midlands force are operating.      I understand that
        originally the Chief Constable of West Midlands agreed to carry out the "police
        investigation" at the request of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, so that the
        findings of an independent force's investigation would be available in the event of
    y   any complaints being made under the Police Complaints Procedure. However, given the
        imminence of the Public Inquiry and to avoid the duplication and overlap that might
        be involved if two separate investigations were being conducted in parallel, I
        Understand that it has been agreed between Lord Justice Taylor, the Home Office and
        /
        the Chief Constable of the two Authorities concerned that the West Midlands
        Authority's investigation should in fact be a dual purpose one, serving the function
        described above (provision of material for the South Yorkshire Authority) and also
        the crucially important one for our purposes, of providing evidence .for the Public
        Inquiry.

      You will appreciate that normally the taking of witness statements etc for such
      public inquiries is a function performed by the Treasury Solicitor's Department.
      Given that the scale of the present Inquiry and the time constraints against which
      we are operating, this is clearly something that is not feasible in this case.
      However, I should be grateful for your confirmation when replying that there will be
    V no question of the Treasury Solicitor's Department at the end of the day being
    J required to reimburse the West Midlands Authority    for such proportion of the cost
      of their investigation as may properly be attributable to the Public Inquiry.

        A copy of this letter goes to Wally Hammond.

                                                    Yours sincerely




                                                        D BRUMMELL
f '- 'v
