             THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
             Room 1101
             50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
             Direct Line 0171 273 4301 Fax 2007



                                                             Your reference:
Mr & Mrs S Roberts
                                                             Our reference:

                                                            Date:              24 November 1997




Thank you for your letter of 18 November to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

Firstly, I can confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will shortly be obtaining a copy of PC
Sherwood’s statement from South Yorkshire Police and will ascertain whether it contains any
information regarding Graham.

 In your earlier letter, dated 20 October, you raised the issue of documents which you believe
 are missing from the body file supplied by South Yorkshire Police. The Judge is currently
 looking into a number of alleged inconsistencies between the information supplied to families
 and that contained in the body files in the possession of South Yorkshire Police, and he will
 be dealing with this matter in his report.

 Yours sincerely




 Mike Ward




 g:\hlllsbro\roberts.doc
                                                Date:   18 November 1997

Lord Justice Stewart-Smith
c/o The Secretary
Room 528
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT



Dear Sir,

Re:   Graham John Roberts killed at Hillsborough

Through the family solicitor we have requested from the  South
Yorkshire Police the statement of PC Sherwood.   This statement
would seem significant as PC Sherwood is referred to by PC Best
in his statement which is in Graham's Body File.

Our request has been denied because PC Sherwood has refused to
give his permission for this statement to be released (a copy of
the reply we received is a t tached) .

We would be grateful if you could request this statement be
released to us.  We are concerned that while the South Yorkshire
Police continue to state that they are co-operating fully with
the scrutiny, access continues to be denied to important
statements, so how can this be a fair and thorough scrutiny?

Surely if a policeman makes a statement as part of his duty              to
the public at large that statement should be made available              to
those it concerns? We have great discomfort with the motto               used
by the South Yorkshire Police - "Justice with Courage" - as              this
bears no resemblance to the treatment we have received from              them.

As I'm sure you will realise, there must be other statements held
by the South Yorkshire Police of importance, but ones the
families have no knowledge of, so are unable request even thpugh
they may be extremely useful for bur fight for justice.   Surely
we would be receiving a fairer scrutiny if all statements were
handed over to you for you to scrutinise thoroughly?


Yours sincerely.




Mr S Roberts                          Roberts       __________ Roberts
G r a h a m 's father   G r a h a m 's mother       Graham's sister
         South Yorkshire
         POLICE
         JUSTICE       with    COURAGE




Ms A M Adlington
H illsborough Family Support Group
                                                      Our Ref:    D&C/AMH/LO HD 114
Pioneer Building
65 - 67 Dale Street
LIVERPOOL
                                                      Date:       27 October 1997
L2 2NS




 RE: GRAHAM ROBERTS

 I re f* to your request of 3 September 1997 for a copy of Polto
 statement           to the above and I write to inform you that PC Snearwood n„s                 to
 release his statement




 AMHepworth
 Superintendent




             Discipline     Complaints D epartm ent
             Windsor Hold
                                                       The person dealing with this correspondence Is.
             SbaSald S8 SUB
             TbL 0114 220 2020 Fas: 0114 252 38S5
                                                       Superintendent Hepworth
             D irect Dial N«:                          T rf 10114) 296 3084    Fax
                                                    20 October 1997

Dear Lord Justice Stewart-Smith,

At our meeting with you in Liverpool on 7 October we stated our concern
over the reliability of evidence contained in the body file on Graham.
Of particular concern are the contradictory and conflicting accounts and
descriptions given by Police Constables Best and Yates (not Wadsworth
and Sinclair as you suggested in your faxed message to the
Hillsborough Family Group Committe e). Further, and after being given
reassurances by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire to the
contrary, we drew your attention to the statement of PC Wadsworth.
As PC Wadsworth's statement was not in Graham's body file we feel
this evidence had been suppressed - please would you look into this?

Professor Scraton went over these issues again, emphasising PC
Wadsworth's almost certain identification of Graham.  You raised the
issue, also in PC Wadsworth's statement, that the person he attended
was put in an ambulance yet Graham did not go to hospital.  Professor
Scraton seemed to remember reading somewhere that some of those
treated at the back of Leppings Lane had been transported to the
gymnasium by ambulance.  You requested that he check to see if this
w?  the c a s e .

Professor Scraton has informed us of a statement made by PC John
Robert Lawrence in which he comments, "All the injured had now been
transported to hospital and we began moving the body's (sic) by
ambulance from the Leppings Lane end.  I went with two other
uniformed officers ....and their respective body's (sic).  I remember
being stuck in traffic for some considerable time outside the
entrance to the police room and gymnasium.  Eventually we were let in
and ambulance staff carried the body's (sic) into the gymnasium."

From this, and PC Wadsworth's statement, it is not possible to draw
any certain conclusions concerning Graham.  What is clear, and it was
the point made during our visit with you, is that had we been given
the opportunity to hear the evidence at our inquest and to cross-
examine these officers and other relevant witnesses we might have a
better idea of the circumstances in which Graham died.  As it stands,
we have statements which are unreliable and we have been denied the
opportunity to establish precisely "how" Graham died.

Another point which concerns us deeply is the unkown reason why
statements from the St John's Ambulance cannot be reviewed by us - or
even if such statements were ever made.  In Dr J R Ashton's statement
(in Graham's body file) he mentions that there were "few St John's
Ambulance and a large and growing number of casualties".  Were the
first aid provisions too sparse or were the trained first aiders
prevented from attending the casualties as was suggested by a local
St John's ambulance man?  We believe that these statements could
uncover details of "acts or omissions which in themselves could have
directly led to the deaths of some of the victims".  We raised this
issue with you at our meeting - please could you look into it for us?

Yours sincerely.




         Mr S Roberts               Roberts              Roberts
