 #                  FAX TRANSMISSION
                     Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
       Attorney General’s Chambers, 9 Buckingham Gate
                                   London SW1E 6JP

                           TEL:      0171 828 1721/1581
                           FAX:      0171 828 0593

 TO;

 O R G A N IS A T IO N :

 F A C S IM IL E NO:

FROM:                      STEPHEN VVOOLER

S U P P L E M E N T A R Y MESSAGE:




DATE:,                     TIME:              No. O F PAGES.        ^ __________
                                                               (including this one)
H a rd copy to follow:      YES/NO
 HILLSBOROUGH: INQUEST — (fr'I'lo/U iC 'f £ Cr^/t/H- *


14^.6 to take: It is not open to the Attorney General to order a fresh inquest.
By statute his consent is pre-requisite to an application to the High Court for
an order directing a fresh inquest. He has considered several applications
relating to the Hillsborough inquest in accordance with the relevant legal
criteria. In no case did he consider that an application to the High Court
would be likely to succeed.


         What is
                 .    .
                     th e
                             .                  N ’
                            criteria by w hich ^A ttorney     General    con sid ers
         ap p lication s under S ectio n 13 Coroners A ct 1988.


A.       The criteria remains that set out by the then Attorney General in a
         Written Answer on 2 May 1989 (Col 39): ie whether an application to the
         High Court would have^reasonable prospect of establishing that it is
         necessary or desirable in the interests ofjustice for a fresh inquest to be
         held.


9    *   W hat d oes th e A ttorney General tak e in to accou n t in con sid erin g
         w hether criteria m et?


A.       He considers the factors set out in Section 13 (eg. Whether there was
         irregularity or insufficiency of inquiry) in the context of the statutory
         purposes of an inquest to which I have referred.


9.       Did th e A ttorney General n o t understand th e n eed for a w ide-
         ranging inquiry?


A.       An inquest serves very specific purposes. Many of the concerns of the
         relatives of the deceased were not matters for an inquest.
                                                                                   UlTl b i d 05':? 3
26-Jl'N. ' 9 'l F R Il   1*:58   AT TORNEY GENERAL                  TEL:01 l     1.1:54 j                    P IJU3




               9.         Inquest w as full o f irregularities?


               A.        The main planks of the applications under Section 13 of the Coroners
                         Act 1988 were the mini inquest' procedure adopted by the coroner and
                         his decision not to leave 'lack of care’ to the jury as a possible verdict.
                         Both issues were in fact considered by the Divisional Court (in
                         unsuccessful judicial review proceedings) and rejected.


                         T here w as also fresh evid en ce in som e cases.


              A.         I understand that the then Attorney General took the view that it did not
                         affect the issues for consideration by the inquest,


              9.         Has th e refusal o f th e S ectio n 13 ap p lication s b een recon sid ered
                         sin ce th e ITV docum entary?


              A.         I understand that no further formal application under the Coroners Act
                         has been made to the Attorney General (before or after election) since the
                         documentary.        The     previous   Attorney   General          explained   in
                         correspondence to some Hon Members that the ITV documentary did not
                         of itself constitute evidence. He promised to consider any fresh evidence
                         placed before him as the result of the research undertaken. No such
                         material was supplied to him.                                                        , -


                         The material supplied to the Home Office byjUFSe was made available
                         to the then Attorney General in March but he concluded that nothing in
                         it had any bearing on the issues raised in the applications which had
                         previously been made and considered. Nothing has occurred to alter or
                         cast doubt upon the validity of that decision.




             SW/2h<>«/5
