          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 528
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171 273 4046 Fax 4028


                                                                Your reference:
R B Wells Esq
Chief Constable                                                Our reference:
South Yorkshire Police
Snig Hill                                                      Date:               July 1997
SHEFFIELD
S3 8LY




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


I have been appointed by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence
relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. I am writing to ask for your assistance (my
Secretary Mr Bone has already spoken to ACC Daines).

It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of my scrutiny is to establish whether there
is any significant new evidence which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry,
to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities. If there is significant
evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have affected the outcome of any of the
proceedings. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary by the end of the year. I
attach my terms of reference.

In the course of my work I expect that I will need to have access to the documents about the
incident and the various proceedings arising out of it which are held by your force. I should
be obliged if you arrange for the Secretariat to my scrutiny to be informed in writing by 4
August of the nature of these documents and how we may most conveniently obtain access to
them.

I have already seen the material submitted by you under cover of your letter o f 3 February
1997 to Mr Pugh, including the two files and the video recordings TB1 and TB2.

If your force has any fresh evidence relating to the disaster I would be grateful if it could be
forwarded to my Secretariat, at the address above, by 1 September.

I have written to the Hillsborough Family Support Group and to various other people who
have come forward asking for some basic summary information about the new evidence
which is said to exist. This information will help me during the preliminary stages of my
work.
As my scrutiny of the evidence proceeds I may wish to interview some witnesses directly. I
am also willing to consider interviewing individual witnesses at their request. These
interviews will be private.

The Secretariat to my scrutiny will be happy to discuss the arrangements if you wish. Please
note that the telephone and room numbers shown above are temporary - we will notify you o f
our permanent address and telephone as soon as we have them.




LORD JU STICE STUART-SMITH
