                     HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




               WITNESS STATEMENT OF GLEN KIRTON




I GLEN KIRTON of the Football Association,    16 Lancaster Gate
London W2 WILL SAY as follows


I am employed by The Football Association and my title is
"Head of External Affairs".     I carry responsibility for The
Football Association's Commercial and Public Relations
activities.    I have been employed by The Football
Association for seventeen and a half years.     In my first two
years, I was Competitions Secretary.     I have attended one or
more F.A. Cup semi-finals in all but one of my years''a~s’ an     ’
F .A. employee.


1.   I travelled to Hillsborough on the morning of the match
with my son,                  , and arrived at the ground at

10.35.a.m.


2.   I immediately made contact with Graham Mackrell the
Club's Chief Executive and handed to him, on behalf of the
Competitions Department, the few tickets that remained in
our possession.    We then went for a quick walk round the
V.I.P. accommodation and the dressing room area so that I
could familiarise myself once more with the layout of the
ground.   We had a brief look at the pitch at this stage.


3.   At 12 noon I went with           to the official lunch
which started late at around 12.45 p.m. and I left the lunch
at around 2.10 p.m. I put           in the guest lounge and
went with Arthur McMullen the F.A.'s Vice Chairman to see
Ray Lewis in the referees room. We stayed there for no more
than five minutes wishing the officials the best of luck on
behalf of The Football Association.      Arthur McMullen then
returned, I believe to the Board Room, and I stayed in the
dressing room area.


4.   At around 2.40.p.m. I was on the perimeter track by the
player's tunnel with Graham Mackrell looking round the
ground.    It was clearly nowhere near full at this stage.
Graham told me that there were 20,000 still outside. Calling
to mind the 1987 semi-finals at Villa Park and Hillsborough
when the kick-off of both had been delayed at the request of
the Police, I asked Graham whether, on this occasion the
Police wanted a delay.    His answer was that they did not,
because putting back the kick-off produced all sorts of
organisational problems at the end of the game.       I would
stress that at this stage I was completely unaware of any
danger to spectators and, to the best of my knowledge,"
Graham Mackrell had also not been informed of any such
danger.    At around this time I returned to the Guest Room
and took          to his seat in the Director's Box, returning
immediately to the tunnel area.       I remained there until
kick-off time, principally because there was a great amount
of press interest in Brian Clough who had been banned from
sitting on the bench for the rest of the season but was
allowed for this match to sit in the seats immediately
behind the substitute bench.    I was in this area at the time
the players came onto the field, I believe the Liverpool
 team first, followed around thirty seconds later by the
Nottingham Forest team.    Shortly before the kick-off, Brian
 Clough came out and went immediately to his seat.      At this
 stage, with the match about to kick-off I returned to my
 seat in the Director's Box.




                                -2-
5.    Shortly after the start of the game I was aware of
movement amongst the spectators at the Leppings Lane end and
my immediate thought was that there was some form of
hooligan disturbance, as the Police appeared to be
attempting to contain a movement of supporters.     I was aware
at the same time that Liverpool were attacking the
Nottingham Forest goal and that an incident had taken place
in the Nottingham Forest goalmouth.            told me that
Peter Beardsley had hit the bar from a corner.     Nottingham
Forest then took the play down into the Liverpool half and I
was aware that the disturbance behind the goal at the
Leppings Lane end was becoming more serious with people
coming over the fence onto the perimeter and much Police
activity. I did see people being pulled up into the stand
above.     I saw one police officer wrestling with someone
trying to get over the fence.     A Police Officer ran onto the
pitch and waved to Ray Lewis to stop the game.      X
immediately went from the Director's Box to the pitch by the
player's tunnel and found Graham Kelly already there.        A lot
of people began to mill about the area.      There were Police
Officers, some supporters, photographers, St. John Ambulance
personnel and the officials of both clubs.      Almost
 immediately Ray Lewis brought the teams off the pitch.        I
 asked him how much of the match had gone by.     He told me
 approximately six minutes.     At this stage one youth ran from
 the Liverpool end of the ground and stood in front of the
 Forest supporters on the Kop making obscene gestures to
 them.     This evoked an angry response and, when the youth was
 chased and brought to the ground by a Police Officer a huge
 roar of approval went up from the Forest supporters.


 6.      I found a Police Sergeant who was clearly under some
 pressure, and asked him to put us in touch immediately with
 the Police Officer in charge of the event for the purpose of
 information.     At this stage John Smith, the Chairman of
 Liverpool, began to make demands himself for The Football



                                 -3-
Association to call the match off.     I explained to him that
we had requested advice from the Police as to whether or not
the match should be abandoned or suspended for a period.       It
was at about 3.15 p.m. that it became apparent to us for the
first time that there might well be fatalities.     Graham
Kelly and I then went immediately with Graham Mackrell to
the Police Control Room and spoke to the Officer in charge,
Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield. Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield told us that a gate had been forced and there
had been an in-rush of Liverpool supporters that had caused
casualties.     He pointed to one of the TV Monitors to show
the gate.     He was not clear at that stage as to how many
dead and injured there were.     He stated that in his view the
match must be abandoned, but that he did not want such an
announcement made for the moment as he had "a lot of angry
people" and he feared disturbances if such an announcement
was made.     He also wished to have time for the emergency
vehicles to clear away the casualties from the area.     We
asked that "We be inf ormed immediately an announcement could
be made and left the Control Room as it was extremely
cramped. I should remark that it was clear to me from the
scenes in front of me that many people were dead and injured
and whatever action was being taken to help these people was
haphazard.     By this I mean that there apppeared to be no
 central organisation or control in directing the people on
 the pitch. I should also add that Graham Kelly, who was
 recognised by the Liverpool supporters in the Leppings Lane
 end was loudly abused by these supporters who clearly felt
 that the incident was in some way the responsibility of The
 Football Association.    Throughout the day, many Liverpool
 supporters who passed within my hearing made the comment
 that they blamed The Football Association's ticket
 allocation.


 7.   On leaving the Control Room, Graham Kelly called a
 meeting of all interested parties including representatives



                                 -4-
of the clubs, the referee and the Police Commander.             The
Police Commander explained at this time that he had withheld
the decision about an abandonment as he felt that it might
be necessary for security reasons to have the match
continued.           I spent much of the time between the end of this
meeting and 4.00 p.m. fending off newsmen who were looking
for comment.           I promised them that there would be a full
statement by The Football Association as soon as the
immediate needs of the situation had been dealt with.


8.       At 4.00.p.m., approximately, I was informed that
Nottingham Forest were becoming restless and threatening to
leave the Stadium.            Graham Kelly went immediately to the
dressing room to sort out the situation and I went to the
Control Room to ascertain at what stage the final decision
was likely to be made.             While I was in the Control Room
waiting to speak to the Commander, a uniformed person whom I
took to be a Fire Officer came in and asked for the
a m b u l a n c e   liaison'man.   'The Police Commander stated that he
had asked for one but had not been provided with one.                While
I was waiting, the decision was made that the match could
now be abandoned.            I left the Control Box to convey this
information to various interested parties, but before I
could get back to the Board Room area an announcement was
made over the tannoy.              As I recall the substance of this
 announcement was that the match had been abandoned;
 spectators were asked to stay where they were for a few
minutes and remain calm to allow the emergency services to
 clear the casualties; and persons should hold their ticket
 stubs pending an announcement of a possible replay.             The
 announcement was greeted with a round of applause from the
 supporters above and around me in the Main Stand.             I do not
 know what the reaction of the supporters on the terraces was
 as I could not see from the position I was in.




                                         -5-
9.    Once all of the relevant persons had been informed of
the abandonment I began to organise the passing of the
necessary information on to the media.       Graham Kelly
conducted interviews with t . v . , radio and the written press.
At around this stage, I met Rogan Taylor, Chairman of the
F.S.A.    in the dressing room area.    He complained to me in
strong terms about the actions of the police.       In
particular, he repeated what I had overhead stated by
several supporters during the afternoon, which was that the
gates had not been forced but had been opened at the
direction of the police and that supporters had been
admitted to the ground without tickets being checked.


10.   I then gave my attention to attempting to reach people
outside the ground by telephone to inform them of what had
happened as we knew it and the action that was being taken.
Richard Faulkner the Vice Chairman at the Football Trust
assisted me with some telephone numbers in attempting to
reach Colin Moynihan.     I also spoke to'                   an
employee of the F.A. who was on Saturday phone duty for The
Football Association and who was being swamped by calls that
he was unable to give any meaningful answers to.         Among the
calls he had received was one from Ken Merrett the Secretary
of Manchester United concerning the possible replay on
Wednesday.     It was decided by Graham Kelly that the match
could not take place and I asked Mark to pass this message
on to Ken Merrett.      I also asked him to phone my wife
            to let her know that both          and I were safe.


11.      The attention of the press was now turned to the Police
who, according to the press, had made no statement on the
situation. At first a rumour spread that the Police
Commander was to give a conference in the old gymnasium at
the club at 6.00 p.m.      This was refuted by a Police Press
Officer who knew nothing about any such plans.       At about
6.00 p.m. a high ranking Police Officer announced that there



                                 -6-
 would be a Press Conference given by South Yorkshire Police
 at the Central Police Station in town at 6.45 p.m.           It was
 agreed that Graham Kelly would remain at the ground and that
 I should attend the Press Conference.         It was also decided
 and announced at some stage during the proceedings that The
 Football Association would be making no decisions on the
 possible replay of the game in the next forty-eight hours,
 but that a press conference would be held at Lancaster Gate
 at 3.00 p.m. the following day.         While driving to the Police
  Station, I attempted to phone                    1the F. A . 1s
  caretaker to ask him to open the office for this conference.
  There was no answer from The Football Association.
  Immediately afterwards,                 managed to contact me on
 my mobile phone and we agreed that she would attempt to
  contact                  knd that she would arrange for the
  office to be opened at 9.00 a.m. on Sunday morning.


  12.       I attended the press conference which was given by the
- Chief Const.ab'l'e of-South Yorkshire, M r 1
                                             .'Peter'"Wright r Tie
  was half an hour late arriving and was clearly very
  ill-informed about what had happened.        He announced that
  ninety-three were dead, two hundred injured of which
  eighty-three had been detained.        He said he could not say
  what was the cause of these deaths.        He said there had been
  pressure on the outside turnstiles by 3 - 4,000 people
  arriving no earlier than five minute before the kick-off. He
  was not aware of any non-ticket holders trying to get in.
  He said that there was room in the stand.        He then responded
  to some very aggressive questioning.        He said that a gate
  had been opened with Police permission, in fact at Police
  direction, he knew who had opened the gate but he was not
  able to divulge the name.     He said the gate had been opened
  because of the danger to life outside the ground.          In
  response to a question as to how many officers were on duty
  he said eight hundred, of which fifteen were mounted
  officers outside the ground.      He went on to refer to another



                                   -7-
gate which he said had been shut to avoid crushing and that
this gate had been forced open. After fifteen minutes or so
he said he could answer no further questions and attempts to
elicit any more answers from the Police were resisted
angrily by one of Mr. Wright's colleagues. At 7.45. p.m., I
returned to Hillsborough with Andy Williamson of The
Football League who had also been at the press conference
and briefed Graham Kelly on what had been said.     I left
Hillsborough at 8.00 p.m. and collected my son who had been
taken to the home of Graham Mackrell by Graham Mackrell1s
girlfriend.


13.    I drove back to London and arrived home at midnight.


14.    I should add that I have been interviewed on 9th May
1989 in the presence of the FA's solicitor by Superintendent
Fancott and Chief Superintendent Baker, of the West Midlands
Police Force who are gathering evidence for the judicial
inquiry. J .was asked questions which are contained in a
questionnaire for selected persons and I should now deal
with those matters not covered so far that are raised in the
questionnaire.


        i)   I did attend the same fixture last year,


       ii)   I drove to the ground.


      iii)   I did not witness any disorder or consumption
             of alcohol in the streets around the ground.


       iv)   I did not witness any crowd build-up or crushing
              at the Leppings Lane entrance. I did not see any
             of the other entrances. I did not witness any
             unauthorised entry into any part of the ground.




                                 -8-
        I did not witness alcohol being brought into
        the ground or being consumed inside the ground and
        did not witness any situation which I thought at
        the time was disorderly except that I did see one
        supporter who ran onto the pitch and made obscene
        gestures at the Nottingham Forest fans which took
        up the attention of two to three police officers.


 vi)    I did have a good view of the West Stand and
        clearly saw the standing area.       I did not see any
        incident in that area which I believe could have
        contributed to the disaster.


vii)    I did not see anything which I believe was
        directly concerned with the breaking of a barrier
        in Pen 3.


viii)   I took up my match viewing position just before
        kick-off.


  ix)   I did not see any unusual crowd surge
        either in Pen 3 or Pen 4.


   x)   I did not witness the death of any
        person. I did not assist any of the deceased or
        injured.


  xi)   The only act I witnessed by supporters
        which obstructed either police, stewards or
        medical persons was the chap I have mentioned who
        ran onto the pitch.


 xii)    I was not personally subjected to any
         threats or violence.       I did not witness anything
         that I considered to be a criminal act by any
         person.



                              -9-
xiii)       I have never been present or had any
            experience of any other football tragedy.


 xiv)       Nothing was brought to my attention which
            was significantly different from last year's match
            which would in my view be a contributory factor to
            the disaster.


   xv)      I have one comment to make as to the way
            the disaster was controlled following the
            recognition of the incident.   In my view it was a
            long time between the incident and when the final
            decision was taken by the police to abandon the
            match.   The Public was not kept fully informed as
            to what was happening.




  Glen Kirton




(10194LL)




                               -10-
