PM REPORTS 29 11 89



FOOTBALL SAFETY ITEM



Presenter:     Liverpool players and fans are back at the

               Hillsborough Stadium this evening for their first

               match there since 95 people died in the crush on

               the Leppings Lane Terraces and they will have a

               constant reminder right next to them of what

               happened.      The Leppings Lane end is closed for the

               match.   A wreath will be laid and there will be a

               minute's silence before kick off as a mark of

               respect for those who died on the 15 April.     Many

               of the Liverpool fans at the game tonight were at

               Hillsborough on that day and as they set out from

               Merseyside this afternoon they talked about this

               return journey.



Fan:           Summat's gorra be done, you've still

               gorra go even if its Sheffield, Derby,

               Manchester City whatever you still go

               you'd be sad obviously, but like I said

               before you've got to get on with it

               ...(unclear)      other games.   If you stop

               going to Sheffield you might as well stop

               going every other week.




                                    1
Interviewer:   How are you preparing yourself to back to

               Hillsborough?



Fan:           I have'nt really thought about it to tell you the

               truth, it might have been purposely, I've been

               leaving it to the last minute, I'm just going to

               play it by ear and try and treat it as a normal

               game, I know it's going to be hard, but I'm just

               going to try to do normal things for an away game.

               I feel a little bit apprehensive now, I don't know

               whether I '11 feel worse or slightly better when I

               get there, I felt as though I had to go back, its

               not something I 've been looking forward to but the

               day has come and as I say I am here and waiting, I

               can't wait to go, just want to be there, I want to

               say my own little prayers at the spot where these

               things happened.



Female Interviewer: Some of the Liverpool fans on their way back

                    to Hillsborough.   Well the match is supposed

                    to be an all ticket game with only 4,500

                    tickets going to Liverpool supporters and

                    there is criticism of the way the Club have

                    handled the allocation.   Our correspondent

                    John Thorne is in the radio car at the ground.

                    John, what is the problem.




                                  2
John Thorne:      The problem seems to be that the South Yorkshire

                  Police and the Sheffield Wednesday Club just

                  were'nt on the same wavelength.   While the Police

                  felt that all the tickets would be sold beforehand,

                  Sheffield Wednesday were prepared to sell right up

                  until the kick-off and then to allow their own fans

                  they say through the turnstiles in exchange for

                  cash and the criticism appears to be that they are

                  afraid some Liverpool fans who have already turned

                  up here without tickets will try to get in among

                  the Wednesday fans through the turnstiles by paying

                  with cash.



F Interview:      How many Liverpool fans are there gathered there

                  already John?



John Thorne:      I've already seen groups of ten, twenty more than

                  that here from about 4 o'clock in the afternoon.

                  They are sort of wandering around the ground,

                  they've been to the Leppings Lane End where already

                  there's a scarf and a Liverpool shirt hanging up on

                  the gate, already some flowers placed there.    They

                  are looking for tickets and asking which end it is

                   that the turnstiles will open and eventually allow

                   them in.

 F .Interviewer   John Thorne, thank you.




                                     3
Presenter:   Also in our Radio car in Sheffield is Rogan Taylor

             who was Campaigns Co-ordinator of the Football

             Supporters Association at the time of the

             Hillsborough Disaster.   He too was there on that

             day in April at the other end of the ground.

             Mr Taylor you did'nt believe that anything really

             serious had happened because it did'nt appear to

             have done at first did it?



Mr Taylor:   No, as you say I was almost a pitch length away at

             the North Stand and it took an awful long time, you

             watched the situation ratchet up before your eyes

             thinking at first its a bad crush, second the

             police are leading people away, they've realised

             what's happened, third God it was crush people have

             been injured maybe a leg broken and then finally of

             course an unmistakeably dead body is taken past by

             supporters with makeshift stretchers as I am sure

             everybody who saw those films will remember.



Presenter:   And of course now your own memories of that awful

             day, triggered clearly again no doubt as you look

             at the Leppings Lane End, not occupied this evening

             though.   Do you think it is now safe?



Mr Taylor:   No I mean I think it's been left entirely as it

             was, at least that's the way I understand it.     I do

             think its a great pity that the fence is still
             there, I think it would have been a good idea to

             just rip it down.   I can understand that the Club

             don't want to do anything particular with the

             Ground until Lord Justice Taylor's final report

             emerges but I think that fence should go.



Presenter:   And what about the ground in general, Hillsborough

             in general.



Mr Taylor:   Well I mean Hillsborough has always been considered

             a good ground, its a ground which has received an

             enormous amount of investment, the penning at

             Leppings Lane was always a horrible place to be and

             I would'nt have dreamed of standing behind the goal

             for that match last April 15th.



Presenter:   And what do you think about that ticketing problem,

             today's ticketing problem that we have just heard

             about?



Mr Taylor:   Well I think you do have to try and understand

             Sheffield Wednesday's situation, they want to try

             and play this as an ordinary game and indeed if

             they were going the other way, if they were going

             to Anfield to play Liverpool they'd get 4,000

             tickets and it would be all ticket as far as they

             were concerned but Liverpudlians could walk in the

             Kop end and pay cash and its the same situation in
               reverse.   I think what they are failing to do

               though is to recognise that this isn't just another

               game, this the first time post-Hillsborough that

               Liverpool fans have come and I think that they

               ought really to have recognised that and to have

               developed a ticket allocation which would reflect

               the interest that they game is bound to generate.



Presenter:     Mr Taylor, thank you very much for the moment, but

               stay with us and I hope and listen to our next

               report.



Female Interviewer:       Because in the wake of the tragedy the

                          Inquiry Chairman, Lord Justice Taylor

                          presented a detailed series of

                          recommendations to prevent such a

                          disaster happening again.   His interim

                          report in August spelled out 43 new

                          safety measures, more than half of them

                          to be implemented by the start of this

                          season, but critics say that hasn't

                          happened as Steve Evans reports.



               One of the main complaints from the terraces is

               that the policing of football matches is still

               inflexibly hard.   It is claimed that situations

               like that at Hillsborough are still misunderstood.




                                  6
                      r
                Bill Brewster is one of the editors of the fans

                large circulation magazine "When Saturday Comes".



B.Brewster:     This letter here from a reader who reported an

                instance where overcrowding was mistakenly taken

                for crowd violence and the police over reacted and

                that kind of thing is what is most worrying about

                what has taken place this season is that absolutely

                nothing seems to have been learnt and nothing has

                changed since Hillsborough.



Presenter:      Steve Beauchamp of the Football Supporters

                Association echoes that view, citing an incident

                from the first day of this season at Nottingham

                Forest, a few days after Lord Justice Taylor's

                interim report appeared.



S .Beauchamp:   The police caged up 400 hundred Aston Villa

                supporters simply because the ground was too full

                to allow them in and they were kept locked in a

                cage without refreshment for an hour and a half.

                This is the sort of behaviour that supporters have

                been putting up with, the number of complaints that

                the Football Supporters Association has been

                receiving about the police regrettably has been

                increasing since Hillsborough and this is most

                disappointing.




                                  7
    Presenter:      The fans also say that they have not been more

                    thoroughly consulted this season than last,

                    particularly by the committees actually responsible

                    for licensing grounds.



    S .Beauchamp:   The liaising with supporters groups has not been

                    implemented at all and we have also found    it very
                    difficult to get involvement in local safety


«                   committees which again was one of Taylor s

                    recommendations.   We around the country, the FSA

                    organisations have been contacting safety

                    committees and we have generally had a very poor

                    response.



    Presenter:      The Football Authorities deny that charge.      Glen

                    Curtin the Head of External Affairs at the Football

                    Association says that each club is working out its

                    own method of consulting its supporters.      It is not

                     true he says that no discussions take place.



     Glen Curtin:    I don't think that is the case, every club is

                     required to put into being mechanism by which the

                     needs of supporters can be ascertained.    Now I am

                     not in 92 football league clubs so I can't say

                     exactly what's going on in each, but if you re

                     saying that the FSA or the National Federation of

                     Football Supporters Clubs have not been taken on to

                     the Board of Football Clubs well that's absolutely


                                       8
              true but I don't think Lord Justice Taylor was

              suggesting that that should happen for a second.



Presenter:    The football authorities say that the important

              recommendations say about escape routes from caged

              in terracing have been carried out, gates are now

              clearly identified, numbers have been reduced

              substantially behind the grilles, they add that

              policing football matches is still difficult

              because some people are intent on trouble.     The

              police themselves reject the charge that they

              have'nt improved their methods.   Manchester's Chief

              Constable James Anderton who speaks for the

              Association of Chief Police Officers on the matter

              says they have fallen into line with Lord Justice
              Taylor.



J.Anderton:   He identified a number of things including the need

              for adequate police reserves to be available for

              better means of communication and control and

              supervision in and around the football grounds; on

              the need for the police to be aware of any likely

              developments arising out of the movement of large

              numbers of people and so on, so many of these

              things which were well within the compass of the

              police previously have now been sharpened up and

              refined and we hope now will be much more

              effective.


                               9
Presenter:   James Anderton and the report from Steve Evans.

             Rogan Taylor listening to Steve's report how do you

             think the police can best be helped to get over

             this problem of misinterpreting overcrowding as

             crowd violence?


Mr.Taylor:   Well I think Lord Justice Taylor in his

             recommendation did make the point that the

             briefings prior to Hillsborough for instance to the

             15 April match did'nt include to the police any

             specific instructions to look for the problems of

             overcrowding.     Now I am sure that that now takes

             place and that the police will have taken that on

             board.



Presenter:   And planning with the fans you also believe is

             essential don't you?


R.Taylor:    I do indeed and I don't think a great deal has been

             done there, Steve Beauchamp the FSA spokesperson

             has just mentioned that very few local safety

             advisory groups have been set up and that is true;

             there are some, I mean for instance Liverpool City

             Council have set one up and they have invited the

             supporters on board and I think those Clubs that

             were closely involved in this tragedy have taken

             care to get much closer to their supporters, but I


                                10
             am afraid it is a very patchy response I hope that

             this spreads a good deal further than it has so

             far.



Presenter:   Mr Taylor thank you very much.   That is Rogan

             Taylor who was Campaigns Co-ordinator of the

             Football Supporters Association at the time of the

             Hillsborough Disaster.




                               11
