PM        S o u th Yorkshire

          POLICE
                                                                                      &
          JUSTICE       wi t h   COURAGE




Mr C Bone                                                               ACC/I D/NMH
Room 528
Home Office                                                             5 August 1997
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT




Dear Mr Bone

Hillsborough Scrutiny

On 23 July 1997 I wrote to you regarding a report by Mr David Phillips concerning the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. As indicated in that letter, I wrote to Mr Phillips to seek
clarification of the background to his report.

On 4 August 1997 I received a reply from Mr Phillips (attached). I believe that Mr Philips’
reply confirms my earlier view that his report does not constitute “new evidence”. However,
that is a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to decide, not me.

The Chief Constable has instructed me that anything which could be possibly construed as
new evidence should be brought to your attention and I will continue to comply with that
instruction.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




           Police Headquarters
           Snig Hill
           Sheffield S3 8LY
           Tel: 0114 276 8522 Fax: 0114 252 3243
, John David Phillips Q.P.M., B.A. (Econ.)
  Chief Constable
                                                                           T < T lF T ^Tr
                                                                           ~L.iX.11 z; X
                                                                         COUNTY CONSTABULARY
                                   Chief Constable’s Office, Maidstone, Kent ME15 9BZ
                                                Telephone: (0622) 690690

            Our ref: G:JDP/CC/July/SMT                                                  30th July, 1997
            Your ref: ACC/D/NMH




             Dear Ian,

                              Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny of Hillsborough

                     Thank you for your letter regarding the above. At the time of the Hillsborough
             Disaster I was the Secretary of the ACPO Football Hooliganism Committee and had done
             much to promote a universal approach to the problems of policing football. As a
             consequence I was asked by the then Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Peter Wright, if
             I would provide a professional expert opinion which might be relied upon in the civil
             proceedings which were anticipated. I prepared my report on that basis both by reference
             to the evidence which came before the hearing; statements obtained in the course of the
             enquiry led by then ACC Mervyn Jones of West Midlands and by interviewing a number
             o f people myself and examining documents. The real weight of my report is interpretive.
             For example, I think it was highly significant that the football ground had hardly ever
             been at capacity in the preceding 12 years whereby there was no local knowledge of the
             problems relating to overcrowding; I think that the evidence relating to the previous
             overspill which Mr. Gosling dealt with and the correspondence thereafter, was of great
             importance; I believe that the failure of John Motson and so many other commentators to
             recognise overcrowding was significant; I believe that the engineering of the ground,
             particularly in relation to the lack of secure connection between turnstiles and parts of the
             ground with crowd limits, was a matter of greater importance than the enquiry considered;
              and finally I think there was a good deal of evidence about the conduct of the late arriving
             Liverpool supporters which seemed to be minimised as the enquiry concentrated upon the
             tragic blamelessness of those who suffered.

                     I hope my observations arc of some value.

                                                       With respect, **



                                                     Chief Constable


             Mr. Ian Daines, BA(Hons)., Dip.Ed.,
             Assistant Chief Constable,
             South Yorkshire Police Headquarters,
             Snig Hill,
             Sheffield S3 8LY
