                                                        ยง3 ^
                                                     28 SEP 1S89
                                cc   Mr   Bolton    )
                                     Mr   Clayton   ) with encl.
                                     Mr   Goddard   ) excluding
                                     Mr   Mower     ) Annexes.




Mr Turney




HOME SECRETARY'S MEETING 28 SEPTEMBER


As requested, I enclose briefing material for the above meeting.

I have no reason to doubt the information provided but equally I
cannot vouch for its reliability.  For example, as some of the
Interim Report recommendations do not affect local authorities it
is just possible they have excluded them in replying to us.

Mr Bolton is putting forward.        ssion on Mr Edey's latest
letter.




                                           D J MOULD

                                            27 September 1989
FEP/89 35/48/88
h s .9.27/hillsbll.dm


HILLSBOROUGH INTERIM REPORT:     PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATIONS

BRIEFING FOR MEETING ON 28 SEPTEMBER


Introduction


1.   There are in effect 90 designated club grounds (Torquay
United's ground holds under 10,000:     Charlton play at Crystal
Palace) plus Wembley Stadium.     Approximately 75 local authorities
are responsible for this certification.


2.   28 out of 43 recommendations were "starred" for "pre-season"
introduction by the Inquiry.     Not all of these (eg police
operational orders) bear directly on local authority
certification responsibilities.


Constraints


3.   Given the logistics and the timescale I felt it necessary to
limit information requested.


4.   The questions asked of all local authorities contacted are
those in the questionnaires at Annex A.    The information has been
obtained by telephone.   It supplements that previously obtained
via ACPO and fire brigades.    Annex B is a summary sheet.

Progress


5.   Enquiries are continuing.    We now have information on the
grounds of those clubs highlighted at Annex C (49).


Summary of results to date


6.   All 28 asterisked recommendations are reported to have been
implemented at 34 grounds (67%).


7.   All the asterisked recommendations except one are reported
to have been implemented at 43 grounds (86%).
8.    The recommendation most commonly not yet implemented is
recommendation 4 (written agreements between police/club).       But
replies indicate that such agreements are well advanced and in
many cases (but not all) near to completion (see below).


Written agreements


9.    This continues to be a difficult area.   Police department
are concerned about the contractual liability which might be
associated with such agreements.    F8 will be seeking more
information on the nature of agreements already reached and have
consulted Legal Advisers.    Contractual agreements would risk
inhibiting discretion of Chief Officers on deployment and might
prejudice their common-law duty.   Whilst it is necessary to
ensure clarity of responsibility it is felt that any "agreement"
should, in effect, be a statement of intent by the police with
freedom to give notice of variation should they consider it
necessary.   This is not strictly on all fours with the Taylor
recommendation but is considered to achieve the objective of it.
F8 are pursuing this.


Ground standing capacities


10.   All except one have been reduced to below 54 persons for 10
square metres.   The additional 15% cut has not been carried out
in 4 other instances: Exeter, Plymouth, Bury, Wigan.   However, in
all these instances density levels are at or below the maximum
set by the Inquiry.


Cutting equipment


11.   There are one or two examples of difficulty here: for
example Manchester Utd and Crystal Palace where "suitable"
cutting equipment cannot be provided.   At the latter ground there
is also objection to keeping open pitch fence gates.


First aid/medical


12.   Improvements have been made generally, more are in progress.
Correspondence with Mr Edev


13.   See Mr Bolton's latest submission to Private Office.


Miscellaneous


14.   Application of the Inquiry's report has been carried out at
other designated sports grounds.   Information is sketchy but
signs are that the recommendations have been applied to rugby
league grounds and non-league soccer grounds, either wholly or in
part.


Conclusion


15.   The earlier advice on good general progress on
implementation is supported by the information obtained so far.
Areas of difficulty are those anticipated.   There is no evident
unwillingness to implement the Report and it is difficult to see
how additional progress could be achieved by the exercise of
powers under the 1975 Act to make an Order under S.15A.      That
option nevertheless is still being considered.




                                         D J MOULD
