                                             22 December 1989




Dear Sir Peter

You invited the Technical Working Party "to review technical
aspects of the guide to Safety at Sports Grounds;  identify areas
requiring clarification or amendment;  and recommend
accordingly." I have pleasure in submitting its Report, which
has been agreed by all members. Detailed supplementary notes
dealing with certain of the technical features will be available
for your use in due course.

We note that the Guide is not confined to football grounds and
stadia but includes guidance on all sports grounds, and we have
borne this in mind in our considerations. Although not within
our terms of reference, and for that reason not addressed in our
Report, we recognise that efficient and effective stewarding is
an integral element of crowd control and safety. Our
recommendations complement, rather than supplant, the need for
such stewarding.

The Technical Working Party met first on 18 October and held five
formal day-long meetings supplemented by many working papers and
informal discussions during the period available for report. The
heavy pressures of the timetable could not have been accommodated
without the fullest co-operation of those concerned, and I record
my thanks to all members of the Technical Working Party and to
its Secretary for the integrity, commitment and enthusiasm with
which they approached the task.




                                        PROFESSOR L MAUNDER
              REPORT OF THE TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY


The Green Guide

1.   The Technical    Working   Party   recognises the valuable
contributions of successive editions of the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds, commonly known as the Green Guide.  Its scope and
status are described in its introduction as follows:        "This
booklet provides guidance to ground management, local authorities
and technical specialists such as engineers on measures for
improving spectator safety at existing sports grounds.    It is a
voluntary guide and has no legal force".

2.   In view of the variability of existing sports grounds in
function and in scale,      there are serious difficulties in
establishing comprehensive and general regulations, backed by
legal force, to cover all the complex details of design and
construction.    Adherence to the standards set by Building
Regulations should provide a measure of uniformity in respect of
new work at sports grounds.   Nevertheless, the Technical Working
Party is strongly of the opinion that a much higher degree of
standardisation than presently prevails should be sought in
practice.

3.   It considers that a revised issue of the Green Guide should
form the basis on which a designated ground or stand is certified
by the certifying authority, and recommends that any departures
from its guidance on technical provisions that may arise from
local circumstances should be fully defined and should be subject
to approval in writing by the certifying authority.

A Centre of Expertise

4.   The Green Guide covers a wide range of material, much of
which concerns the physical characteristics of grounds.       Its
successive issues have been published in response to a number of
serious accidents at football grounds.   This process has led to
incremental advances in the Guide as experience has grown, but
the Technical Working Party does not believe that such a process,
although essential, is by itself sufficient to cope with present-
day requirements.
                  4 -Q Q ii& (jd X '
5.   Many British us^e$*s grounds were first constructed a long
time ago, and improvements have been introduced largely on an
individual basis.   A central body ^of^Jcnowledge applicable to the
complex design of such grounds has^befen entirely 1-erefclTTg. As a
result, progress has been piecemeal.                           *

6.   The Technical Working Party considers that this is a serious
defect.   A continuous and expanding body of public knowledge,
drawn from the relevant professional fields, is required to
provide a basis for good individual designs at modern standards.
At a time when substantial improvements are under consideration,
including a higher proportion of seated accommodation, it is
imperative to establish and to disseminate rigorous standards of
design if expectations are to be fulfilled.         The work of
organisations in other countries, including the Comitato Olimpico
       't u   " fU f             fa t       Vtfric v iv v jfo ifl^ )A    COM^   ^ { $ f * k C*w*e.'l ,
    1K 'r         ^    H                         ^ IaoW wuk k A ^ fW o ^ /tt^ f> * *» >

                                                                        _ fefeen^*
              Kov*m*, Vv Aw*vM(^ ^ +i^V *v«<^^L(J^ ^ * W < ^
X       7.    The Technical Working PartyJrecommends the formation of a
         central body, under a title such as The Advisory Council for
         Sports Grounds, to provide an authoritative source of knowledge
X       for all those involved in the design and construction or^sEadia.
         A detailed specification of its structure and funding is not
         proposed at this stage but, as envisaged, its members would be
         drawn from the relevant professional fields and would commission
         specialist advice when necessary.  It would be independent of any
         Inspectorate.     The relationship of such a body to other
         organisations is a matter for further discussion, but it is
X       suggested that the Football Association imight wish to play *0 *"
/        leading role 4;                           £          ^ ,,     •{

         Seating and Standing                                            *

         8.   The Technical Working Party notes that FIFA has agreed
         regulations on seating for certain classes of football matches,
         and that the regulations are to be imposed within a short time-
         scale.  It also recognises that the British tradition of standing
         on terraces runs counter to these international requirements.

        9.   It is clear that if British Clubs are to continue within the
        international community, they will be obliged to close      their
        standing accommodation for matches that fall within the FIFA
        definition.    For other matches, the Technical Working Party
        recognises     that,  whilst   standing accommodation    is   not
        intrinsically unsafe, the benefits to spectator comfort and crowd
        control brought about by all-seater stadia are likely to
        accelerate the move towards such venues.    The Technical Working
        Party accepts, however, that although the introduction of all-
        seater stadia for leading, well-supported football clubs may be
        both beneficial and practical, clubs in the lower divisions may
        find it less so and the removal of all standing accommodation at
        these grounds may affect their viability. Alterations to seating
        from standing arrangements at existing grounds may have both
        design and cost implications through the impact on such matters
        as spectator sight-lines and crowd density.

         10. In addition, it must be recognised that there are many
         sports (horse, greyhound, motor racing and car rallying for
         example) where the nature of the sport favours the mobility of
         large sections of the crowd and where viewing from standing areas
         is an essential element.   Any recommendations towards all-seater
         stadia must therefore be carefully worded.

         Capacities

         11.  The Technical Working Party recognises       that the safe
         allowable capacity of any viewing area, whether seated or
         standing, is the least of (i) its holding capacity, (ii ) the
         number of persons who can leave through a normal exit system
         within a prescribed time at the end of an event, (iii) the number
         of persons who can leave through an emergency exit system within
         a prescribed time, and (iv) the number of persons who can be
         admitted through the turnstiles serving that area within one
         hour.
12. The theoretical holding capacity of a seated viewing area is
simply the number of seats in good condition which comply with
the relevant Green Guide recommendations including those relating
to distance from exits and gangways and size and spacing.
Determination of the holding capacity of a viewing terrace or
slope is not so simple;   factors that must be taken into account
include the strength and spacing of the crush-barriers, the
position of gangways, the dimensions and physical state of the
steps, the effective standing area, and the acceptable packing
density.

13. A packing density of 5.4/m 2 is recommended in the current
Green Guide as the maximum allowable figure for terraces and
viewing slopes that meet all the specified guidelines. A reduced
figure of 2.7/m 2 is presently recommended for areas deviating
materially from the guidelines. The Technical Working Party sees
no point    in retaining reference to the lower figure and
recommends that there should be no lower limit to the reduction;
ie if the enclosure had such poor safety standards that it was
totally unfit as a viewing area the figure should be zero.

14. As to the maximum figures, the Technical Working Party
concludes that a uniformly distributed density of 5.4/m 2 should
be saf£f in conditions in full compliance with the Green Guide.
It recognises, however, that there will be variations of density
within a given enclosure, and allowance should be made to
accommodate this factor in the final determination.

15.     The Technical Working Party     recommends that the maximum
allowable average packing density determined by the Inquiry
should establish a general reference for certifying authorities.
For an individual ground, the packing density applicable to a
given standing area should be derived from this figure, the full
figure for areas in good condition and reduced figures for areas
in poorer condition. Detailed calculations of holding capacities
should then be determined on the basis of the agreed packing
density for that specific enclosure or other relevant factors.
These calculations should take into account specific features of
the    crush-barriers and fences   and   of step dimensions as
illustrated in the Green Guide.      The Technical Working Party
recommends a thorough review of the examples currently contained
in    Chapter  16 of the GreenGuide,     and the    inclusion of
appropriate diagrams.

Structural Elements

16. It is a fundamental requirement of safety that structures at
grounds should provide spectators with safe accommodation and
safe means of ingress and egress. They should also enable police
and stewards to exert proper control over crowd movements. If a
conflict should occur between these objectives, a substantial re­
arrangement may be required;    in no circumstances should safety
standards be compromised. The Technical Working Party recommends
that references to sub-divisions in Chapter 14 of the Green Guide
be reviewed with these considerations in mind, and that the
Chapter as a whole reflect more positively.
Separation of Viewing Areas and Pitch

17. The Technical Working Party recognises the importance of
physical barriers as deterrents to pitch invasions.      It also
recognises that not all viewing areas present the same risk, and
recommends that consideration be given to differentiating those
areas requiring higher levels of security and other areas, such
as seated accommodation and members' enclosures, where a lesser
degree of security might be acceptable.

18. The general     principle of separation endorsed by the
Technical Working Party is that the means adopted should provide
sufficient security against pitch incursions to enable the police
to take timely and effective action should such incidents occur.
Clearly a balance has to be struck between crowd control and
safety.

19. A configuration recommended for wider consideration consists
of a perimeter barrier on the pitch-side backed by a parallel and
continuous crush-barrier on the terrace-side, set back from the
perimeter barrier so as to provide a clear walk-way between the
two;   except in emergencies, spectators would not be allowed to
enter the walk-way.   Such an arrangement would reduce the risks
associated with a common feature of British grounds, namely that
the front steps of terraces are substantially lower than the
level of the pitch:   immediate attention should be given to the
elimination of this hazard.

20. The Technical Working Party recommends that the maximum
height of perimeter fences should be determined in relation to
the UEFA standard of 2.2m.    It also recommends the removal of
overhanging sections and spiked or barbed-wire attachments at the
tops of fences.

21 . A form of separation increasingly adopted in new stadia is
the dry moat.   To be effective, a dry moat must be sufficiently
wide and deep, and should be protected by fences on both sides to
ensure that spectators and players do not fall into it.     Where
enough space is available, a moat may offer an attractive
solution, but its application to older grounds is likely to be
restricted by limitations of space.

Emergency Access to Pitch

22. The Technical Working Party recommends that emergency access
to the pitch should be provided from all adjacent viewing areas.
It considers the provision of gates or gaps in any formal barrier
to be in all cases advantageous for the evacuation of adjacent
enclosures and essential except where adequate, safe alternative
arrangements exist.       Where fences,   barriers or moats are
installed the majority view of the Technical Working Party is
that there should be clear gangways leading to emergency exits on
to the pitch.   Such gangways must be properly identified and kept
clear at all times.    The exit gates or gaps should be at least
1 . 1 metres wide or as wide as the gangways feeding into them,
whichever is the larger and should be sufficient in dimensions
and spacing to allow evacuation of the enclosure within a
prescribed time. The Working Party recorded a minority view that
the need to police gangways exacerbated friction on terraces, and
that gangways were not always essential for proper crowd control
and safety.

Crush Barriers

23. A review of the procedures for inspection and testing of
barriers is recommended.   The Technical Working Party considers
that greater emphasis should be given to thorough recorded and
certified annual inspections of all crush barriers.    Particular
attention should be given to the development of corrosion.

24. It is further recommended that 25% of barriers, evenly
spaced through each enclosure as designated by a competent
engineer, continue to be tested each year.     In addition, all
barriers which the inspection has identified as of possibly sub­
standard condition should also be tested.

25. The adopted test method should be capable of applying to
barrier rail, post and foundation anchorage,a loading equivalent
to a uniformly distributed load 1 . 2 0 x the   design load of the
barrier as at present.

26. The test procedure should be revised in line with current
practice for structural testing to incorporate (i) a detailed
visual inspection of the barrier, (ii) a bedding-in cycle taken
to a percentage of the design loading and (iii) a single cycle of
proof testing taken as at present to 1 . 2 0 x the design loading.
Deflections at all significant points should be recorded.

27. After the full proof load has been held for a minimum of
five minutes the deflections should be recorded prior to release
of loading and the permanent residual unloaded deflections
recorded after the load has been released.

28. The Technical Working Party recommends    the adoption of two
criteria for acceptable structural performance (i) that no
significant   defects,   including corrosion,   are revealed by
inspection and (ii) that the percentage recovery of deflections
after   release  of   the   load  during proof-testing achieves
acceptable values.   The specific values required will depend on
the materials of construction.

29. The Technical Working Party recommends that the distinction
currently drawn in the Green Guide between "peak" and "non-peak"
viewing areas for the purpose of assessing barrier spacing should
be abolished.    All areas should comply with the peak viewing
specifications.

Stands

30. A substantial part of Chapter 10 of the Green Guide, 'Roofed
Stands   with  Seated Accommodation',    deals   with temporary
structures.   It is recommended that this material should be
placed in a separate chapter, and that it should give explicit
references as required to British Standards and to applicable
regulations.
31. The remainder, which might be called 'Covered Standing and
Seated Accommodation', should clarify the special requirements
for safety that are involved, noting that fire risk is not the
only hazard and that statutory control of the requirements may be
vested in different authorities.      Appropriate references to
Building Regulations should be made.   It is important to ensure
that all spectators can be cleared into safe protected escape
routes within prescribed times, although such routes need not be
exits from the stand as a whole.

Ingress/Egress

32.  The current Chapters on Ingress and Egress in the Green
Guide (Chapters 5 and 6 ) contain much useful information, but are
nonetheless in need of some revision. Consideration was given by
the  Technical Working Party tothe possible amalgamation of
features common to both ingress and egress, but despite the
common ground it is recognised that emphases might well differ.
The Working Party does not therefore recommend amalgamation of
the individual Chapters.

Ingress

33.   The Technical Working Party     felt that Chapter 5 needed
expansion to incorporate additional clauses on (a) the positive
counting and recording of those passing through each turnstile;
(b)   the location of amenities      inside the ground to avoid
obstructing or disrupting the flow between turnstile and
enclosures;     (c) the sub-division of enclosures;       (d) the
adequacy of well distributed entrances into large enclosures to
facilitate even packing;    and (e) the design of entrances so as
to avoid local pressure on spectators caused, for example, by
downward ramps.     Informative diagrams should be adopted and
general principles laid down, wherever possible.    The Technical
Working Party would not favour the introduction of numerical
examples which might, in any event, be difficult to establish.
It views the current maximum notional flow rate per turnstile of
750 persons per hour (as set out in paragraph 47 Green Guide) as
too high, and recommends a figure of 500 as the median for a
normal turnstile.   Furthermore, it recommends that variations up
or down be approved by the certifying authority, subject to a
maximum upper limit of 660 persons per hour.

Egress

34. Greater cross-referencing with other Chapters is required,
and the Technical Working Party favours expansion or amendment of
a number of paragraphs.    In particular, the density figure set
out in paragraph 54 in respect of reservoir areas is felt to be
too high,   andthe members of      the Technical Working Party
recommend that,    where reservoir areas cannot be removed from
egress routes, a   lowerdensity of 35-40 persons per 10 sq metres
be substituted.      The Technical Working Party favours greater
emphasis on networking, and believes that the Green Guide should
include a stipulation that each ground produce proper, networked
plans, delineating all aspects of ingress/egress.
Enclosures/Turnstiles

35. The Technical Working Party strongly recommends that there
should be a direct one-to-one relationship betweenHfurnstiles and
enclosures in order to maintain accurate counts of entries. A
review of the current state of League grounds had shown that sub­
divisions such as had occurred at Hillsborough were uncommon, and
had generally been initiated by police for crowd control.   Where
such sub-divisions do exist, it is imperative that the total
number of spectators entering each sub-division should be counted
separately.

Stairways and Ramps

36. The Technical Working Party notes the dangers presented by
stairways and ramps, particularly those used by the public in
large numbers, and recommends extensive redrafting of the Green
Guide to present more sharply the hazards involved.            It
recognises that the standards of safety required for stairways
and ramps which form part of the access between enclosures and an
exit and those which exist as gangways within enclosures differ
and recommends that the differences be explained in more detail.
Particular attention should be given by certifying authorities to
acceptable upper limits on the gradients of ramps and stairways.
The maximum gradient for ramps set out in the current Green Guide
was felt acceptable.

37. Similarly, the Working Party believes that the channelling
of flows by the provision of handrails should be given greater
emphasis.   The recommended width of channel for both stairways
and ramps should not exceed three persons (unit widths) in line
abreast, and the width of up to 1 . 8 metres permitted by paragraph
76 should therefore be reduced accordingly.        Handrails should
extend, by at least 300mm beyond the top and bottom of any
stairway or ramp.

38. The difference between handrails, balustrades and barriers
on or near the top and bottom of stairways and ramps, and their
appropriate strength requirements, needs to be clarified.

39. The Technical Working Party recommends the inclusion in the
Green Guide of a greater number of diagrams illustrating the
potentially hazardous situations in relation to stairways and
ramps and of the principles behind the provisions.

Inspections and Tests

40. Inspection and tests of all equipment and structures at
grounds are vital features of good operation.     Their range is
wide, extending from visual inspection before and after each
event to regular testing of structural components.       It is a
matter of serious concern that the interpretation of requirements
by those responsible is unacceptably variable.      The Technical
Working Party considers that action should be taken to ensure
that common high standards of inspection and test are realised,
and makes the following recommendations.
    (i)    The Green    Guide should  include a comprehensive
    tabulation of inspections and tests covering the essential
    technical features of grounds.     It should prescribe the
    minimum frequencies at which the inspections and tests
    should be conducted.

     (ii)   The required levels of competence of those carrying
     out the inspections and tests should be defined.

     (iii) Records of the resultsof inspections and tests,
     including the identification of defects and the remedies
     adopted, should be certified by those carrying out the work.

    (iv)   A national Inspectorate     should be established to
    oversee the adoption of common standards of inspection and
    test.  Its terms of reference should include the compilation
    and maintenance of a national register of organisations
    employed to carry out inspections and tests;         central
    recording of the extent and type of the inspections and
    tests adopted at individual grounds;    and the provision of
    advice on inspection and test for those responsible for
    carrying out the work and for certifying authorities.     It
    would be in the interest of common standards if an
    Inspectorate of this kind dealt with the grounds of all
    relevant sports, and consideration should be given to its
    formation through an association of their governing bodies.

Fire Safety

41. There is general recognition amongst Technical Working Party
members that the current Chapter on Fire Safety (Chapter 11) is
well-defined.  It contains much useful advice on egress and means
of escape, application of which is not restricted to fire risks
and which would bear repetition in other Chapters.

42. The Technical Working Party considers that it is essential
to maintain simple, clear lines of authority and communication;
independent input from individual bodies is to be avoided. With
that in mind, its members believe that consultation on all safety
matters should be directly with the certifying authority who, in
turn, would consult with the fire, police, and other authorities.

Emergency/Auxiliary Power

43. The Technical Working Party considers that the current Green
Guide contains insufficient information on auxiliary power.    It
recommends a separate chapter on the topic with a requirement
that emergency power should be sufficient to maintain an adequate
level of lighting, and public address system and to operate any
electronic gates, alarms etc for a period of three hours from the
time of failure of the normal supply.

Communications

44. The Technical Working Party considers that too little weight
has in the past been attached to the need for a comprehensive
communications system,  capable of reaching both inside and
outside the ground.
45. Chapter 12 of the Green Guide therefore requires substantial
amendment to reflect the importance of effective communications
systems, the need to make use of high-technology equipment, and
the value of closer co-operation between club and police
personnel. The Technical Working Party considers that Interim
Recommendations   31-34   should be retained permanently and
incorporated into the Green Guide.

Disabled Spectators

46. The current 'Green Guide' fails to address the specific
problems encountered by disabled spectators and the Technical
Working Party recommends the introduction of a Chapter to cover
these aspects.   It should deal in particular with Ingress and
Egress and with the provision of self-contained viewing areas.
                    SUMMARY OF MAIN RECOMMENDATIONS


The Green Guide


1.   A higher degree of standardisation in stadia design and
construction is required.        An updated and revised Green Guide
should form the basis on which a designated ground or stand is
certified.    It should incorporate appropriate diagrams and refer
to relevant Building Regulations.


Advisory Body


2.   There should be a single, central body (called perhaps the
Advisory Council for Sports Grounds) to provide an authoritative
source of knowledge for all those involved in the design and
construction of stadia.


Seating/Standing


3.   Whilst standing accommodation is not intrinsically unsafe,
all-seater stadia bring benefits to spectator comfort, safety and
crowd control.     The implementation of higher proportions of
seated accommodation should be governed by common high standards
of design and construction.

                                                                        IferAWi   sWv'1'4. V*
Capacities                                       j   ^   sV
                                                 I            Art »«a
                             ^            ^                 — .
4.   Capacity     depends on standards of ingress, egress and safety                       \
generally as well as the acceptable packing density and the                                    \
                                                                                               i
effective area of the accommodation.          The current maximum packing                  j

density of 5.4/m 2 recommended in the Green Guide *is ■congifloirpri -fro
be— &&£e.    It should be recognised, however, that densities
normally vary     over anenclosure, and an      allowable average figure
should reflect this consideration.        The   reduced figure of 2.7/m 2
should be abolished and there should be no specified lower limit.
If an enclosure has such poor safety standards that it is totally
unfit as a viewing area, the figure should be zero.
Separation of Viewing Areas and Pitch


5.    Consideration should be given to different perimeter
arrangements appropriate for different areas of a ground.


6.    The means of separation adopted should provide sufficient
protection against pitch incursions without compromising
spectator safety.    The maximum height of fences should be
determined in relation to the UEFA standard of 2.2 metres.
Overhanging sections and spiked or barbed-wire attachments should
be removed.


7.    Attention should be given to the elimination of spectator
viewing from front steps of terraces which are substantially
lower than the level of the pitch.


Emergency Access to the Pitch


8.    Emergency access to the pitch should be provided from all
adjacent viewing areas.


9.    Exit gaps or gates should be at least 1.1 metres wide or as
wide as the gangways feeding into them, whichever is the larger.
All gangways must be clearly identified and must be kept clear of
spectators in normal circumstances.


Crush Barriers


10.   A review of the procedures for inspection and testing of
barriers is recommended.    Greater emphasis should be given to
thorough recorded and certified annual visual inspections of all
crush barriers, and to the establishment of an unambiguous
testing procedure.


Stands


11.   The Green Guide should contain a separate chapter on
temporary structures, with appropriate references to applicable
regulations and British Standards.
Ingress


12.     The current maximum notional flow rate per turnstile of 750
persons per hour is too high.     A figure of 500 should be adopted
as the median with a maximum upper limit of 660 persons per hour.
Variations from the median must be approved by the certifying
authority.


Egress


13.     Where reservoir areas cannot be removed, a lower density of
35-40 persons per 10 sq metres should be adopted.     Each ground
should produce networked plans delineating all aspects of ingress
and egress.


Enclosures/Turnstiles


14.     There should be a direct one-to-one relationship between #
turnstiles and'enclosures.     Where sub-divisions exist, it is
imperative that the totals entering each sub-division are counted
separately.


Stairways and Ramps


15.     The recommended width of channels should not exceed three
persons (unit widths) in line abreast.     Handrails should extend
by at least 300mm beyond the top and bottom of any stairway or
ramp.     The design and strength of handrails, barriers and
protection on or near stairways or ramps should be clearly
defined.     Ramps should not produce dangerous crowd pressures.


Inspection and Tests


16.     Action should be taken to ensure that common high standards
of inspection and test are realised.     A national Inspectorate
should be established to oversee the adoption of such standards.
Its terms of reference should include compilation and maintenance
of a national register of organisations employed to carry out
inspections and tests;   central recording of the extent and type
of inspections and tests at individual grounds;   and the
provision of advice.


Disabled Spectators


17.   The Green Guide should contain a separate Chapter to cover
this subject.
