From: P eter Edm undson                                   cc Mr Michael
      O perational Policing                                 Mr Howarth
      Policy Unit                                           Mr Middleton j /
      Room 527, QAG                                         Mr Pugh
      8 273 -2621                                           Mr Clifford ABCU
      6 May, 1998                                           Ms Clifford CD
                                                            Mr Warner
                                                            Mr Owen


Clare Sumner

HILLSBOROUGH: ADJOURNMENT DEBATE - HOM E SECRETARY’S
              SPEECH


I attach, as requested, a note with disk to fill in the gaps marked in the Home
Secretary’s speech. We have also made some minor amendments to parts o f the text
where it appears to have gone awry in transposition.

2.   I also attach a schedule showing what has been placed in the House o f
Commons Library.




                                    Peter Edmundson




f:\oppu\complnts\speech\mp-0553 .doc
HILLSBOROUGH SPEECH




Para 12. For many o f the families, the sense o f grievance only increased with the
passage o f time, and they decided that more should be done to get at the truth as they
saw it o f what happened. In 1996, Jimmy McGovern, with the full co-operation of
the Hillsborough Family Support Group decided to prepare a television drama-
documentary for Granada’s World-in-Action programme. Entitled simply
“Hillsborough” the two hour long programme presented a powerful picture o f the
tragedy. It suggested that there was fresh evidence which had not previously been
considered which called into question the verdicts at the inquests, and some other
decisions.

Para 14.       Following the Adjournment debate, My Hon Friend for Liverpool
Walton (Peter Kilfoyle) secured an adjournment debate in December 1996.1 attended
that debate, and listened with great attention at the careful and decisive way in which
my predecessor, the Rt Hon Gentleman for Folkestone and Hythe, responded to the
debate on the matter and whether any inquiry should be re-opened, he said this:

       I must emphasise the fact that I would not take a decision to re-open the
       inquiry lightly. I must be convinced that it would be in the public interest
       to do so.

       The charge has been made - it is one which I will consider carefully - that
       there has been a cover-up, an attempt to pervert the course of justice. I
       shall also consider whether there is any new evidence, and if so, whether
       that evidence is of such significance that had it been put before Lord
       Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or
       the verdict of the jury would have been different.


Para 24.       But we have known since Lord Taylor’s report who was principally
to blame - the police.

Para 29.        First, there is the question o f the missing tapes. Two tapes were stolen.
Their theft - still unsolved - has understandably heightened concerns about a “cover
up”, which were compounded by the extra-ordinary and pervasive denial of
responsibility by South Yorkshire Police at the time. But the crucial thing about
these tapes is that they contained no material evidence not otherwise available. One
was entirely blank as the camera concerned had been pointing at a wall. The other
showed turnstiles 9-16 at the Leppings Lane end, next to turnstiles A-G, which
themselves were monitored by police CCTV camera 1. What happened on these
turnstiles was recorded on both the police tape (TB2) and tape RJH2, which
consists of camera output viewed in the club control room.




f:\oppu\complnts\speech\mp-0553.doc
Para 30.      Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group made five
submissions on behalf o f the Group, listed at paragraph 33 on p.20.

1.That the police blamed their failure to see the overcrowding in pens 3 and
4 of the Leppings Lane end on camera 5 being defective when in fact it was not.

2.That the evidence of the video tapes taken from camera 5 was deliberately
suppressed and concealed.

3.     That the coroner deliberately failed properly to pursue the question of the
“missing video evidence”.
4.That police officers gave deliberately false evidence that camera 5 was not
working correctly.

5.     That evidence from Mr Roger Houldsworth, a CCTV technician in the
club control room, was suppressed. Mr Houldsworth, who featured so
prominently in the World in Action programme, claimed that he could see from
monitoring police cameras that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded and that a
dangerous situation was likely to arise because of the influx of fans through Gate
C.

Para 33.     In respect of submission 5, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith emphasises
that Mr Houldsworth’s existence, and his evidence, were known both to the
Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner, and that his evidence, even if correct, would
not have had any effect on the previous proceedings.

Para 34.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also deals with the credibility of Mr
Houldsworth. He says that he was “unable to accept that his recollection of
events now is accurate”, and adds that “the importance of his evidence has been
exaggerated out of all proportion”.

Para 37.       Other allegations related to the rescue operation, and to alleged
improper interference with witnesses. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith noted that Lord
Taylor had inquired into the rescue operation and criticised the slow response of
the police. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found no evidence of want of care by the
emergency or medical services and, in his view, no purpose would be served by
any further inquiry into this aspect of the disaster.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith investigated in some depth allegations that certain
witnesses were pressurised by the West Midlands Police to change the evidence
which they wished to give. He concludes that there was no improper attempt to
affect their evidence. He also examined carefully the statements which the South
Yorkshire Police obtained from their own officers, some of which were amended
on the advice of force solicitors. He is satisfied that the Taylor inquiry and the
inquest were not in any way inhibited or impeded by what took place. In a very
few cases referred to in appendix 7 of the report, what was excluded was either
factual or comment in which factual matters were implicit and he says that “it
would have been preferable “ for those matters not to have been excluded.


f:\oppu\complnts\speech\mp-0553.doc
Para 39.        A re-opening o f Lord Taylor’s inquiry would serve no purpose, and
since I published Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report on 18 February I have heard no
argument against that. Since there was cover-up neither by Lord Taylor nor Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith, we know already who was principally to blame - the police -
and thankfully Lord Taylor’s recommendations about the safety o f soccer grounds
have already been implemented.

Para 46.        It has often been asked o f me, if the police were to blame, why has no
police officer been brought to book? The only answer, very far from satisfactory, is
that police disciplinary procedures have been so defective that individual senior police
officers can utter “disgraceful lies” and act with contemptible incompetence without
penalty.




                                                            /




f:\oppu\complnts\speech\mp-0553 .doc
                           Hillsborough - House L ibraries

Items sent to the House Libraries

Transcripts o f interviews with those who gave evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

Other records o f discussions held by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, where transcripts
were not made

Written Evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by witnesses

Other written statements consulted at the request o f thefamilies

Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart Smith by Counsel and
others on behalfo f the Family Support Group

South Yorkshire Police Operational Orders for the 1988 and 1989 semi-finals

Nineteen statements by the Police Complaints Authority

Report produced by David Phillips o f Devon & Cornwall Constabulary (Report o f the
police operation at Hillsborough - produced at request o f South Yorkshire Police)

Report by Noel Bume (a structural engineer; he was instructed in July 1989 to report
on and advise the South Yorkshire Police Authority on the safety and structural
aspects o f the Hillsborough ground, in particular with a view to the anticipated civil
proceedings)

Police videotapes TB1,2,3 and 4

Transcripts o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s open meeting on 6 October and meeting
with Counsel on 30 September

South Yorkshire Police Statements




f:\oppu\complnts\speech\mp-0553 .doc
Items still to be sent to the House Libraries

Written Evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by those consulted by the
Judge.

Awaiting agreement to disclosure before sending to the library. The material
concerned is from The Hon Mr Justice Collins, Mr Christopher Dorries (current
Coroner for S Yorkshire), DCS Foster, West Midlands Police, Mr Douglas Fraser, Mr
Benet Hytner QC, Mr Peter Metcalfe (Hammond Suddard Solicitors), Sir David
Parry- Evans (St John Ambulance Brigade), Dr Stefan Popper (former Coroner for S
Yorkshire), Her Honour Judge Elizabeth Steele, Mr James Wardrope, Mr Peter Wells
(St John Ambulance Brigade), Mr Peter Whitehurst, Dr David Williams.

Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart Smith by Counsel and
others on behalf o f the Family Support Group

The material consists o f submissions from the Family Support Group at the beginning
o f the Scrutiny, all o f which is therefore in the public domain. Volumes V and VI, a
copy o f a memorial submitted to the Attorney-General in 1993 with enclosures, has
already been placed in the Library.




f:\oppu\complnts\speech\mp-0553 .doc
