                              DRAFT               DRAFT
10 May 1989                 Press Contacts: Leeds 0532 438232
                                                        x2418

                                             London 01 273 4610


OPERATIONAL GUIDANCE NOTE FOR NEWS EDITORS


         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY : ORAL HEARINGS




On Monday 15 May at lD'^0^)am, Lord Justice Taylor will open the
oral hearings in the Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry at Sheffield
Town Hall.

On Monday only the hearings will commence at 10.30am, adjourn
for lunch at 1.00pm, reconvene at 2pm and adjourn for the day at
5pm. On subsequent days hearings will be from 10am to 1pm and
2pm to 5pm Mondays to Thursdays and 10am to 12.30pm and 1.30pm
to 3.30pm on Fridays.

An initial facility was provided for filming and photography
before the preliminary hearing began on 28 April. No further
facility will be provided prior to the daily commencement of the
oral hearings.

Representatives of the press and broadcast media who wish to
attend the oral hearings on Monday should be at Sheffield Town
Hall at 9--.45am-for^-4LQ^-QQam. What is normally the public gallery
of the chamber has been made available exclusively for the use
of reporters. This accomodation offers between 40 and 50 places
with benches for reporters covering the hearings.

No television filming or photography of any kind will be
permitted in the Town Hall building during the Inquiry. Sound
recording of the proceedings will also not be allowed.

Order of proceedings
A notice of the order of proceedings together with a list of
witnesses giving evidence that day will be available on the
morning of each day of the oral hearings.
Approaches to witnesses
Lord Justice Taylor has made it clear that the witnesses should
not be interviewed in any way before they have completed their
evidence to the Inquiry. If this request is ignored it may have
an adverse effect on the difficult task Lord Justice Taylor has
to carry out.

Statements
Copies of witnesses' statements on a 'check against delivery'
basis will be made available in the Press Room as the witness is
called to testify.

Transcripts
Full transcripts of proceedings will be available by
mid-afternoon for the morning hearings and the following morning
for the afternoon hearings. These will be available from the
Secretariat on request at £10 per copy. News organisations will
be billed as necessary for copies requested. Contact Lynn Taylor
of COI (see number below) for further details.

Models,plans diagrams etc.
Where necessary, maps plans and diagrams will be displayed
outside the chamber. There will be no objections to reporters
viewing material inside the chamber during the lunch adjournment
or once the day's proceedings are over.

Technical terms
The Secretariat and the Press Liaison Officers will be prepared
to offer any assistance as may be required in the explanation of
technical terms used during the hearings.

Press room
In addition to the gallery, a press room in the Town Hall
building with full telephone and facsimile facilities, a sound
feed and a Press Association line feed will be provided.

Further enquiries about the press arrangements should be made to
either Roy Sutherwood in London on 01 273 4610 or Lynn Taylor in
Sheffield/Leeds on 0532 438232 x 2418.
                    THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                    Queen A n n e’s Chambers
                    28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS____
                    Telephones  Direct Line  01-210
                                Switchboard 01-210 3000
                    Telex 917564        GTN 210
                    Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
                    D X No. 2318 Victoria

Messrs Davies Arnold Cooper
S n h > ltr> rc                                                       Please quote
“                 ,, ni                                               L89/2117/DB
LONDON            EC4 6 A D                                           1 1 7 /7 4 3 9 6 8 /S W
                                                                     Date
_^Q£^th6^att6ntion_of_Mr_Doyle                               _______ 9 May 1989


                                          BY F A X A N D LETTER




                     /

H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y - S H E FFIE L D W E D N E S D A Y F O O TB AL L C L U B



Y^U     Zl[l r^Cal[        the Pfe-Inquiry meeting on 28th April Lord Justice Taylor
indicated th a t any body against whom any allegation was to be made would be informed
ot it and the substance of the evidence supporting it.

You will app reciate th a t the task of assembling the evidence for the Inquiry is a
formidable one, and sta te m e n ts are still being taken. However, it seemed right to let
^i?U h*V<T w   must be a preliminary indication of criticisms which may be levelled at
t e Club and its employees as soon as possible before the commencement of the
          We suspect that you are already aware of the general thrust of the criticisms
which have been made and th a t what is set out in this le tte r will be no surprise to you.

The following are the main general criticisms which so far appear from the evidence
available to us:-

1.        There appear to have been a number of significant failures to follow the Green
          Guide recommendations. In particular, we refer to the following paragraphs:-

           26.      Training of stewards in carrying out their roles in natural and emergency
                    situations.                                                         °       3
           29.      There may have been breaches of the following sub-paragraphs, namely
                    (v)(a) and (c), (vi), (x), (xii) and (xv).

           45.      Walls could be climbed over.

           46.     There were insufficient contingency plans to deal with the e ffe c t of
                   opening the gate to relieve crowd pressure outside.

           57.      There was no proper signposting in the ground.

                                                     1.
             99.    The gangways in the terraces were not indicated.

          176.     The planning for emergency, in the light of events, was inadequate.

                         (lV)' N° StCpS WCre taken t0 ensure th a t the capacities of Pens 3
                   and 4 were not exceeded and loud haiiers were not provided for stewards
                   and police to control the crowds.                                stewards

          195. (a). No stewards were available to direct persons entering the ground to
                 ensure th a t the te rra c e s filled up evenly.             ground to
          200 .    There is some evidence th a t the police were unable to communicate with
                   the stewards.

          206.     The arrangements for access to and egress from the pens on the terraces
                   w e r e i n a d e q u a t e and t h e r e w e re i n s u f f i c i e n t e x it s to c a t e r for an
                   emergency.                                                                                     iui d.n


         2     1   i Sn f atCS ‘V f r Perim eter fence were not marked as such and th a t to
                            was difficult to use, since there were no steps leading to it.
 2.
         TnUrHStiI,0h A"G WCre ‘nsufficient to ensure ease of admission to the terraces
         inside, there were inadequate directions to the pens to the side, th ere being a
              ,       insignificant sign indicating standing to the right and no sign a t all to
         pmi! ,      H            Was       aI1 en terin g were drawn to the tunnel leading to
         Pens 3 and 4 which was not of a uniform gradient and sloped steeply a t the end
         leading onto the terraces.                                             p ;       c

         No steps were taken to ensure that the pens did not get overcrowded. Stewards
         ought to have monitored the ingress of the crowd and, with police assistance if
         necessary to have prevented spectators going down th e tunnel when Pens 3 and
         4 were full.                                                                u

4    .   The c o lla p s e of a b a r r i e r      in Pen       3 m ay i n d i c a t e   a lack of s t r e n g t h .
5.       Since the gates to the perim eter fence were small and unmarked and the gates
         giving access between the pens a t the top of the terraces equally small and
         unmarked, it should have been appreciated th at a full house might lead to
         dangerous overcrowding.         Furthermore, since Liverpool had been given an
         allocation of seats which might have been inadequate to c a te r for its regular
         supporters, it was likely th a t persons would come without tickets and add to the
         pressures outside the ground. Very g re a t care should have been taken to prevent
         overcrowding and to ensure an abundance of stewards to supervise the te rrace.

6.       The first-aid equipment may have been inadequate. In particular, there was no
         oxygen available or equipment to assist resuscitation. Arrangements to access
         emergency vehicles were inadequate: an ambulance could only reach the playing
         area a f te r an advertising hoarding was removed.

Should any further criticisms come to our attention, we shall of course let you know of




                                             DAVID BRUMMELL
                                        Assistant Treasury Solicitor

                                                         2.
