            THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
            Room 1106
            50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
            Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Peter C Metcalfe                                              Your reference:
Hammond Suddards Solicitors
Empire House                                                  Our reference:
10 Piccadilly
BRADFORD BD1 3LR                                              Date:              October 1997



           /U.£ AaC-AAjft
                 Preparation of Statements following the Hillshorough Disaster



As I am sure you know, the Home Secretary has appointed me to undertake a scrutiny o f the
evidence relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster in 1989. As part o f this
work I have already had extensive contact with the South Yorkshire police, for whom I
understand your firm was acting. I attach a copy o f my terms o f reference.

2.     I would be grateful for information about the procedure that was adopted in obtaining
statements from police officers involved at Hillsborough.

3.      It appears that individual police officers were asked to write out in their own words on
plain paper their recollections o f events o f the day, including comment and impressions.
When statements were required by the West Midlands Police for the purpose o f Lord Justice
Taylor’s Inquiry, these original statements were forwarded to your firm and certain
amendments were made, excluding in the main comment and impressions. These amended
statements were intended to form the basis o f Criminal Justice Act statements for submission
to Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry.

4.     It would be helpful if you could confirm or correct any misunderstanding in what I
have written above. In particular it would help if you could tell me why this approach was
adopted. Who considered it desirable to have police officers’ comments and impressions, and
why? It has been suggested to me that this was a departure from the usual procedure
whereby police officers would make up their note books, then draft a CJA statement. Could
you also let me know if any police officers refused to sign the amended statements or the
CJA statements based on them. If there were such officers, who were they?

 5.    I am sending a copy o f this letter to the South Yorkshire Police for their observations
 and any assistance they can give on the matters I have raised in the previous paragraph.



                                            Aa.j*-_____
 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH

 G: | H ILLSBOR \ MAIN \ METCALFE. 1 2 8
