E.R
      From: N A Nagler                               cc   Mr Malone-Lee
            Finance Division 2                            Mr Addison
            12 June 1989                                  Mr Whalley
            Ext 3472



      Mr Storr

      HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

      Mr Whalley, the secretary to the Taylor inquiry, has offered some
      comments on the draft letter to the Chief Secretary attached to
      my submission of 8 June.  Mr Whalley's comments relate to the
      content of the enquiries being undertaken by the West Midlands
      Police, and suggest that it would be helpful to amend the draft
      letter in order to strengthen our arguments with the Treasury.

      I therefore suggest that paragraphs 5-6 of the draft letter be
      amended as attached (new passages sidelined).



*

                                        N A NAGLER
5.   South Yorkshire have not yet accepted this point.   They have
argued that the investigations are being dictated primarily by
the needs of the Taylor Inquiry and have ceased to be directed
towards the needs of their force.   There is some validity in this
argument, although I do not accept South Yorkshire's conclusion.
It is clear that as a result of the decision to make the results
of the police investigations directly available to the Taylor
enquiry, which was obviously a sensible arrangement, there is an
element in the investigation which is, for the sake of
convenience, being conducted for the benefit of that enquiry.
For example, statements were taken from those from whom the
selection of witnesses for the inquiry was subsequently made;
substantial video evidence has been analysed by the police for
the benefit of Lord Justice Taylor; and the police are urgently
following up at his request specific points arising on the
evidence as the inquiry progresses.

6.   The additional costs of the investigation were initially
estimated to be running at £1.7 million per month.   This covered
both the direct overtime worked by the 350 or so officers
involved and the consequential overtime worked in West Midlands
to cover for their absence.   It also includes accommodation
costs, trar^jort, subsistence and the like.  There may be further
costs associated with the investigation, such as use of computer
facilities and helplines, which may add to the costs.   The ' scale
of the police commitment is being regularly reviewed by the
police and secretariat together.   The investigation is now being
scaled down substantially; even so West Midlands Police
Authority's tentative estimate of the total additional costs is
around £4-5 million.
