INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                 The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                              50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                              London SW1H 9AT
                                              01-273 2577/3602/2370

J Mervyn Jones Esq                              Your Ref:      JMJ/VSC
Assistant Chief Constable
West Midlands Police
P O Box 52
Lloyd House
Colmore.Circus Queensway
BIRMINGHAM                                    Date
B4 6NQ                         j                 30 November 1989




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - REQUEST FOR STATEMENTS

Thank you for your letter of 21 November which I have shown to
Lord Justice Taylor. So far as Lord Justice Taylor is concerned,
he would be quite happy for anyone to have access to any of the
statements collected and prepared for his Inquiry. But he
recognises that others have an interest, and is therefore
prepared to permit you to operate a policy of non-release in
accordance with the DPP's wishes, as suggested at the foot of
page 2 of your letter. He has noted the views which Dr Popper
and Captain Taylor have taken, and is content for others to
decide having regard to their specific responsibilities.  In
summary, therefore, no release if others officially involved
think there should not be.

I hope this is helpful. I daresay the pressure will certainly
remain and probably intensify, so please keep in touch and let us
know if it proves difficult to sustain.

I am copying this letter to David Brummell.




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                               FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                        Furnival Gate
 H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                      Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                 Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                          Fax:        0742 731483
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                           Medico Legal Centre
Colmore Circus Queensway                                         Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                    Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                Our Ref:        JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                 Date:           21 November 1989



         R M Whalley Esq
         Secretary to the Inquiry
         Room 662
         Home Office
         50 Queen Anne's Gate
         London
         SW1H 9AT




         HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - REQUEST FOR STATEMENTS

         The purpose of this letter is to seek Lord Justice Taylor's views on the
         release of statements which we gathered for his inquiry and which we also
         anticipated would be of use for HM Coroner. At present we are receiving
         an increasing number of requests from those who made the statements (or
         their legal representatives) and others, parties to the civil
         proceedings, who require information in our possession to help in the
         preparation of their case. The agreed policy with you was that the
         individual who made the statement would be furnished with a copy on
         application. However, on taking responsibility for the criminal
         investigation I suspended that policy. The position is as follows.

        From April to July when the oral hearings ended West Midlands police
        officers obtained something in the order of 4,000 written contributions.
        They took three main forms, viz:-

            (1)     Statements of witness under the provisions of the Criminal Justice
                    Act.

            (2)     Written recollections not under caution or within the provisions
                    of the Criminal Justice Act.

            (3)     Written recollections prepared and submitted by legal
                    representatives on behalf of their clients.




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                   Lloyd House, Birmingham
We still hold the original documents here in Birmingham, having supplied
complete sets to Treasury Solicitors and to yourself. The objective of
taking the written evidence was to furnish Lord Justice Taylor with an
accurate and complete account of what happened at Hillsborough. A
parallel objective, knowing that a Coroner's Inquest would inevitably
follow, was to secure evidence about the ninety five deaths whilst the
detail was still fresh in the minds of witnesses. This latter objective
was primarily achieved by statements of witness taken at (1) above.   It
was always recognised that relevant evidence    receivedin forms (2) and
(3) would have to be converted at a later stage for the Coroner.

As you know after the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's report on
4 August 1989, Mr Wright, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire raised
the question of a criminal investigation with the Director of Public
Prosecutions. This led subsequently to an invitation to Geoffrey Dear
to undertake a criminal investigation (see Annex 'A'). Mr Dear Agreed.

Since that time we have been pursuing the criminal investigation with
the objective of completing all our enquiries, interviews, analysis and
final report by the end of February or early March 1990. At present we
are still operating on that timetable.

Requests for copy statements declined after the publication of Lord
Justice Taylor's report. However, recently they have started again.
The reason for this is two-fold. Firstly, there are still some
outstanding applicants to the Hillsborough Disaster Fund who are
required by the executors of the Fund to produce some kind of evidence
of attendance/involvement. Secondly, and the greatest cause of
requests, is that the civil proceedings have been set to commence in
Liverpool on 19 June 1990. Legal representatives for the plaintiffs and
the four defendants are now busily preparing their respective cases.
Unfortunately for them much of what they require is in my possession and
is relevant to the criminal investigation. As you know normal policy is
not to release information to civil litigants or others until the
investigation is complete and the Director of Public Prosecutions has
made his decision.

For obvious reasons I am keen to follow the normal policy of non-release
as is the Director of Public Prosecutions who has issued a letter to that
effect (see Annex 'B ')- Confidentially, I can advise you that a decision
of the Director of Public Prosecutions is unlikely to be announced before
the start of the civil proceedings.

The issue is, therefore, will Lord Justice Taylor permit me to operate a
policy of non-release in accordance with the Director of Public
Prosecution's wishes? I have to say that release has the potential to
seriously impede the process of the investigation. I would also point out
that I am not in a position to operate a selective policy given that I
will not know what is "relevant" until the investigation is complete.
                                   - 3 -


On a question of definition I am not attempting to restrict release of
those statements which were taken "as read" at the Hearings, the
transcripts or other material which could be defined as in the "public
domain". Rather I am concerned about the vast bulk of material which was
not called by Andrew Collins QC, some of which may have formed part of
the private reading of Lord Justice Taylor.

For your information I have also raised the issue of non-release with
HM Coroner, Dr Popper, and Captain E N Taylor of the Police Complaints
Authority, both of whom have indicated that evidence gathered specifically
for their purposes should not be released whilst the Director of Public
Prosecution's involvement continues. Thereafter they will decide upon
release dependent on their individual concerns and responsability.

I have taken the liberty of copying this letter to Mr David Brummell of
Treasury Solicitors for his information.




ENC



PS: With regard to the release of barrier 124A I am still awaiting the
    response of the Forensic Science Service before formally inviting
    Lord Justice Taylor, the Director of Public Prosecutions and HM Coroner
    to give their permissions.
TELEPHONE:                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 7W522                                 POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: $419%                                             SNIGHIU
TAX: (0742) 513243                                        SHEFFIELD S3 ILV

P WRIGHT CBE OSl i CBtM
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                            16 August 1989
 C J Dear Esq QPM DL L U
 Chief Constable
 Vest Midland* Police
 P 0 Box 32
 Lloyd House
 Colaore Circus Queensway
 Birmingham BA 6NQ




  I have today received a letter from tie Director of Public Prosecutions
  expressing hi 3 view that ia relation to Che event* at Hillsborough on
  13 April last there should now be a full criminal enquiry - not limited to the
  possible culpability of police officers alone. I understand you ars in
  receipt of a copy of this lettsr. I would be grateful If you will undertake
  this enquiry together with any polics discipline aspects which may emerge.

 There are currently three matters of public complaint under investigation and
 which have been raised by Mr Trevor Hicks.

  The South Yorkshire Police Authority Is to consider his complaint against my
  Deputy, Hr Pater Hayes, on Friday next.

  His complsint against Hr Duckenfield is with Hr K Cooper, Assistant Chief
  Constable of Northsaptonshire Police, and is supervised by Mr S N Taylor of
  the Police Complaints Authority. A meeting Is arranged between them and
  Hr Hicks on 23' August and until this has taken place it is considered
  appropriate chat the complaint remains with Hr Cooper. If after 23 August
  Mr Hicks is persisting with the matter of complaint then Z suggest it should
  be referred to you and this will be trrangsd through the PoliceComplaints
  Authority.

  His remaining complaint is of incivility which is being investigated by a
  superintendent from this Force.

  There is a fourth complaint of corruption, namely police officers allowing
  fans into the ground on payment, which is being investigated by an officer
  from Greater Manchester Police. You may wish to consider which if any of
  these you would wish to take over.

  In relation to costs, 1 am advised by our Treasurer that In the light of on­
  going negotiations between the Authority and the Home Office It is highly
  probable that an agreement will soon be resched. The effect of this is likely
  to be that the coats of the enquiries you have undertaken so far and in the
G J Dear Esq QPM DL LIB             -   2   -                    16 August 1911



future In relation to any discipline or criminal matters or in respect of the
inquest will be net in full from central government following the agreed
contribution from the South Yorkshire Police Authority. If such an agreement
is reached it will effectively deal with the queries you raised in your lettei
of 11 August.

It is my intention to make an announcement of the Director** advice and of
action on the afternoon of 16 August.
                                                    Ciown Prosecution Service
J Mervyn Jones
Assistant Chief Constable                           Headquarters
West Midlands Police
? C Box 52                                          -1/1 2 f,)upp)i Amies Gale
                                                    I ondnri
Lloyd House
                                                    SVV 111 fW .
Colmore Circus Que e n s w a y
Birmingham                                          I c l r p l i n i l f ' (11   '? '? ?   '? 'M
B4 6NQ                                                                    r-:i



                           Olirlh-I

JMJ/DH                           P G K . 3341.89                         31 O c t o b e r 1989


Dear

H I LL S B O R O U G H ENQUIRY
R EQUESTS FOR STATEMENTS

Thank you for your letter of 24 October.        I have given careful
consideration to the points w h i c h you raise on d e a l i n g wit h
requests from wit n e s s e s for copies of their statements.

I can quite u n d e r s t a n d the d e c i s i o n to sup p l y statements upon
request du r i n g the earlier p h a s e of the enquiry.             However, I
feel that there is a d i s t i n c t i o n to be drawn between the
inquisitorial nature of Lord Just i c e Taylor's Public Enqu i r y
and the full criminal i n v e stigation w h i c h is now being
conducted.     I feel that such stat e m e n t s should remain the
confidential "property" of the investigation and they should
not be released until either a fter the end of any criminal
proceedings or after the D i r e c t o r has reached a d e c ision not
to issue p r o c e e d i n g s .

If it is necessary, of course, there w o u l d be no objection to
witnesses refreshing their m e m o r i e s from their statements in
the usual w a y p r i o r to giving evidence.

I would, of course, be p r e p a r e d to discuss this m a t t e r wit h
you on the telephone and I w o u l d also be most interested to
hear the response w h i c h you receive from the Police Complaints
Authority.




C J Cleugh
Head of Police Complaints Division



                                                                                                    //*3
