                                                              HOME OFFICE              ^
                                                       Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                               Direct line: 01-273    _
                                                             Switchboard: 01-273 3uuo



Owr reference:    P O L /89 8 5 0 / 4 / 3 0
Your reference:   POLET 43/SW /M R




   R C Johnston Esq BA IPFA
   Clerk and Financial Officer
    to the South Yorkshire
    Police Authority
   PO Box 37
   Regent Street
   Barnsley
   South Yorkshire
   S70 2PQ                                                   12 September 1989



   <I) cxxV                                   \K-a _
   HILLSBOROUGH : COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

   I refer to the telephone conversation between Mr Waghorn of this
   department and Mr Walker on 7 September in which Mr Walker informed
   us that Mr Boys Smith's letter of 31 August will be discussed at
   the forthcoming meeting of your finance and general purposes
   committee on 15th September.

   I understand that there could be some concern over paragraphs 3 and
   4 of Mr Boys Smith's letter, which cover the costs of the criminal
   investigation announced recently, it may be helpful if I clarify
   our position slightly prior to Friday's meeting.    It was not our
   intention to give the impression that we would not agree to the
   special payment on these costs, although we did consider that some
   of the work already undertaken by the West Midlands Police could be
   used in connection with the criminal investigation at no extra
   cost.

   As Mr Boys Smith said, the criminal investigation costs were not
   included in the original offer of special payment.  What we need
   therefore is further information on the likely scale of the new
   criminal investigation including an estimate of the number of
   officers involved, the possible length of time required and the
   additional cost.   Mr Walker did mention that it could be in the
   region of 50 men, over a period of up to 6 months at a cost of
   about half a million pounds.
E.R.

    Provided that the proposed costs are reasonable, then the special
    payment would    extend   to  them   as part    of the necessary
    investigations by West Midlands arising from Hillsborough.

    In the meantime we very much hope that your authority can commence
    payments to the West Midlands in respect of the costs of Lord
    Justice Taylor's Inquiry itself which the West Midlands Police
    authority have already invoiced for.   It seems unfair to leave the
    West Midlands waiting for reimbursement of these items. On receipt
    of further information concerning the criminal investigation costs
    we will let you have a substantive reply on this point as soon as
    possible.

                                                                O


m                                             M J ADDISON
