l.\O U K \  : () THE HILLSBOROUGH           The Rt H on L ord ju stice Taylor
‘'TADH M i)(S a ;>TKR
                                            SO Q u e e n Anne s Gate
                                            London SWIH L)AT
                                            Q l-2'3 2S"~3 6 0 2 /2 5 ^ 0


Ni-gel Hook Esq                                Your Ref:   Senior
Technical Officer                              NH/dc/11418
The Central Council       sical
 Recreation                                    Our Ref:         FEP/89
Francis House                                  35/48/43
Francis Street
LONDON SW1P 1DE                             f )ate
                                               ■R January 1990




Dear Mr Hook

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


I am writing to thank you for your letter of 12 January, together
with enclosures, following our recent telephone conversation in
which you asked whether it would be possible for a small
delegation from the CCPR's national governing bodies to meet Lord
Justice Taylor.

As I explained then, Lord Justice Taylor is currently preparing
his Final Report,   which he intends to present to the Home
Secretary by theend of this month. His time is therefore very
limited.  I have   shown him your request, but, in the
circumstances, I   am afraid that he can see no opportunity for a
meeting.  He has, of course, taken full note of the points raised
in your earlier written submissions, but if there is anything
else which you wish to add, perhaps you could do so in writing as
soon as possible.

I am sorry that I cannot be more helpful.

                                              Yours sincerely




                                              JONATHAN C SWEET
                                              Hillsborough Inquiry
 The Central Council of Physical Recreation
     Francis House, Francis Street, London SW1P1DE Telephone: 01-828 3163/4 Telex: 8956058 Fax: 01-630 8820
                                                              Patron:
                                                      Her Majesty The Queen
                                                            President:
                                        HRH The Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh KG KT OM




Executive Committee Chairman:   Deputy Chairman:             Divisional Chairmen:                     Water Recreation: A E Hodges
Ron W Emes MBE                  Jim F Elms MBE               Games and Sports: C S Palmer OBE         Outdoor Pursuits: G A Cubitt MBE
General Secretary:              Honorary Treasurer:          Major Spectator Sports: R G Robinson     Interested Organisations:
Peter Lawson                    Miss Marea Hartman CBE       Movement and Dance: Miss A Bambra        Lt-Col R G Satterthwaite LVO OBE



      NH/dc/11418

      12 January 1990

      Jonathon Sweeting Esq
      Room 448
      Home Office
      50 Queen Anne's Gate
      London
      SWIH 9AT

      Dear Jonathon

      HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

      Further to our telephone conversation can I confirm that a
      small delegation from the CCPR's national governing bodies of
      sport would welcome a meeting to discuss matters previously
      presented in written evidence to Lord Justice Taylor.

      I enclose copies of correspondence previously      submitted
      with notes of meetings held on 11 July and 8 September 1989,
      and also three letters previously submitted dated 6 October,
      30 October and 14 November 1989.

      Concern has been expressed by our members at the present
      charging and licensing arrangements for the authorisation of
      sporting events at indoor sports centres.

      The   present    arrangements   are   open   to   considerable
      misinterpretation by local authority officials and as a result
      are having a serious detrimental development on both community
      and national sport.

      We would welcome a meeting in order to discuss these matters.

      Yours sincerely
               merely




      NIGEL1HOOK
      Senior Technical Officer


      Encs
                                  A Com pany limited by guarantee: No. 474512 Registered in England
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH       The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER                    5QQueen Anne,g Gate
                                     London SWIH 9AT
                                     01-273 2577/3602/2370




                                     Date




                                               Ref: Hl/E




    Oe^ 'vw               ,
                              of
    Thank you for your letter
    which Lord Justice Taylor has read and which will be
    taken into account in the Inquiry.




                         <i R M WHALIEY
                            Secretary to the Inquiry
                                   The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
STADIUM DISASTER                   50 Q u een Anne's Gate
                                   London SWIH 9AT
                                   01-2732577/3602/2370




Mr Nigel Hook                   Your Ref:
Senior Technical Officer        NH/dc
The Central Council of
 Physical Recreation
Francis House
Francis Street                      Date
                                26 October 1989
LONDON SW1P 1DE




 Dear Mr Hook
 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

  Thank you for your letter of 6 October
  regarding the evidence you have submitted for
  Part II of the Inquiry.
  In vour letter you use the phrases the
  "licensing of indoor sports" and a single
  operators licence". Whilst we think we know
  what you have in mind, I should be grateful if
  you would clarify exactly what was meant by
  these phrases.
                                 Yours sincerely


                                                      w


                                  MRS M A WITHER
                                  Hillsborough Inquiry
 INQUIRY IN TO THE HILLSBOROUGH                        TheBHonl^jutticeTaylo,
 STADIUM DISASTER                                       50 Q u een Anne’s Gate
                                                        London SWIH 9AT
                                                        01-2732577/3602/2370




r0M N-

                                                         Date      $ul«i
                'sw T p " 'io e                                    ■ * * m/A



                  'YU/       -Ho d e f



     Thank you for your letter of                  I
     w h ic h h a s b een p a s s e d t o lo r d J u s t i c e T a y lo r
     consideration.




                                             M.u»
                                          R M WHAIXEY
                                      '   Secretary to the Inquiry
            THE CENTRAL COUNCIL OF PHYSICAL RECREATION

NOTES OF THE MEETING WITH THE HOME OFFICE TO DISCUSS THE FIRE
SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 HELD ON TUESDAY
11 JULY 1989 AT 2.30 PM AT FRANCIS HOUSE


PRESENT

Mr Nigel Hook                 In the Chair, CCPR

Mr David Hillier             Home Office

Mr   Brian Coleman           English   Basket Ball Association
Mr   Peter Neighbour         English   Indoor Bowling Association
Mr   Ken Eales               British   Judo Association
Mr   Keith Delderfield       British   Paraplegic Sports Society

Miss Davina Coulter          CCPR


1 CHAIRMAN'S REMARKS

The Chairman drew attention to the minutes of the Games and
Sports meeting (GS/M50/88) held on 11 October 1988 and to the
submission to the Home Office by the Sports Council's Director
of Development Services dated 20 August 1986.     It was noted
that this submission had been made without consultation with
the national governing bodies of sport which were largely
affected by the new Act, nor indeed with certain members of
the Sports Council.


2 APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

Apologies had been received from Mr Charles Palmer.


3 THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987

Mr Hillier referred to the legislation which had arisen as a
result of the Popplewell Enquiry into the tragic events at
Bradford City Football Club and the extensive consultation
exercise which had taken place with national associations
throughout the country.    "Part IV of the Act, which concerned
indoor sports licences, had come into force on 1 June 1988 and
this had been preceded by the issue of a Home Office
Circular (NO 19/1988 - circulated) on 22 March containing
information and advice about its provisions to the chief
executives of licencing authorities, clerks to fire and civil
defence authorities, and the police".        He said that the
purpose of the Act was to require, in the interests of public
safety, the licencing of all premises used for indoor sports
entertainments to which the public were invited as spectators
where the entertainment was the principal purpose for which
the premises were being used at the time.         There was one
exception   to  the   last   criterion  -   every   such  sports
entertainment held in a sports complex required a licence, to
overcome the difficulty of having to decide which, of the many
events which might possibly be taking place, was the principal

                                                   purpose for/.
                               2

purpose for which the premises were being used.     It had not
been expected   that the Act would place very heavy an
additional burden on local authorities which were ready
responsible for administering similar licencing arrangements
in respect of public entertainments in their districts etc.


4 GENERAL DISCUSSION

The representatives present spoke of their concern about the
legislation  since   it  had   been  introduced   without  any
appropriate consultation with the national governing bodies of
sport.  The governing bodies were now faced with the problem
of dealing with the various departments within the local
authority structure which were responsible for issuing the
licences.

It was noted that the act was "silent" about who, in any
particular case, was responsible for obtaining a licence when^k
one was required.    The representatives present were of the^r
opinion that it should be the responsibility of whoever was
providing the accommodation used for an event to ensure that
an appropriate licence had been obtained and that this should
not be incumbent upon the governing bodies or individual
sports clubs concerned.   Mr Hillier explained that, in form,
the provisions for indoor sports licensing followed those
already enacted in respect of public entertainments licensing
in general and that there was little prospect of any further
changes to this area of the law for the time being.     It was
with the hirers of halls about whether an appropriate licence
was already in existence.     Concern was expressed that the
present requirements, which were listed in the Home Office
Circular, were not working satisfactorily at a local level.
Mr Hillier said the Home Office would be concerned if this
were the case. A suggestion that a meeting be sought with the
Association of District Councils and the Association of
Metropolitan Authorities to clarify the situation and seek
their assistance in resolving the difficulties currently being
faced by sports bodies was agreed.   Mr Hillier said he would
be prepared to attend any meeting convened for this purpose.

It was     further  suggested  that,  when   appropriate,   the
Government should consider a review of the various licensing
requirements in existence at the present to which sports
centres were subject in the hope that some form of single
"operators" licence could be devised to cover them all.      Mr
Hillier explained that the Enterprise and Deregulation Unit at
the Department of Trade and industry had been looking into
this possibility but had found the practical obstacles to
progress very severe.       It was   currently   reviewing,  in
conjuction     with   other   Government    departments,    the
administration of licencing with a view to simplifying and
streamlining procedures at the local level.

                                      The representatives/.
                               3

The   representatives, whilst making    it   clear  that  they
supported the Government's intentions in bringing in Part IV
of the 1987 Act, said that the various interpretations being
placed upon it by different local authorities were causing
considerable difficulties for voluntary clubs etc who were
trying to promote sport throughout the country.     Mr Hillier
said the Home Office took the view that the flexibility
provided for in the legislation over such matters as the terms
and conditions which could be imposed on the grant of a
licence enabled local authorities to respond appropriately to
the particular circumstances of any licence application.
However, it was hoped some greater uniformity of approach
would be in evidence after the publication, later this summer,
of the Home Office "Guide to Fire Precautions in Existing
Places of Public Entertainment and Like Premises", which
consolidated and to some extent revised existing guidance in
this sphere and covered some areas not dealt with in similar
previous publications.   it contained guidance on such matters
as seating arrangements, room capacities and means of escape
in case of fire and covered, amongst other premises, indoor
leisure centres.

The point was made in conclusion that it was to be hoped that
when the report of the Lord Justice Taylor's Enquiry into the
Hillsborough disaster or any future legislation concerning
sport was being considered, the views of the governing bodies
of sport would be fully taken into account.

On behalf of the members the Chairman thanked Mr Hillier for
attending the meeting.



28 July 1989
               THE CENTRAL COUNCIL OF PHYSICAL RECREATION

       NOTE OF A MEETING WITH THE HOME OFFICE AND GOVERNING BODY
        REPRESENTATIVES TO DISCUSS THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF
      PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 HELD ON FRIDAY 8 SEPTEMBER 1989 AT
    11.00 AM AT THE CCPR, FRANCIS HOUSE, FRANCIS STREET, LONDON SW1

    PRESENT

    Mr Nigel Hook                In the Chair, CCPR

    Mr David Hillier             Home Office
    Mr Phillip Reader            Association of District Councils
    Mr Bob Perkins               Association of Metropolitan
                                   Authorities
    Mr Tony Reay                 British Judo Association
    Mr Peter Neighbour           English Indoor Bowling Association
    Mr Brian Coleman             English Basket Ball Association
    Miss Davina Coulter          CCPR


    1   CHAIRMAN'S REMARKS

    The Chairman welcomed everyone to the meeting and in particular

•   Mr Phillip Reader (Association of District Councils) and Mr Bob
    Perkins (Association of Metropolitan Authorities) who were
    representing the local authority associations.

    Attention was drawn to the previous meeting when concern over
    the present legislation had been voiced by the national
    governing bodies on behalf of their member clubs throughout the
    country, and during which it had been suggested that a meeting
    should be sought with the local authority representatives in
    order to see if a solution could be found to the difficulties
    being faced by these associations.


    2   APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

    Apologies    for    absence     had    been    received from
    Mr Keith Delderfield, British Paraplegic Sports Society and
    Mr George Bulman, English Volleyball Association.


    3   NOTE OF THE PREVIOUS MEETING

    The note of     the   previous   meeting   held   on   11   July   1989    was
    received.


    4   HOME OFFICE

    Mr David Hillier (Home Office) spoke of the general background
    to the legislation which had been introduced as a result of the
    tragic circumstances surrounding the fire at Bradford City
    Football Club.  As a result of this accident, coupled with the
    outbreak of a fire at a sports centre in Northern Ireland,
    theGovernment had sought to introduce measures which would
    ensure that football stadia and indoor sporting arenas were
    safe for members of the public and the sportsmen and women
    participating in various activities.

                                                                         5/.
                                  2

5    GOVERNING BODIES OF SPORT

Mr Phillip Reader (ADC) referred to the extensive campaign
which had been carried out by his association during the
drafting stages of the Bill in close co-operation with the
Department of Trade and Industry and the National Economic
Development Office in an effort to ensure a satisfactory
wording to the Bill and to endeavour to devise a system
whereby a "single operator's licence" for sports centres could
be introduced.   In the opinion of the ADC, such a measure
would have reduced the level of bureacracy that was recently
faced by the local authorities, and would have brought some
financial savings to the Treasury.    However, such arguments
put forward by the ADC for cost effective savings and
reductions in manpower had been rejected by the Treasury.

Mr Bob Perkins (AMA) suggested that the present legislation
merited a simple enabling Bill which would simplify the
current situation, but equally support the notion that the
sports centres should be safe for the individual members of
the public.    He expressed the view that there was some
difficulty over the interpretation of the present legislatio^fc
at local level which presented difficulties in achieving er
common standard of safety which would be in the interest of
the public at large.

Reference was made to the present legislation and the interim
report recently published by The Lord Justice Taylor Enquiry,
which in paragraph 314 stated:

    "Arguments have been put to me suggesting the need for some
     national   oversight  or   inspection  of   local  authority
     certification procedures.   This raised complex issues which
     I shall want to consider further at Stage 2 of the Inquiry."

During the general discussion it was noted that the intention
of the Bill had been to put into effect a simple piece of
legislation which was to be principally targeted for special
events at mass spectator sports and had not been drafted for
the sporting and recreational events at local level.   It was
noted that there were numerous licences which were recently
sought for a wide variety of different aspects of public
entertainment including recreation, music and motor vehicle
licences.

It was noted that many voluntary governing body club officials
at local level were currently faced with the difficult task of
both identifying the individual within the local authority
administration who had the responsibility for issuing the
licence, and also the difficulty of raising money to cover the
cost of the licences which were now being charged in some
areas of the country at an exhorbitant rate.

The governing body representatives indicated that any policy
by local authorities which maximised their revenue by charging
extortionate costs to the governing bodies would result in a
conflict with the expressed Government policy for maximising
sports   participation    within   the    local   communities.
Representatives suggested that the Home Office should consider
at some appropriate stage licensing the buildings and not the
sporting event.

                                            Mr David Hillier/.
                               3

Mr David Hillier (Home Office) kindly offered to meet the
representatives of the local authority associations to see if
a greater clarification of the Act could be achieved in order
that the events     in sports centres could be specified   in
respect of the legislation's primary intentions.      It was
suggested that     the CCPR submit furtherevidence to the
Taylor Enquiry seeking a "licensing operator for indoor
sports" which would be in the interest of public safety.   It
was further requested that the CCPR should endeavour to seek
the support of those politicians who might be sympathetic in
raising the matter in the House of Commons.

The suggestion was made that the governing bodies should
reappraise their   licensing arrangements in the light of the
statements which   would be forthcoming from the Taylor Report
in an effort to clarify the position with their member clubs.

On behalf of the governing bodies, the Chairman thanked the
representatives from the Home Office and the local authorities
for attending the meeting.
