                                                       \               M                        OJ^c^
     oHammersmitn J
lO v F llln rm n                           *
                                               m
                                                }jS
                                                   ,        London Borough of Hammersmith & Fulham


                                                           Telephone: 01-748 3020
 ^                                  ✓          ^SssS       Fax: 01"381 0079

 Environmental Services                                    William Myers
                                                           Director of Environmental Services




        Mr. R.M. Whalley                                   „
        Secretary to the Inquiry                           ° Ur    K,: ES/WGB/SCB
        Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
                                                           Your ref:
        50 Queen Anne's Gate
        London SW1H 9AT
                                                           Date:       3.11.89.




                                        Tb, _LL £ j u c U ►vu.
        Dear Mr.^TOialley,

        I refer to our previous correspondence and have pleasure in enclosing
        comments on the interim recommendations of the Inquiry.

        You will see that the major themes of our response lie with an
        effective Safety Team, including the clubst working closely and
        co-operatively together with the fullest exchange of information
        and joint planning.   This will become even more necessary when the
        membership card scheme of the Football Spectators Bill starts to
        be implemented.

        In addition there ar^ two general points that I would wish to raise
        to my comments in response to the Interim Report. ’ Both relate to
        current standards and guidance, that all 'interested parties' have
        to have regard to, in relation to, the design and construction of
        football stadiums.

       You will be aware that the standard reference is the Guide to Safety
       at Sports Grounds - referred to as the 'Green Guide'.       The scope
       and status of this publication is to provide ".... guidance to ground
       management, local authorities and technical specialists, such as,
       engineers, on measures for improving spectator safety at existing
       sports grounds." (Para 1, page 5 Introduction).

       Further it goes on to state in para 7, page 7, that the standards
       set reflect the constraints imposed by dealing with existing grounds.
       It does not claim to be a design brief for new construction and
       reconstruction work.   However, the guide states "....such work should
       not be to a standard lower than that set out here and the scope
       offered by new design work should lead to better standards than can
       be achieved at grounds already built."




                                                                              Cont'd/....




Tony Eddison Chief Executive
                                -   2   -




This   authority   is currently involved in discussions with the
management of Chelsea F.C. in relation to the major redevelopment
of    their ground, with possibly a similar exercise being undertaken
at Fulham F.C. in 1990.    I am also aware of other similar work going
on   in or around the London area, e.g. Charlton F.C.       Whilst the
emergence of new and redeveloped grounds is not general throughout
the country, I think it is reasonable to assume that more will emerge
in the future.

The work that has been done to review and update the Green Guide
and its technical requirements has, in the main, been retrospective
to quite correctly learn from previous experiences.  However, there
is now an urgent need to be forward looking and devise and set
standards for new or redeveloped stadia that will be appropriate
for the 1990's and beyond.

The second issue is more a point of information to reflect our
experiences in practice. Current legislation restricts our regulatory
function to within the curtilage of any football ground.     However,
it is now well documented that the environment and factors occuring
outside the ground will affect how it responds to coping with
spectators.    Also many existing grounds are in densely populated
areas and they impact dramatically on the activities and lifestyles
of local residents.     This was well illustrated at the Arsenal v
Liverpool match at Highbury recently, when the police set up a cordon
around the ground and required every person, including residents,
to produce documentary evidence of their right to enter.

Local authorities have other roles to that of licensing, which are
however,  complimentary to this regulatory function e.g. street
widening, traffic calming, traffic restriction, traffic flow schemes.
All of these activities can either contribute to or detract from
the movement of spectators and emergency vehicles to and from the
ground.

This authority has always taken an holistic view of its licensing
role, taking into account all factors external to the ground and
if necessary sought to influence these mattersthat contribute to
the safe operation of the grounds in the borough.     This reflects
the police role, who similarly function both inside and outside the
stadium.

It would greatly assist if any future recommendations that may or
may not be embodied in statute or guidance, formalise this arrangement
and role for local authorities and thereby provide a firmer basis
upon which we make comments and recommendations.



                                                          Cont'd/
I hope that you find our comments helpful. Should you require further
information or clarification either orally or in writing please do
not hesitate to contact me again.


Yours sincerely,




  D #~
William G. Myers
DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
                 INTERIM REPORT OF THE INQUIRY BY
                THE RT. HON. LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
             LONDON BOROUGH OF HAMMMERSMITH & FULHAM
               COMMENTS ON INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS



The following comments are numbered in accordance with the number
of the recommendations.

1.   Agreed - Radial fences, that create pens, have in the main
     been installed to help with public order problems rather than
     public safety. However they did have the effect of
     preventing lateral movement or surging across the terrace.
     In some grounds the radial fences allowed the accommodating
     of rival fans on the same terrace with segregation being
     achieved by a "sterile" area created either by leaving a pen
     empty and/or a steward/police cordoned area.

^    The implementation of the Recommendations has generally
     resulted in some or all of the radial fences being removed,
     which dedicates the whole of a terrace to either 'home' or
     'away' fans.

     In some cases where the radial fences have remained in part,
     further segregation has had to be carried out at the rear of
     the terrace to ensure spectators cannot move from one area to
     another during half-time etc. Also facilities for fans such
     as refreshments, toilets etc., need to be dedicated to each
     area to avoid the calculation of 'pen' capacities being
     undermined by spectators choosing to change viewing positions
     when they leave one pen to obtain a drink etc., and return to
     another pen.

     Many of the radial fences have now been removed, those
     remaining are to allow police access into the crowd or to
     maximise the use of a terrace.  In respect of the continued
     practice of having segregated areas on the terrace specific
     recommendations would be helpful to require complete self
     containment of spectator facilities to assist in maintaining
     capacities.

2.   Agreed - The Green Guide was reviewed in 1986 although it
     would be appropriate to examine it again, and in a manner
     that ensures local authority input.

     a) Particular work is required on paragraphs 221 and 222 in
        relation to densities.  Clearer guidance on the factors to
        be taken into account in deciding packing density between
        the two figures of 27-54 persons per 10 square metres,
        would be helpful.

     b) The notional reduction of 15% to improve safety margins
        has generally been able to be met by the clubs without too
        much difficulty.  Initial observations of crowd dynamics
        at these new densities suggest that the terrace capacities
        are correct . However further observations of matches
        needs to be undertaken before a final conclusion can be
        made.
  What ever capacities are finally decided, crowd dynamics
  are such that at peak viewing areas the densities will be
  exceeded. In addition the problems of"peak viewing" also
  arises in other than the traditionally accepted areas
  eg. behind goals. The configuration of grounds that do
  not have "rounded" or curved spectator viewing areas at
  the corners and a short distance from the pitch to the
  terrace/stand results in spectators surging forward when
  play moves into or near to the corner flags, eg. Q.P.R.
  Football Club. This results in crowd densities occurring
  in excess of those recommended.

   With some existing grounds, this can not be avoided, but
   special consideration is having to be given to barrier
   configuration and strengths in recognition of the way
   crowds respond to the activities on the pitch.

Agreed - although removal of radial fencing on the terraces
will reduce self contained pens. Unless - specific
facilities are provided for each pen then crossing will occur
throughout game or at half time. Alternatively there will be
a reliance on the effectiveness of the stewarding. Our
current experiences of stewarding efficiency is variable.
Most clubs rely on the voluntary element to recruit stewards
paying only a small remuneration. Consequently both quantity
and quality of stewards is subject to variation and has to be
judged on an individual basis. The police are understandably
reluctant to assume a 'stewarding' role, which we would
support as it allows clubs to abdicate their
responsibilities.

No objection to this but it does seem to have a very direct
bearing on the public safety and therefore should as a
minimum be copied to the local authority but preferably be
after consultation with the local authority and/or safety
team. The way that this recommendation is currently worded
can be read to exclude this co-operative approach.

Agreed - although it is difficult to see the extent to which
a pen is filled by standing at the bottom or in front of a
terrace pen. It could appear very full from the front but
have spaces behind the first six rows.

Agreed.

Agreed - although this can be confusing if the gates are
opened and fully folded back.  If the recommendation to have
gates open at all times is to continue in the final report it
is then unnecessary.

Gates in radial fences can not practically be marked
"Emergency Exit" unless they actually lead directly to such a
route. Also if they provide an exit route in either
direction it will mean marking both sides. This would be
contrary to good practice where it is desirable to have
emergency exits leading the public away from a source of
danger, with the flow in one direction only. Marking both
sides will result in opposing flows of spectators and produce
confusion.
     Given the build-up of spectators on either side of a radial
     fence it may also be impractical for the gate to be actually
     opened against the pressure of the crowd.

8.   See comment above. However it should be borne in mind that
     the fences were first erected for public order purposes.
     This could become a problem as the season progresses as
     matches assume a greater importance to the fans and their
     emotions are heightened. However consideration could be
     given to closing the gates shortly before the end of the
     match to prevent crowd invasions.

9.   Agreed - clear, understandable and rapid lines of
     communication are the key to responding to rapidly occurring
     or changing situations. At the best of times a large crowd
     is a volatile crowd.

     This recommendation could be broadened to allow the police to
|    decide to close the gates if a public order problem is
"    reasonably seen to be developing i.e. a pitch invasion.
     However this must be on the understanding that public safety
     considerations come before public order issues, and the
     decision to close must rest with the nominated senior police
     officer in the ground.

10. This is necessary if recommendation 7 is proceeded with.   If
    the gates are to be kept closed for public order perhaps the
    emphasis should be for the nominated senior police officer at
    the grounds to order them to be opened. Preferably by clear
    uncoded loudspeaker message relayed direct from the police
     control box and overriding all other priorities on the use of
     the loudspeaker system.

11. & 12.   Agreed.

13. Agreed as absolutely essential.

     Any review of the certificate or for that matter the routine
     monitoring of its continued effectiveness and applicability
     must include"during match" inspections. The dynamics of any
     ground can change dramatically when full of spectators.
     Local authority representatives must achieve a minimum number
     of inspections in any one seas on, preferably at 'A' graded
     games when the stadium is under maximum pressure.

14. A date should be set for Safety Certificates to be issued by
    and coupled with a requirement for a Safety Team to be
    established by the local authority with a designated officer
    as the chairman and effective procedures.

15. Essential. However this recommendation should recognise the
    greatly increased workload in a local authority in
    undertaking this responsibility properly and therefore
    provide an opportunity to recover costs. Alternatively an
    annual fee could be charged based on the average crowd at
    home matches. This would require an amendment to the Safety
    of Sports Ground Act to clarify the issue of charging for the
    review and renewal of safety certificates whichever method of
    assessment is chosen.
    Such an amendment to the legislation should allow the local
    authority to charge for amendments/changes in the certificate
    irrespective of who initiates them. At present a fee can
    only be levied where 'application is made' to the local
    authority.  In the case of the Interim Report local
    authorities acted pro-actively and required implementation
    which effectively precluded them from recovering the
    considerable costs incurred in officer time.

16. Agreed - and we would be  happy to co-operate in the
    development of a "model” of good practice which local
    authorities should aim to achieve.

17. We currently run three separate "Safety Teams" who meet
     regularly and for several hours at a time, to add to this
     further meetings of an advisory group is bound to be
     repetitive. The real answer is to have effective Safety
^   Teams.

    The club representativesmust be part of the Safety Team in
    the same capacity as all   other organisations represented and
    in fact this is what happens in practice.

    On the theme of introducing further tiers of bureaucracy, the
    proposals in the Football Spectators Bill, to have a
    Football Licensing Authority, are equally unwelcome.
    Establishing such a body will not contribute anything to the
    safety of football, that cannot and is not able to be
    achieved by an effective Safety Team and through the existing
    enforcement role given to local authorities. An additional
    body could have the potential to create confusion and blur
    responsibilities that the report is seeking to clarify.   It
    is suggested that the implementation of that part of the Act
    is not brought into operation until the Identity Card scheme
    has been properly assessed in practice and the effect of the
    Final Report of your inquiry has also been evaluated.

18. Agreed - It should be noted however that flow rates and
    anticipating the rate spectators need to be admitted is
    difficult and can vary due to a number of external factors.
    These include the time of arrival at the ground either by
    choice or due to travel delays. However other factors such
    as a 'search regime' used by the police does significantly
    slow the rate of flow through the turnstiles.

19. The limiting of the capacity of viewing areas to the number
    who can access it in one hour is not essential.  It is
    understood that this is the pattern of attendance in some
    areas particularly of Liverpool fans. However our experience
    indicates that fans gather in the area several hours before a
    match and with gates opening at 1pm for a 3pm kick off
    there is often an early surge. There will still be a
    majority of fans who arrive in the last hour but a
    significant minority do arrive before that. Recommendation
    25 would also be a positive way to encourage early arrival
    coupled with major improvement in toilet and refreshment
    facilities.

    See also comments to 18 above.
20.   Agreed.

21.   Agreed - perhaps this could be extended to the
      identification of viewing points for cameras external to the
      ground to enable co-ordinated action to be taken. The
      external camera could show access and egress of fans from
      the ground and if linked to the police control box could be
      used to minimise external difficulties e.g. build-up of fans
      waiting to enter. The positioning of cameras on external
      parts of the ground does sometimes give a fragmented
      picture.

22.   Agreed - with perhaps some thought to standardising signing
      across all grounds. This would be of assistance to stewards
      travelling with away supporters who if properly trained can
      have a major role to play.

      Signing should also correlate with all other information
|     released, particularly directions and plans incorporated on
"     tickets. This should include signing on public passenger
      transport premises such as British Rail and London Regional
      Transport, which for some grounds are in close proximity to
      the club.

      Local authorities can also contribute to improved and
      standardised signing where they act as the Highways
      Authority with responsibility for street furniture.

23.   Agreed - though care should be taken not to leave them in
      such a style as to make counterfeiting easy. Particularly
      as the costs of football tickets will rise so will the
      temptation to falsify them. Active encouragement should
      also be given to clubs and the police to take action against
      ticket touts. This is a loophole where small numbers of
      away supporters can gain access to home supporters areas of
      the ground.

24.   Agreed - This should also include "in conjunction/liaison
      with the local authority" to ensure any planned arrangements
       satisfy safety requirements as well as public order
      requirements.

      The more the decision making process can involve all
      interested parties the better, to avoid 'side agreements'
      being reached between two or more of the parties to the
      ignorance of others.  If the local authority is to fulfil
      its' true licensing role then it must be aware and party to
      all agreements and procedures, so that it maintains a
      complete overview and is able to protect the interests of
      all parties involved.

25.   Agreed - It should be noted that certain entertainments
       require a licence from the local authority. However as this
       will normally be the same local authority department that
       leads the Safety Team it should not be a problem.

26.   Agreed.
27     This should preferably include briefing the local
       authority. Most Operational Orders are standardised for any
       particular ground, with the exception of some variations
       for certain major matters.

       Consequently it would assist the local authority, in its
       overseeing role to be aware of the normal arrangements to be
       put in hand by the police.

28.    Agreed.

29.    The practice of a regular postponement of kick off could
       lead to fans starting to arrive even later. Late evening
       kick offs also increase nuisance experienced by local
       residents later into the evening.

       This should also include a reference to consultation with
       the club representative/safety officer, who must be present
fc     with or in communication with the officer in command.
"      Safety Certificates place responsibility on the 'holder'
        although it is acknowledged that the responsibility can and
        is given to others such as the police. However I would not
       wish to see the 'holder' excluded and thereby encouraged to
        abdicate his/her responsibilities.

       The requirement could require consultation and in the event
       of failure to agree then the decision of the police officer
       in command shall prevail.

30.    Agreed - The comments, in 29 above relating to the
       club/'holder' representative/safety officer equally apply to
       ensure that although there may be delegation of
       responsibility, the club can not avoid accountability.

 31.   Agreed - In our experience the presence of a senior official
       of the club (Chief Executive or Secretary) with radio access
       to senior stewards is also extremely useful in backing up
       police action.

       Additional channels would be helpful for other emergency
       services to utilise in the event of any emergency.  It is
       anticipated that senior representatives of such services
       would be present in the control room, either as routine or
       in the event of an emergency. Separate radio communication
       facilities is preferable to avoid interference with police
       radio links.

       The implementation of recommendation 31, 32, 33, and 34
       appears to imply that the police control room will be the
       sole central communication point. Should this be the case
       then the facility must be sufficient to accommodate both the
       'holders' representative and those of the other emergency
       services. Alternatively a separate 'stadium control' point,
       linked to the police control point could be established.^ In
       practice having the ability to communicate face-to-face is
       preferable to radio communication, as all parties can
       assimilate and evaluate the same information at the same
       time e.g. viewing the same CCT monitor or observing crowd
       dynamics directly on the terraces.
32.   It would be preferable if the separate system of land lines
      were treated as for summoning emergency services i.e. fire
      proofed and with secondary power source.

33.   Agreed.

34.   Agreed - although hand signals in a crowded ground over long
      distances may become somewhat "lost".

35.   This can be done through the Safety Team between matches or
      does it just refer to the period when a game is being
      played.

      This must include the local authority as the issuer of the
      certificate for reasons already stated.

36.   Agreed - but the information should be passed to the local
      authority also. A minor problem has arisen on match days
      with large crowds by the late arrival of Emergency vehicles
      within the hour before the kick off and having to progress
      through the crowd. Totally separate access is not feasible
      but a requirement to be in position by a certain time would
      be.

37.   Agreed - and clearly an issue for the Safety Team to be
      involved in.

38.   Agreed.

39.   Agreed.

40.   Agreed.

41.   All clubs will have a doctor(s) in attendance at every match
      for the benefit of the players.  It should be clarified that
      not only must they satisfy the 'trained in advanced first
      aid' criteria but also be dedicated to the needs of the
      spectators.

42.   In practice some of the ambulance provision is made up of
      vehicles provided by St. Johns, with the agreement of the
      ambulance service. It would perhaps be appropriate to
      ratify this arrangement with an appropriately amended
      recommendat ion.

43.   Agreed.




INTREP/PHB
