             UNIVERSITY OF SURREY^ B
              Guildford Surrey GU2 5XH        Telephone (0483) 571281          Telex 859331
              Departm ent of Psychology       Direct Line (0483) 50917&        Fax 0483 32813

              David Canter, Head of Department and Professor of Psychology
              Harry McGurk, Professor of Developmental Psychology
                                                                                         A*      fa-17
2nd October 1989                                   cc     S;                                    HI   Rt
                                                                                                     n
Mr R M WhaUey
Secretary to the Inquiry
                                                          h ."JbVvw
Inquiry into the Hillsborough                                      Mcxvv-eU/
Stadium Disaster
50 Queen Anne‘s Gate                                      .|h l*
London SW1H 9AT

Dear Mr Whalley,

Further to your request of 20th September 1989, enclosed are some notes on the issues
as I see them in relation to Crowd Behaviour. I have deliberately been as succinct as
possible, given the amount of documents you will be reading. I hope my notes are not
too cryptic as a consequence.

If you require any further assistance do let me know, but as you will see I do think
that this is an enormous topic with very little scientific information to draw upon.

Yours sincerely,



Professor David Canter
Head of Department

Encl.




                                              1
                   HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY




                        Comments on Crowd Behaviour from
                        Professor David Canter
                        University of Surrey




  LACK OF RESEARCH

   1. Despite the distressing regularity of major inquiries into aspects of crowd safety and
   control throughout this century there has been remarkably little systematic, scientific
^fctudy of crowds and how to control them effectively. What knowledge does exist tends
      be ad hoc personal experience of police officers.

  2. The few studies that have been carried out tend to have focused on limited issues in
  haste for major inquiries, (e.g. the work of Scicon following the Ibrox Disaster Inquiry,
  the work of Canter et al for the Popplewell Inquiry).

  3. Clearly, then, a significant issue is to encourage the support of wide ranging studies
  of crowd behaviour by competent behavioural scientists.


  WHAT IS KNOWN

  4. Such studies can build upon the following areas in which there is some systematic
  knowledge.

         a)     Flow rates can be predicted in general terms.

         b)     Basic maximum capacities can be established as a consequence of
                 assumptions about flow rates, but the densities used as calculations are for
                extreme circumstances not for the normal conditions.

         c)     Although often ignored, there is a general understanding of the difficulties
                that disabled people experience in crowds and how to design for these
                people.

         d)     There is some preliminary understanding of how to communicate with
                large crowds and of the processes that are likely to make crowds difficult
                to control.




                                               1
MATTERS REQUIRING URGENT CONSIDERATION

5. Differential Ingress and Egress

Current calculations usually take the capacity divided by exit unit widths in order to
calculate crowd flows. This assumes people divide themselves evenly between available
exits or entrances. They do not.

6. Differential Densities

Variations in crowd density are likely to be a natural product of various sociol-
psychological processes. This should be planned for in capacity calculations and crowd
management procedures.

   Crowd Characteristics

The large differences between types of crowd needs to be systematised and allowed for,
overtly, in management and planning. This will have direct implications for flow rates
and densities.

8. Waiting Times

The Scicon study on crowd waiting in enclosed areas and possible turbulence, is by
their own admission ambiguous and flawed. Yet it guides many regulations. The
control of slow moving, static or waiting crowds needs urgent analysis.

9. Communication with Crowds

A set of clear guidelines on the most effective way to communicate with crowds under
various circumstances need to be established. This should not be left to "common
sense" and the personal style of the person who happens to be near a microphone, for
example. Who should communicate, when, where and how all needs to be set down
for varying circumstances.

10. Information Systems

The maintenance of consistency across all forms of communication and signposting is
already indicated in your interim recommendations (e.g. recommendation nos. 22, 23
and 24). What is involved in establishing a comprehensive consistency now needs to
be elaborated.

11. Training for Crowd Management

Procedures need to be established as to the best ways to train police, club management,
stewards etc to recognise and act on appropriate crowd cues. I have already had police
forces in touch with me asking for help for example, in relation to recommendation 6,
in recognition of crowd densities and dynamics.



                                           2
12.   Public Expectations and Attitudes

As considered in our book "Football in its Place", which has been sent to you, a focal
issue is the expectations that members of a crowd have about a public event. The role
of the police and club management in this are crucial. At present most actions support
a fortress attitude with expectations of anti-social behaviour. If there is not to be a
need for another inquiry in a few year's time this attitudinal/educational issue must be
addressed directly.



BRIEF RESUME OF PROFESSOR CANTER

Professor David Canter is Professor of Psychology and Head of the Department of
Psychology at the University of Surrey. He is internationally known for his work in
Environmental Psychology and his studies of human behaviour in fires and emergencies.

    is Fellow of the British Psychological Society and the American Psychological
Association and the British Institute of Management. He is the founding editor of the
Journal of Environmental Psychology.

He carried out a series of studies on major fires and other small domestic fires, for
many years for the Fire Research Station, As a result of this work produced a book,
published by Wiley in 1980 entitled "Fires and Human Behaviour". He has also
published a number of papers on this topic and given many presentations at national
and international conferences on the topic.

He was appointed as a technical adviser to the Popplewell Inquiry into Crowd Safety at
Sports Grounds and the King's Cross Inquiry.

He had produced 14 books and over 100 articles in technical and learned journals.




                                           3
