                 ^ V'AiV^   W; jW                   rf,

NOTES OF VISIT TO ROME 11/12 OCTOBER


Introduction


I visited Rome on 11 and 12 October, by arrangement with Mr
Godfrey at the British Embassy, to make preparations for our
visit to Italy in early December.   In the course of my visit I
met Dr Gustavo Cappuccio. Direttore, Servizio Ordine Pubblico,
had lunch (at the invitation of the Information Officer at the
Embassy) with some local journalists who are interested in our
Inquiry, visited the stadia at Olimpico and Flaminio, and met
officials of the Federazione Italiana Giuoco Calcio.


Dr Gustavo Cappuccio


2.   Dr Cappuccio gave a fluent and polished account of his
responsibility for the service of public order in Italy.    He had
at his fingertips, for example, detailed reports from police
services throughout the country of incidents at grounds.     He also
took me carefully through the latest ordinance relating to safety
of stadia and crowds in them (August 1989) which had in part been
influenced by Hillsborough.    (Mr Godfrey gave me this some time
ago and I have already circulated it).    In addition to these
regulations, the Italian football authorities are requiring that
all stadia with a capacity for 10,000 plus should be all-seater
from April 1990 onwards.    This is in time for the World Cup.    In
discussions with Dr Cappuccio, we agreed that his colleagues from
the Direction General of Civil Protection should also be present
at the meeting to brief Lord Justice Taylor about current issues
affecting stadium design and construction in Italy, so this point
can be discussed with them.


3.    The police have extensive responsibility for crowd
behaviour and safety in Italian football matches.    They can make
checks on clubs to ensure that they are carrying out their
responsibilities.   For "delicate" matches, the local prefect can
call the police, fiscal authorities, carabinieri and football
clubs for meetings about their organisation.    Control of football
hooliganism probably accounts for about 10,000 police officers in
Italy as a whole.   There are problems both inside and outside
stadia, the latter being relatively new, and usually taking place
on the same day.    Trouble mostly occurs at football matches:      it
is beginning to creep in to basketball.     The police are improving
their intelligence gathering and information.     There is now a
databank on well known trouble makers.     All fans who are arrested
or reported will be kept on this databank, the details being
subject to the 1981 legislation on data protection, so that civil
rights are respected.    This would enable certain fans to be
excluded from matches.    If a name came up on the databank, the
police force concerned could refer to the force of origin, who
would immediately telefax a photograph to enable identification
to be confirmed.


4.   Police were also improving their pre-match arrangements and
liaison about transport etc.    A ratio of 10 police officers for
300 fans would accompany a group of fans visiting an away match,
but could be more for sensitive matches.     Dr Cappuccio was in
touch with police departments in the Ministries of the Interior
in various European and other countries concerning fans who might
be particularly troublesome at the World Cup (it was clear he was
already developing extensive contacts with the Home Office and
police authorities in the UK through the TREVI public order
context).


5.   But it was not all being left to the police.     New
regulations were being enforced on the clubs in relation to the
control of behaviour inside the stadia.     One in particular, to
which importance was attached, related to fans who carried
banners threatening violence.    A club who allowed this to happen
could be fined up to 50 million lire.     These stiff regulations
have been imposed by the Federation with the encouragement of the
Minister of the Interior who regularly met the President of the
Federation (himself an MP).     This renewed interest had been
driven by incidents in 1988 and 1989, in each of which a young
fan had been killed.     The forthcoming World Cup was another
important factor.


6.   Ticket touts were a particular problem in Italy.       Since
matches are all ticket, and VAT is therefore chargeable on every
ticket sale, a tout can be charged with evading VAT, and fined
£100 on conviction.     Criminal offences are also committed if
tickets are forged.     It is, however, more difficult to enforce
these penalties on people who sell tickets for their face value.
Tickets are widely sold before a match through banks, shops,
clubs etc.     No particular measures are taken to separate rival
fans.     Ticket touts can also be subject to local exclusion from a
ground, which, if broken, can be penalised with one year's
imprisonment.     That applies inside rather than outside grounds.


7.      Alcohol is not a particular problem.   The sale of alcoholic
drinks is banned within stadia, and fans are not allowed to take
alcohol in, whatever the container.     But, as a matter of realism,
the police cannot check everyone.     This is a matter on which the
police need to maintain close contact with the clubs.      But it was
explained to me that Italian culture does not tend either to
produce or to tolerate the kind of exhibitionist drunkenness
noted in some other countries' supporters.      A bigger problem
related to drugs inside the stadia especially to their sale among
the cheaper seating areas.


Visit to Stadia Olimpico and Flaminio


8.      We went first to the Stadio Olimpico, under construction for
the World Cup Final next July.     It is an old stadium, previously
holding 80,000 with a mixture of seats and standing, which is
being entirely reconstructed to hold 85,000 seated all under
cover.     In fact the intention is to enable the entire stadium
area to be covered if desired.     The design is an oval shape, but
smaller than Wembley, with the terracing sloping steeply at the
top.     The entire area will have fitted seats made of non­
flammable non-toxic plastic.     Emergency evacuation will be
through the back and on to the pitch.     This has been a problem,
because the original design allowed no access on to the pitch
from the viewing areas, but at the insistence of FIFA this is
needing to be changed.     Our guide (Personal Assistant to the
Project Director) did not know how this would be resolved.         At
present, the viewing areas terminate with a glass screen,
comprising three welded sections each one centimetre thick, at
roughly shoulder height.    Immediately in front of this is a
concrete moat, about five metres wide, with another glass screen
the other side of the moat.    The depth of the moat is 3.4 metres
and the height of the further glass screen 2.8 metres.     Anyone
climbing into the moat would therefore have to scale a height of
6.2 metres.   It is thought that the time taken to do this would
enable the police to arrest any would be pitch invaders, who
would then be ejected from the ground.


9.    When the emergency exits at the back and onto the pitch are
complete, the aim is to enable the stadium to be evacuated in
four to five minutes.    The projected solution is gates across the
moat onto the pitch.    These would be in the ratio 1.2 metres for
every 500 people, and as each sub-section would probably hold
1,500 people, the gates would probably be 3.6 metres.


10.   The new construction is costing £70 million.    It is being
financed by CONI (the National Olympic Committee) out of the
takings from the football pool (for further details of this, see
discussions at FIGC below).    CONI own the stadium and, when it is
completed, it will be used for other major sporting events,
including fortnightly fixtures of Lazio, one of the two Rome
clubs in the first division of the football league.


11.   We then went to visit an older stadium, Flaminio, again
owned by CONI and currently shared by Roma and Lazio.     Its total
capacity is 31,600.     It comprises a main covered stand, another
seating area along the length of the pitch, and two lower areas
behind the goal mouths, which are a mixture of seating behind and
terraced standing below, on an oval configuration.     Each of the
four sections of the ground is self contained.     Areas behind the
goal can each accommodate 8,000 spectators, there is no physical
separation between the seating and the standing areas, and as the
price is the same those who arrive first go to the seated areas.
This relieves pressure on the terraced areas.     The prices are
high (£12 for the end areas and up to £80 for the best seats in
the covered stand).
12.   The immediate entry onto the terraced area is through a
tunnel which then projects quickly down to a well area, fronted
by a concrete wall, on top of which is a glass fence, with a high
area of netting above to prevent missiles being thrown.     In its
configuration of tunnel, terrace and sump it is horribly
reminiscent of Hillsborough, but there is much more space for the
outward dispersal of pressure.     It has been in use for football
only this season, while the Olimpico Stadium is being
reconstructed, and so far there have been no problems with    the
crowds.    There were some isolated incidents of violence between
Roma and Napoli fans the previous weekend, reported in the
English press.    In the area immediately leading up to the tunnel
entrance is a small garden of bushes and shrubs, apparently
untouched by football fans this season.


13.   But it was clear that extra precautions had had to be taken
to enable matches to be played at this stadium.     These consist of
an entirely new external perimeter fence set back variously
between 30 and 50 yards from the existing entrances.     Fans are
assembled outside this fence, where there is plenty of room for
dispersal, for a preliminary inspection of tickets by clubs and
police.    Mounted officers are on duty in this area.   After the
first check they are allowed into the next area, through some 48
gates for 8,000 people.    Inside the second area they are further
checked before being allowed into the stadium via another battery
of barriers and turnstiles.


14.   The limitation on the numbers entering into a fixed part of
the ground (eg 8,000 for the area behind the goal mouth) is set
by the number of tickets issued.     There is some problem with
ticket touts but little problem with forgeries.     Prices at the
stadium are high, because of the interest shown in two first
division clubs, and have been increased above what is normally
charged at the stadium, but there has been no fall off in
revenue.


Discussions at FIGC (Federazione Italiana Giuoco Calcio)


15.    We met Avv Carlo Sica, who is responsible for the legal
office at FIGC, and Dott Pennacchia who is a technical
consultant.   Aw    Sica said that we would be welcome to see the
match at Milan on 3 December.     He would get in touch with the
club to start off the arrangements.      I explained to him our
normal pattern of attendance at the match.      We would be able to
meet the Chief of Police at the stadium, but consideration would
be needed whether this should be on the Saturday evening or on
the Sunday morning, given detailed arrangements for which he
would be responsible.     New this year is a system by which FIGC
appoint three representatives of their own at each match,
(usually magistrates or lawyers), and it was suggested that we
should meet these people and possibly watch the match with them.
It was further agreed that Avv Sica and Dott Pennacchia would be
available to meet the Inquiry team at a meeting in Rome on 4 or 5
December.


16.   I was given a copy of the new regulations which FIGC have
imposed on clubs this year (in Italian:     we will have it
translated) in relation to responsibility for the prevention of
acts of violence.     This can include fines of up to 50 million
lire and also the cancellation of the result of the match and the
substitution of a two nil defeat for the miscreant club.         The
offences for which a club can be punished in this way include
acts committed beyond its own curtilage.     A club can also be
disqualified from holding matches at its ground.      Problems
sometimes occur where a club, fearful of reprisals, does not hand
over information enabling a supporter to be identified.       The
spirit of the new regulations is to emphasise to clubs their need
to co-operate with the police and with other authorities to
prevent acts of violence, and to impose sanctions if need be.
They have not so far been necessary this season.


17.   The FIGC impose a partial membership scheme.     This is
voluntary, and supporters do not need to be members of it in
order to buy tickets to attend matches.      But if they do decide to
join, they are given a card with their photograph on it.         This
entitles them to membership of a supporters' group which runs
discounted schemes with a combined ticket for transport and entry
to the match.      Clubs issue the cards and keep the lists of the
m e m b er s .


18.     I was told that it was not considered in accordance with law
to prevent someone buying a ticket only because he was not a
member of a supporters' club.          A further change to bear in mind
is the requirement that all stadia with a capacity in excess of
10,000 must be all-seater by next April.


19.     Clubs themselves did not own stadia:        these are owned by
municipal undertakings or by banks.           Improvements therefore had
to catch the owners of grounds as well as the clubs themselves.
It was up to the owners of stadia to make the necessary changes
by the following April.          The basis of financing was a share of
the pools money.          This went 26% to the state in taxes, 38% in
prizes, 25% to CONI, 6% on administration and 3% to a bank
financing development of sports facilities with low interest
loans.           CONI1s share had to be divided between all sports
federations.           FIGC received 3.5% of CONI's 25%, and also 2% of
the 6% on administration, giving them 5.5% of the total proceeds
of the pools.           FIGC1s share came to some 120 billion lire (£55
million) last year (on these figures, the total takings from the
pools are about £1 billion).


 20.     Among other issues briefly discussed were a scheme by which
 sponsors could give prizes to well behaved spectators, procedures
 to control the behaviour of fans on trains, use of sniffer dogs
 for the detection of drugs, measures to force clubs to sell only
 four or five tickets to each person;          touts (who are otherwise
 left to the police);          a recent census which had shown that
 attendances had fallen off because people were dissatisfied with
 violence, cost and comfort in that order;          agreement between FIGC
 and the clubs about whether prices should be kept low (FlGCs
 option) so as to maximise attendance, or raised (the club's
 performance);          and discussions between FIFA, the Ministry of the
 Interior, FIGC, the police and host towns about World Cup
 arrangements.



 3 November 1989                                 R M WHALLEY
