            U |p > ) U V X i K . W   ^                          ^      S ^ € je J Q

NOTE OF MEETING WITH ACPO (SCOTLAND):            27 OCTOBER


Present:   Lord Justice Taylor
           Mr Johnson
           Mr Whalley
           Mr Sweet

           Mr J Bowman (President of ACPO(S) and Chief Constable
                of Tayside)
           Mr H G Clark (Deputy Chief Constable of Lothian and
                Borders)
           Mr W Wilson (Deputy Chief Constable of Fife)



Fencing


1.   Lord Justice Taylor asked about the current position on
fencing at Scottish football grounds.            In reply, it became clear
that there was no uniformity:            there was no fencing at Dundee and
at Dundee United, and there was low fencing at Hibernian and
Heart of Midlothian which could be climbed over.              There was no
perimeter fencing at Dunfermline.            Lord Justice Taylor asked
whether problems arose at grounds with no or only low fencing.
In reply, it was suggested that there were few problems, just as
there were few problems with open gates in perimeter fencing.
One factor was that few matches were played to capacity, and
Scottish fans on the whole accepted segregation and were content
to stay in their territorial area.            This could partly be
explained by small attendances by comparison with capacities, but
also to more positive policing practices.            The position was
likely to be different at capacity matches, certainly if the
allocation of tickets was perceived to be unfair (which could
arise at Celtic versus Rangers matches, or matches played against
Rangers at small grounds).


Positive Policing


2.   The concept of positive policing was explored.                 Important
elements were proper surveillance through CCTV, arresting
troublemakers early and detaining them in custody until a
subsequent court appearance after the weekend.            On occasions,
supporters were bailed after the match.            There was little
reliance on a policy of ejections from football matches.
Compared with England and Wales, this was easier because there
were fewer clubs, and potential troublemakers could be targetted
more easily.     Nevertheless, Scottish fans tended to show less
restraint when visiting English clubs.     That sometimes required
tough measures - for example, Rangers would ban for life from
attendance at home matches supporters causing trouble at away
matches.     The role of the security officers to the clubs was
crucial in this respect.


Gates


3.      Lord Justice Taylor asked about policy on gates in perimeter
fences.    ACPO(S) took the view that, where fences were present,
it was better to have gates closed and unlocked than open.         The
need to have means of escape onto the pitch was recognised.         So
also was the need for police to have access to particular areas
and there was a case for recommending a minimum size of gate for
this purpose.     Guidance would also be helpful on the number of
gates for a given length of fence, and they should be painted
green.


All Seated Accommodation


4.      Lord Justice Taylor asked for views on all-seater
accommodation.     ACPO(S) believed that it was an important
objective, while recognising the problems it would create for
small clubs.     One option would be to limit it to stadia with
capacities above 5,000, but they recognised the problems arising
with a large away    crowd at a small ground.Scottish clubs       were
keen to take part    in European competitions, and recognised the
need to change by    1992, and the 10 clubs in   thepremier Scottish
division would be    aware of these pressures.    If all-seater
accommodation were made mandatory for the premier division,
others would probably follow.     Nevertheless, many clubs would
need an extensive period to make the change, and would need to
cope with both the capital costs and the subsequent loss of
revenue (albeit charges could be raised for seated
accommodation).     Precedent had been set in the Scottish rugby
league, where accommodation was upgraded on promotion from the
second to the first division.


Police Powers of Arrest


5.   Lord Justice Taylor explored further the way the Scottish
police use their powers of arrest.     In reply,    ACPO(S) said that
the aim was not to arrest in large numbers:        some 20 to 30 at a
Hibernian or Hearts match would be regarded as a failure.        Many
of the arrests were outside the ground.     Those arrested were
bailed if drunk:     generally, none were kept over the weekend
unless they were likely to be charged with a serious offence.
The Procurator Fiscal took all football cases in the sheriff
court.


Breach of the Peace


6.   Lord Justice Taylor asked whether any complaints were
received about the breach of the peace provisions.       ACPO(S) said
that few complaints were received:     the breach of peace
provisions were based in common law and could extend to a wide
range of offences.     Some sheriff courts would not convict unless
behaviour had been obviously provocative (throwing coins or
sweets or repeatedly aggressive acts).     The evidence of two
police officers was necessary so as to give the required
corroboration.     The penalty imposed (be it a fine or period of
imprisonment) was constrained by the level of the court in which
the offences were heard.     The value of the breach of the peace
provision compared with ejections was that there was nothing to
stop ejected fans coming straight back into the ground.


Ticket Touts


7.   Ticket touts were something of a problem in Scotland, but
currency in forged tickets was a greater problem.       This arose
through the acquisition of tickets before the match, since clubs
did not allow them to be sold on the day.     Touts could always be
persuaded to move elsewhere in the knowledge that they would
otherwise be arrested for breach of the peace.       Any measures
would, however, have to deal with the practical difficulty caused
by the arrival of large numbers of visiting supporters at
important matches.


Alcohol


8.    Lord Justice Taylor asked for the reasons lying behind the
view that substantial progress had been made in dealing with
alcohol related disorder at football matches.     The police view
was that the position had greatly improved since the change of
legislation in 1980.    There was still a large amount of drinking
by Scottish football fans, but they stood the risk of not getting
into the match if they arrived drunk, and powers to stop and
search buses en route to matches, and to stop cans and bottles of
alcohol being taken in to the ground, brought good results.
ACPO(S) saw no case for any exemptions to drinking within
grounds, though conceded that drinking in a board room out of the
sight of the ground was acceptable.     Bearing in mind that the
Scots retained their habit of drinking large quantities over a
short period, ACPO(S) were against any extension of drinking
inside grounds.


Early Kick-Offs and Sunday Matches


9.    ACPO(S) had not seen much need for early kick-offs.      There
was a danger that it would merely lead to longer drinking after
the match.     The Skol Cup Final had been played on a Sunday.
There was a tendency to regard 3pm as sacrosanct.     A bigger
problem was replays of cup matches at short notice:     Scottish
police forces were small, and mounting major operations often
meant calling men in off rest days.


Police Costs


10.   ACPO(S) policy was to charge the rate for the job, according
to a formula agreed by the Scottish Office which was based on the
attendance at the match and the club's ability to pay.      (Mr
Bowman undertook to send further details about how this worked in
Tayside).    Lord Justice Taylor asked whether the levels of
costings had been used to encourage clubs to adopt more efficient
stewarding arrangements, and hence less demand for the police.
ACPO(S) firmly believed in the clubs maintaining good stewarding.
In Lothian and Borders, clubs recruited their own stewards with
police assistance, and looked for fit young men aged between 25
and 35 or 40.     The police kept firmly to the policy that they
were in charge but the duty of looking after fans lay with the
stewards.     The chief steward would be located in the police
control room, and in practice there were no problems.       The club
was the invitor but the police would intervene when necessary.
The club could delegate its functions.     Strathclyde police had
produced a guide to practice for consideration by ACPO(S).


Ticketless Fans


11.     ACPO(S) said that the practice was not to allow ticketless
fans entry to the ground.     This had not been a serious problem.
They were kept away from the ground, turned back and sent home on
their transport without much difficulty.     The exception, as with
other things, was matches between Rangers and Celtic, with many
ticketless fans, forgeries circulating, and capacity crowds.
Even so, it was better to deal with ticketless fans outside the
ground than to overcrowd terraces.     That was expressly precluded
in the Safety Certificate, as was selling tickets on a match day.


Football Spectators Bill


12.     ACPO(S) understood the purpose of the Bill (which of course
did not apply in Scotland).     They would fear attempts to get hold
of cards improperly, for example by robbery.     The Bill presented
no attraction to them, they could not see it working effectively,
and questioned its relevance to the Scottish scene.     They would
strongly resist the reporting procedures in Clause 19 of the
Bill:     small police forces were stretched to the limit
controlling football matches, let alone having to supervise
reporting procedures as well.     As for Part 2 of the Bill,
Scottish fans overseas rarely presented much of a problem.       The
Scottish FA's control of ticket sales overseas was generally
effective.     Police intelligence could also play a part (as in the
recent international in Paris), and the media had generally been
helpful.


Processing of Prisoners


13.   ACPO(S) explained the law on the corroboration of evidence
involving two officers, the verbal account given at the time of
the arrest, the taking of a photograph, and the compilation of
the detention record.     An officer would generally be away from
his post for about 15 minutes when making an arrest.    A   pro forma
was used for drunkenness offences, and standard provisions were
generally followed for breach of the peace offences.


Communications


14.   Lord Justice Taylor asked whether any particular problems
had been encountered with communications.     ACPO(S) mentioned lack
of channels,   and difficulties when systems were used on   talk-
through, but a variety of systems was used (VHF in Fife     and UHF,
on one channel, in Lothian and Borders).     Communications were
generally extended down to Sergeant level.     There would always be
problems when a communications system was under stress, or
equipment malfunctioned.     A safeguard was for headquarters
control officers to listen in to police box traffic and telephone
conversations.   A Sony device could cut out ambient sound:     and
there was always room for more discipline on the part of police
officers in their use of communications.


Defined Capacities


15.   There were no particular problems about defined capacities
in Scottish clubs, mainly because of the small attendances.
Capacity could be related to turnstile flows as much as to size
of terraced areas within grounds.
