                                                                           a m         z fa & h *


Sir Malcolm Thornton encloses a letterfrom Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

A copy ofMr Hammond’s letterhas been sent to allMembers ofParliament, and this is one of
a number ofresulting Minister’s Cases.

                           ? To P/S ofM of S aswithin




                                                             ULa a
                                                             MW a rd
                                                                           H/
                                                             29 January 1997




                                                                       0 5 FEB 1997

                                                                    OF -
                          The Rt Hon David Maclean MP      H ome O ffice
                                                          QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                           LONDON SW1H9AT




Our R e f :   PW/97 5/2180/10                           ® ** FEB 1997
              PO 1299/97




Thank you for your letter of 14 January, to Michael Howard,
enclosing one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken
to consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
Hillsborough, and the representations which have been made to him by
the bereaved families and by others.   He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme.  The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                                DAVID MACLEAN



Sir Malcolm Thornton MP
                          The Rt Hon David Maclean MP    H o m e O ffice
                                                        QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                        LONDON SW1H9AT


                                                          0 5 FEB 1997
Our R e f :   PW/97 5/2180/10
              PO 1299/97




Thank you for your letter of 14 January, to Michael Howard,
enclosing one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken
to consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
Hillsborough, and the representations which have been made to him by
the bereaved families and by others.  He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme.  The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                                DAVID MACLEAN



Sir Malcolm Thornton MP
Thank you for your letter of 14 January/to Michael Howard, enclosing one from Mr Phil
Hammond, Secretary ofthe Hillsborough Family Support Group.


As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken to consider carefully
the points which were made inthe programme Hillsborough, and the representations which
have been made to him by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised thathe
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightlybut would need to be convinced thatit
would be in the public interestto do so and thatitwould stand a chance ofproviding a better
understanding than there isatpresent ofwhat happened on thatterrible day.


In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether there isany new evidence;
he will also consider whether thatevidence appears tobe of such significance thathad itbeen
put before Lord Taylor orbefore the coroner, eitherthe outcome ofthe Taylor inquiry or the
verdict ofthejury would have been different.


The ChiefConstable of South Yorkshire has undertaken toprovide the Home Secretary with a
detailed report ofallthe points raisedby the programme. The Home Secretaryhas promised
thathe will reach a decision on any further actiontobe taken as soon as he has been able to
consider allthe issues.
                    Dlvblonol filekcferenco Rjft 1        S i 'l l fib   1(0
HOME OFFICE
MINISTERS CASE DRAFT REPLY

A ddressee]
 N3ITI6    ^ v>                         «wf

 Address                  Reference
 Tick on# box
                House of Commons
      □         House of lords
      □         Other - Insert full postal address




Letter drafted for 5 ignature by]

          A d iJW d jL o ^                    ( Name of Signatory!

Enclosures




Copies to be sen t to




                                   ( Full addresses, i f nccessory]
                       From Sir Malcolm Thornton, M.P.
                            HOUSE OF COMMONS
                             LONDON SW 1A OAA




                                                         14 January 1997
R t . Hon. Michael Howard,    QC, MP,
Secretary of State,                         a
                                                c   Ca
Home Office,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON.    SW1H 9AT

                                         say®




I would be ver y grateful for your comments on the enclosed
correspondence from Mr. Hammond of the Hillsborough Family
Support G r o u p .

I look forward to hearing from you in due course.

Kind r e g a r d s .




Enc.
       SBORn
                                                               cBORn




      fuppov^
                                                              •Tl/ppov^
                   Hillsborough Family Support Group
 All Members of Parliament.


                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - JUSTICE CAMPAIGN

 Sir Malcolm Thornton M.P


I am writing to ask for your support for the campaign mounted by
the Hillsborough Family Support Group for the justice and
accountability which we believe has so far been denied to us by
the complete failure of the judicial system in the aftermath of
the Hillsborough Disaster.

You should be aware that following the broadcast on Independent
Television on December 5th 1996 of the drama/documentary
"Hillsborough", the Home Secretary is presently considering
whether, on the basis of the new and unused evidence which
emerged from the programme, there are grounds for him to order a
fresh Inquiry into the Disaster. Mr Howard in fact spoke
personally in the House of Commons adjournment debate which was
held about Hillsborough on 17th December, 1996 and he later met
privately with the many family members who had travelled to
London to be present at the debate.

The Hillsborough Family Support Group is hopeful that the Home
secretary will order a fresh inquiry, particularly in the light
not only of the new evidence but also of overwhelming public
support we have received - people from all walks of life from
right across Britain have written to us and telephoned to express
their outrage and anger at the treatment of bereaved families.
However, regardless of the decision of Mr Howard, the families
have also separately instigated the following legal actions to
take forward our quest for justice

i) a complaint to the Director of Public Prosecutions seeking a
criminal investigation into possible misconduct in the way
evidence was or was not presented to the Inquest jury. This
action is based on the evidence which has now come to light of
video- technician, Roger Houldsworth, who was not called as a
witness to either the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest and whose
existence was not known to the families until the TV programme
was made. The new evidence directly contradicts what some South
Yorkshire police officers told the jury and Taylor inquiry.

ii) an application to the Attorney General under section 13 of
the coroners act asking the High Court to consider quashing the
inquest verdict and ordering a fresh inquest.


CHAIRMAN                        SECRETARY                  TREASURER
T. Hicks                        P. Hammond                 Mrs. J. Travnor
                                 i n , - ...... ti - _ j
Liverpool City Council, at an extraordinary meeting held on 19th December 1996, have already
pledged their unanimous support to the families in our campaign. With the assistance of the City
Council, the campaign is now being taken out across the country where it is our intention to seek
the support of local authorities in all areas of Britain in response to the massive public disquiet
which has emanated from the television programme ( the "Daily Mirror", for example, has
received a huge response to the petition it launched in December, on behalf of the families,
supporting the call for a new inquest into the Disaster.) The response to the programme clearly
indicates this is a matter of public intrest and should be dealt with accordingly.


The Bereaved families of Hillsborough will forever be in debt to writer Jimmy McGovern and to
Granada Television for bringing the tale of our fight for justice into the homes and consciences of
the British people. However, in some ways the story told on television could not truly reflect the
scale of what we have been made to endure by having the absolute grief of losing our loved ones
compounded by what can only be described as the biggest farce and cover up in British legal
history. As if this was not enough of a burden, the families, despite the unequivocal findings of the
   /lor Inquiry, have also had to fight to counter a concerted and seemingly intentional campaign

«  certain public and media figures to scar the reputation and memories of our loved ones by
   blaming them, and their fellow supporters, for causing the Disaster.


T h e " Hillsborough " television programme seems at last to have washed away the cartload of lies
about the Disaster which have stood as a barrier to the reaching of a fair and just conclusion
about the needless deaths of 96 people. On behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group I
would now urge you to help us go one step further and establish $s a matter of public record for
all time the truth of what did happen on that dreadful day of 15th April 1989. Only if that can be
done may the bereaved families be able to put our loved ones finally to rest.


Yours faithfully



Phil Hammond
Secretary - Hillsborough Family Support Group.
                                            •<
