  Mr and Mrs S Roberts          cc        }40W*s4<
                                      fW*'* Ji-e


  ___________________                Kr              O'
                                     yxv Pfii*

                                   \W Uslo/i^sy




  W - Mar^Ms ^JW r>
 Thank you for your letters 2 8 February and 3 0 March about the Hillsborough
 disaster. I am sorry that you have not received an earlier reply to your letters
 about the outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny of evidence about the
 disaster.

 Let me first apologise for the mistake in my letter of 18 February w ith Graham's
 name. I am sorry for the distress which this must have caused you.

 I realise that you and the other Hillsborough families are bitterly disappointed by
the outcome of the scrutiny. As I explained in the House, one of my first
concerns on taking office last year was to ensure that there should be a
thorough and independent investigation of any material which cast doubt on
earlier findings about the disaster.

 I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a thorough scrutiny
 of the evidence and considered its significance carefully. His report covers in
detail the matters put to him by the families and others and the reasons for his
conclusions. He has considered all the material allegations about missing or
concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference w ith witnesses and
witness statements and concerns about the use of the 3.1 5 pm cut-off tim e at
the Inquest.


 I have considered the Judge's report carefully and accept the conclusion which
he has reached that the evidence submitted to him does not add anything
significant to the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor Inquiry and
the Inquests.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that he does not consider the inquest to have
been flawed and he supports the Divisional' Court's conclusion that there was
no evidence of bias. He found no basis for the Attorney-General to apply to the
High Court to quash the inquest verdict or to hold a new inquest. He also
considered the arguments about the 3.1 5 pm cut-off time. He says that the
coroner did not say that all those who died did so before 3 .1 5 pm, or that all
those who became unconscious subsequently died. It was only in relation to
how or by that means the deceased came to their deaths that the cut-off time
was imposed. The Taylor inquiry considered in detail the response of the
emergency services after 3.1 5 pm as well as before, and concluded that no valid
criticism could be made of them.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it clear that he entirely accepts Lord Justice
Taylor's conclusion that the principal cause of the disaster was the failure of
police control. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith himself condemned w h at he described
as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's "disgraceful lies" that the fans had
opened Gate C.

The Home Secretary has indicated that he shares the sentiments expressed by
the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in Chapter 7 of his Report when he says:

"/ understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary
proceedings, or even to the exten t o f losing their job".

There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which
the Government intends to address. In January, the Home Affairs Select
Committee published some important recommendations about the police
complaints and discipline procedures. I recently announced my response to the
HAC recommendations including my intention to reduce the standard of proof to
the civil standard in discipline procedures and to remove the existing double
jeopardy provision which restricts criminal and disciplinary action on the same
facts. I have also endorsed the Com m ittee's recommendation th a t forces should
show greater com m itm ent to their powers to verify claims of sickness and
disability and, where appropriate, to postpone a request to retire on ill health
grounds until the completion of disciplinary proceedings.

You asked about statem ents by members of the St John Ambulance. W hen I
made my statement on 18 February I said that I would place in the House of
Commons Library as much of the evidence which Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith
considered in his scrutiny as possible, including the statem ents made by police
officers about the events of the day. Lord Justice S tuart-Sm ith's report dealt
with allegations about the amendment of a number of those police statem ents
and it was, therefore, appropriate to publish them .
All other statements made by those present at Hillsborough, including those
made by St John Ambulance members, are held by South Yorkshire Police.
Copies of statements should, therefore, be requested from South Yorkshire
Police direct. Requests should be made to Ken Greenway at the Complaints and
Discipline Department, Windsor Road, Sheffield, S8 8UB.

You also asked w hy the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire received a copy of
the scrutiny report in advance of its publication. Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith's
terms of reference specifically referred to the Chief Constable as the disciplinary
authority for South Yorkshire Police and, therefore, one of the parties to whom
the report was directed. It was entirely appropriate for the Chief Constable to
consider the report once it was submitted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

I am, as you know, ready to talk to the families further to explain my decision.
Graham's sister was among the delegation I met whilst in Southport on 7 March,
and you may be aware that I am in touch w ith the Family Support Group to
arrange another meeting in Merseyside. The House of Commons will also have
an opportunity to discuss Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny in an adjournment
debate in the House of Commons on 8 May.




                                  JACK STR A W
M r John Glover




                              j

Thank you for your letter of 9 April about Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith's scrutiny of
the Hillsborough disaster.

I am very conscious of the strength of feeling surrounding the Hillsborough
Disaster, and I understand that my decision not to hold a fresh inquiry will be a
disappointment to you and the other families of those who died.

As I explained in the House of Commons, one of my first concerns on taking
office last year was to ensure that there should be a thorough and independent
investigation of any material which cast doubt on earlier findings about the
disaster. I, therefore, announced on 3 0 June 1 9 9 7 that I had asked Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith to conduct a scrutiny of the evidence and to report his conclusions.

I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a thorough scrutiny
of the evidence and considered its significance carefully. His report is
comprehensive and sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the
reasons for his conclusions. He has considered all the material allegations about
missing or concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference w ith
witnesses and witness statem ents and concerns about the use of the 3.1 5 pm
cut-off time at the Inquest.

It is inevitable with a disaster of this magnitude that evidence will emerge from
time to time which has not been heard publicly before. W h at the Scrutiny had to
consider was not only w hether the evidence put forward w as new , but also
whether it was of such significance th a t it would justify a new inquiry, or further
consideration by the A ttorney General (with regard to the inquest) or the criminal
or disciplinary authorities.
I have considered the Judge's report carefully and I accept the conclusion which
he has reached that the evidence submitted to him does not add anything
significant to the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor Inquiry and
the Inquests.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found no basis for the Attorney-General to apply to
the High Court to quash the inquest verdict or to hold a new inquest. He also
said that the effect of quashing the verdict without substituting any other
verdict would be the same as if the jury had returned an open verdict and that
would only be appropriate where there is insufficient evidence to record any
other possible conclusion.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith made it clear that he entirely accepts Lord Justice
Taylor's conclusion that the principal cause of the disaster was the failure of
police control. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith himself condemned w h a t he described
as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's "disgraceful lies" that fans had opened
Gate C.

I do share the sentiments expressed by the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in Chapter
7 of his Report when he says:

"/ understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary
proceedings, or even to the exten t o f losing their job".

There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which I
intend to address. In January the Home Affairs Select Committee recently made
some important recommendations about the police complaints and discipline
procedures. I have recently announced my response to the HAC
recommendations including my intention to reduce the standard of proof to the
civil standard in discipline procedures and to remove the existing double jeopardy
provision which restricts criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. I
have also endorsed the Com m ittee's recommendation that forces should show
greater commitment to their powers to verify claims of sickness and disability
and, where appropriate, to postpone a request to retire on ill health grounds until
the completion of disciplinary proceedings.

I also support Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith's endorsement of the findings of a
Home Office Working Party, published in March 1 9 9 7 , that the role of the
coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. The main change proposed by
the Working Party was to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest
after an inquiry has been completed. If this had been in place at the tim e of the
Hillsborough Disaster, it would have spared the families of those w ho died
unnecessary distress when the Taylor Inquiry had covered substantially the same
ground as the Inquest.
For the families of those who died at Hillsborough the grief will never end, and I
recognise that it will be difficult and painful for them to accept m y decision. The
original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in identifying the
main causes of the disaster, and I hope that the families will accept that Lord
Justice Stuart-Sm ith's scrutiny was equally rigorous.

I share your disappointment that it was not possible to arrange a further meeting
in Merseyside w ith the families, although I understand the problems involved. I
am, as you know , ready to talk to the families further to explain m y approach. I
met a delegation whilst in Southport on 7 March and I will arrange another
meeting in Merseyside. The House of Commons will also have the opportunity to
discuss Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny in an adjournment debate on 8 May.




                                  JACK STR A W
                                               QUEEN A N N E ’ S GATE L O N D O N S W1 H 9 AT



                                                                      fi >M«f 1998
Mrs Rose Robinson




                             lA .


Thank you for your letter of 3 March about Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith's scrutiny
of the Hillsborough disaster.

I recognise that my decision not to reopen the inquiry is a bitter disappointment
to the families of those who died. I am satisfied, though, that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has conducted a thorough scrutiny of the evidence and considered
its significance carefully. He has considered all the material allegations about
missing or concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference with
witnesses and witness statements and concerns about the use of the 3 .1 5 pm
cut-off time at the Inquest. His report is comprehensive and sets out clearly the
reasons for his conclusions.

You asked whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, Dr Stefan Popper and M r
Duckenfield were freemasons. That is entirely a matter for them to disclose. As
you may know, I recently announced the Government's response to the Home
Affairs Select Committee report, "Freemasonry in the Police and the Judiciary". I
announced that all new appointments to the judiciary, the police, the legally
qualified staff of the Crown Prosecution Service, probation and prison services
will have to declare their membership of the Freemasons as a condition of their
service. Any later admission to the Freemasons after taking up post will also be
declarable. In addition, I have now w ritten to the United Grand Lodge, requesting
their members who are already working in these professions to join a voluntary
register. Failure on the part of those already within these professions to return
information would not, at this stage, be a breach of conditions of em ploym ent,
and nil returns would be shown as such on the register.

You referred to the verdict of accidental death reached at the inquest. Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith says that he does not consider the inquest to have been
flawed and he supports the Divisional' Court's conclusion th a t there w as no
evidence of bias. He found no basis for the Attorney-General to apply to the
High Court to quash the inquest verdict or to hold a new inquest.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it clear that he entirely accepts Lord Justice
Taylor's conclusion that the principal cause of the disaster was the failure of
police control. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith himself condemned w h at he described
as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's "disgraceful lies" that fans had opened
Gate C.

I do share the sentiments expressed by the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in Chapter
7 of his Report when he says:

"/ understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary
proceedings, or even to the extent o f losing their job".

There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which I
intend to address. In January the Home Affairs Select Com mittee recently made
some important recommendations about the police complaints and discipline
procedures. I have recently announced my response to the HAC
recommendations including my intention to reduce the standard of proof to the
civil standard in discipline procedures and to remove the existing double jeopardy
provision which restricts criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. I
have also endorsed the Com mittee's recommendation that forces should show
greater com m itm ent to their powers to verify claims of sickness and disability
and, where appropriate, to postpone a request to retire on ill health grounds until
the completion of disciplinary proceedings.

I also support Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's endorsement of the findings of a
Home Office Working Party, published in March 1 9 9 7 , that the role of the
coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. The main change proposed by
the Working Party was to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest
after an inquiry has been completed. If this had been in place at the tim e of the
Hillsborough Disaster, it would have spared the families of those who died
unnecessary distress when the Taylor Inquiry had covered substantially the same
ground as the Inquest.

For the families of those who died at Hillsborough the grief will never end, and I
recognise that it will be difficult and painful for them to accept my decision. The
original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in identifying the
main causes of the disaster, and I hope that the families will accept th a t Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny was equally rigorous. I am, as you know , ready
to talk to the families further to explain my approach. I met a delegation whilst
in Southport on 7 March and I am in touch with the Family Support Group to
arrange another meeting in Merseyside. The House of Commons will also have
an opportunity to discuss Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny in an adjournment
debate on 8 M ay.


                            \A A a




                                 JACK STRAW
to talk to the families further to explain my approach. I met a delegation whilst
in Southport on 7 March and I am in touch w ith the Family Support Group to
arrange another meeting in Merseyside. The House of Commons will also have
an opportunity to discuss Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny in an adjournment
debate on 8 M ay.



                            \A A a




                                     JACK STRAW
