                               cc: Mr Turney
                         -         Mr Watts
                          ■*       Mrs Tuck
                                    Mr Greenwood
                                    Mr Simpson
                                    Dr Peace
                                    Dr Turnball
                                    Mr Smith v-—
                                    Mr Archer
                                    Mr Moss

Mr Bolton
FIRE RESEARCH STRATEGY AND PROGRAMME 1990/91
I am sorry to have left   it until the lastminute to reply to your
note to Mr Watts of 2 June about research.
My main purpose is to put up a marker in anticipation of any
recommendations on research into crowd safety at sports grounds
which might come from the Hillsborough Inquiry.
I do not know what the Inquiry might recommend by way of
research, nor do I know if any such recommendation will appear_in
an Interim Report (expected towards the end of next month) or in
a Final Report which is likely to be somemonths away.    Ministers
are, I think, likely to want action to be taken quickly if such
recommendations are accepted. Is it possible, therefore, to
allow some contingency within the research programme to do this?

FEPD's responsibilities for sports ground safety is not, of
course, totally on all fours with "fire" research. I am not
therefore sure if the fire research programme can properly
undertake research into sports ground safety which may not be
directly fire-related. The Inquiry might well press for research
into, say, policing of large crowds which might be more an area
for RPU than SRDB.
The other reason for this note is to raise the possibilities of
research into the use of Public Address Systems. This idea
originated from the Technical Working Group (TWG) o f _the
Popplewell Inquiry which recommended that consideration be given
to producing "standard guidance covering the use of public
address systems for emergency purposes". The TWG meant research
 (in the context of fire) into such matters as the best way to
attract attention and put across messages so as to achieve the
required response ie human behaviour rather than technipal
specification, although the latter may be relevant. Tajking this
research onto the existing human behaviour research was thought
not to be a good idea.
On checking our papers I find that earlier correspondence with
SRDB on the prospects of such research appears to have ended
nearly 2 years ago on the promise of a data-base search for any
existing research work. I shall contact SRDB to resurrect this
and perhaps for a clearer idea of the potential value of such
research, tentatively estimated at between £20,000 and £30,000
over a 6 to 18 month period. Meantime, perhaps I can make a
provisional bid to be given at least a medium priority in view of
the time factor and current sensitivity about crowd safety
generally at sports grounds.




                                   D J Mould
                                   G1 Division



   June 1989



FEP/89 17 35 1


j36




                                                                    i
