                                I/W
80-5.BM

                                  cc Mr Boys Smith
                                     Mr Bolton       G2
                                     Mrs Cato        F5 (para 9/10)
                                     Mr Cogbill      C4 (para 8)
                                     Mr Rhodes       F8 (para 8)
                                     Ms Jago         F8


Mr Goddard



POLICING FOOTBALL : DIVISION 2 CONFERENCE 1989/90



I attended on Monday 14 May the first day of a two day end of
se^eon conference for those involved in policing Division 2
marches in the Football League.   As well as providing useful
operational contact,   I was made very welcome and delegates
generally appreciated that someone from the Home Office had been
interested enough to attend.


Problem Clubs


2.   I was surprised at the extent to which the one real problem
club in Division 2 (Leeds) dominated the police discussion even
without Supt Les Burns' vivid account of policing Bournemouth over
the Bank Holiday weekend.


3.   My thoughts, strengthened in discussion with Malcolm George,
Jim Brownlow (now consultant to the FA) and Adrian Appleby was
that a more conscious,   targeted offensive would be worthwhile
against such hooligan groups,   jointly by the football authorities
and the police.   To some extent Bournemouth may have been Leeds
un-doing in that scrupulous police investigation of the key
hooligans will now follow, but my impression was that Leeds
hooligans had been able to make the running for too long as the
acknowledged hooligan leaders in Division 2 without bringing down
a sufficient counter attack.    Jim Brownlow acknowledged that the
football authorities had written twice to Leeds during the season
but only in relation to incidents at their home ground and not in
relation to problems elsewhere.


Stewardinq


4.     The police seem cautions to the point of hostility about a
move towards less policing and more starting at grounds.      Their
fear centres on the poor quality of stewards at present,
scepticism that standards will improve, and cynicism that more
stewards mean a greater chance of disaster for which the police
will catch the blame.


5.     I quickly made the points to the conference that Taylor had
recommended clear standards for stewards - it was not a question
si^^Ly of paying good money to existing inadequate volunteers
(indeed, nor was it about expecting inadequate club managements to
recruit and organize this type of skilled workforce).      I recounted
my experience of seeing the excellent, professional stewarding by
Rocksteady Ltd at Hamden and Ibrox in Glasgow.      I cannot pretend
to have dispelled much doubt : the police will need a lot of
convincing.


CCTV


6.     Standards and procurement of CCTV (fixed and portable video,
to be more accurate) is inextricably linked with Football Trust
(FT) funding.    The   'CCTV1 working party of ACPO which has been
considering all this post-Taylor has now reached the point of
negotiating its proposals past two tiers of FT committees.      The
report advises on assessment of grounds for cameras,     lighting etc;
identifying priorities; decision making (under the auspices of the
Taylor-recommended 'advisory group'    for the club); and procurement
and supplier relations.     Once through the FT, to approve funding
arrangements,   the report will circulated to all clubs and forces.


7.     NFIU made a worthwhile input encouraging better use of video
tape analysis and how good evidence of crime can come to light -
they played a tape from the 1989 FA Cup Final at Wembley where
they had identified to the Met that an apparently minor incident
of jostling was a serious attempt at robbery against a lone woman
by a large group of men.


Tavlor Offences


8.   The conference heard a report on the emerging views of ACPO
on the proposed new offences recommended by Sir Peter Taylor.        The
consultation process is not yet complete.     The views so far tend
to indicate:


           Throwing missiles    ACPO are in favour.   They suggest the
           definition would have to be wide enough to encompass
 _         other forms of projecting objects than simple throwing,
           eg catapults or discharging (rocket) fireworks.


           Chanting abuse   ACPO see attractions whilst recognizing
           the potential difficulties in proving the offence.


           Pitch invasion   ACPO are attracted to this, too.    Whilst
           there may be some (though not complete) overlap with
           existing public order offences, ACPO see one benefit of
           a very specific football ground offence as streamlining
           arrest procedures:   it could reduce the time needed to
           establish the case for charging an alleged offender,
           freeing the arresting officer more quickly to return to
           the action.   This is an important consideration.


           Touting   Not mentioned.


Training


9.   An ACPO working party has been set up chaired by
Nottinghamshire (under the ACPO training committee) to examine
police training for football.     Pilot courses for match commanders
are being run by Kent (2 days) and GMP (5 days).      A variety of
pre-reading,   theory, classroom exercises, practical (ie involving
a visit to match) and post-course follow-up are being considered.
The final, standardised course may be 3 or 4 days.


10.   The working party is also examining training for all police
officers policing matches - a training package for distribution by
the Forward Planning Unit,      including videos,    is being assembled;
and for stewards.


Other practical issues


11.   I am glad to report that good opportunity was taken of the
experience of delegates,     in presentations and discussions,        to
focus on suggested best practice.        Ch Supt Mike Halford of
N o ^ i n g h a m s h i r e delivered a hard-hitting piece on taking a firm
ld^re on locking out ticketless fans at all-ticket features and not
delaying kick-offs when convenience for stragglers rather than
genuine safety was at issue.       Ch Supt David Clarkson, West
Yorkshire gave a presentation the second day (after I had left) on
the multi-agency approach; he raised this at last year's
Division 2 conference and the concept is close to Taylor's
recommendations on broad based advisory groups.           NFIU and GMP gave
useful presentations on intelligence and hooliganism trends.




                                        E J. SMITH


                                         F J SMITH
17 May 1990                              F8 Division
