                                          Hw' ^5

                        With the Compliments            ^
                                  of
                  Sir Richard Barratt CBE QPM
                 H M Chief Inspector o f Constabulary




Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT

Telephone 01 273 3084
   ’89-09-08 12=15 HMIC C REGION 0905 359927                 HMIC C REGION          P. 2/3


From; C J DEAR QPM DL LLB                                      WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
      CHIEF CONSTABLE                                          HEADQUARTERS
                                                               PO Box 52 1Lloyd House
                                                               Colmore Circus Queeosway
                                                               Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                               Telephone: 021-216 9000




       P Wright Esq CBE 0 St J CBIM                            GJD/AMS
       Chief Constable
       South Yorkshire Police
       Police Headquarters
       Snig Hill
       Sheffield
       S3 SLY                                                  7 September 1989

                                                   Ct ■                o»V.
       PERSONAL

                                               (                       H MMC
                                                             fJcarzlc^jk hiA
                                                   H*-\CAC




       I spoke to Peter Hayes today concerning your letter to me of 6 September
       1989. I hope that he will have the chance to discuss our conversation
       with you as soon as possible, in which case I feel sure that he will be
       able to put your mind at rest on the doubts that you raised.
       The all important factor to emphasise is contained in the third line of
       Mervyn Jones penultimate paragraph, when he wrote to Stuart Anderson on
       my behalf on 5 September 1989* He said "nothing is being lost at this
       time in impetus” and that remains the case.
       You will know that I have been issued with a directive by my Police
       Authority (reinforced as recently as this morning) not to engage in "new
       work" - however that might be defined. I am unwilling to bring into play
       my statutory powers and for reasons that may be obvious to'you would
       wish to be seen to comply with this directive,
       At the moment there is no problem. The work that we are doing is vital
       to the criminal inquiry as essential preparatory work, but is
       coincidentally also essential to the.inquiry for HM Coroner. There is
       thus, de facto, a duality which allows me to operate without loss of
       momentum whilst still satisfying points made by my Authority. They,
       incidentally, are about to put more pressure on the Home Office from
       their end to seek a resolution of the financial problems that exist. \
       I thought that, after our telephone conversation on 4 September, you
       were in agreement with the Regulation 7 Notices for discipline purposes
       being served by Kenneth Cooper, since he is still appointed as
       Investigating Officer. Immediately after we spoke, I telephoned Captain
       Taylor at the Police Complaints Authority and he was in full agreement
                                                                              cont M 4«
'89-09-08 1£■' 15 HMIC C REGION 0905 359927            HMIC C REGION
m


                                              2 **•
    with this course of action, We appreciate that there are      legal
    requirements concerning speed of service and these would best be
    discharged by the Notices being served by Kenneth Cooper, We both
    recognised'that any disciplinary inquiry would, thereafter, have to be
    left in abeyance until after the criminal matters had been resolved.
    By that device, therefore, the requirements of the Discipline
    Regulations could be discharged without delay and my position with my
    Police Authority would not be compromised. It is, I suggest, a neat
    solution in all the circumstances.

    One of the over-riding considerations must be the necessity to be fair
    and even-handed with your officers in both disciplinary and criminal
    inquiry matters. I know that you have this already at the forefront of
    your mind. I am absolutely satisfied that their position is not being
    prejudiced at the present time, neither do I envisage that occurring in
    the future. On the contrary, I would not allow such a situation to
    develop

    Of course, I would be pleased to discuss any of the details on the
    telephone, if you wi3h. I shall be at the office or on the car
    telephone all next week.
