                                                                                  <s
NOTE OF MEETING HELD ON 7 SEPTEMBER 1989

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT ON HILLSBOROUGH

Present:                  Home Secretary
                          Mr Whalley                                                                        ^
                          Mr   Bolton
                          Mr   Goddard                                                 fij I         /
                          Mr   Mower                                    v                       oJU -xsl.
                          Mr   Lidington                                                       Te*

                          ? se»
                          Miss     • *
                               Bannister                            ^                                       .3
                                                                                                             , /» /
   .    :     .   . . .    _        .                      ......




      The meeting had been called to discuss compliance with the Taylor
interim report, following reports in the press that the Government, clubs and
authorities had failed to respond publicly to the interim recommendations.
The meeting had before it Mr Bolton's submission of 21 August, my note of 30
August and Mr Bolton's two submissions of 1 September about the letter from
Mr Roy Edey and the Hillsborough interim report.

2.    The Home Secretary said that he had felt vulnerable at the start of the
football season because of the reports in the press, letters in "The Times"
from Mr Edey and Mr Grayson, and anecdotes that the clubs were not able or
willing to complete all the interim recommen,dations in time. He thought that
the Government remained vulnerable to severe criticism if something went
wrong.   He was grateful for Mr Bolton's submission of 1 September on the
compliance with the interim recommendations, which suggested that there was
a willingness but practical difficulties-had prevented compliance in all
cases. He asked Mr Bolton how the information had .been obtained.

3.     Mr Bolton explained that information was obtained essentially in three
ways

             (i)          on compliance with recommendations to the fire
                          service, direct from the fire service;

            (ii):< *tsri^econmiendatioris ^ncerningft3ie polac^ilHMC^
                ;|pjw^BBd.*ACPO to, do^ a survey^ and-^hey ^had jrej>orted

                                  *                  •                  . . . .


       (iii)              information had been gleaned by a large number of
                          telephone enquiries.

This allowed officials to build np                                            ,
as far as the police and fire services were concerned, but therewas no means
of checking which local authorities had complied to the letter. This was
because there was no^supervision of local authorities' compliance ' **Xt was
expected that Lord Justice Taylor would deal with this point in his final
report.   If the Home Secretary had to answer to Parliament for compliance
with the recommendations, he would have to base his answer on the information
in Mr Bolton's submission.
WRITTEN AGREEMENTS

4.    The Home Secretary said he understood that there was some reluctance to
draft agreements because of legal worries. Officials had been sent a copy of
a draft agreement between the South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club by the Chief Constable's legal advisers for guidance.        It
seemed sensible, but the Chief Constable had been warned that he migK^-be
personally liable for any infringements.       Officials awaited Home Office
lawyers' advice, but the intention of the Taylor recommendation had been that
the agreement should be operationally clear and not legally binding.      The
Home Secretary asked whether it was for the police or for the football clubs
to take the initiative on drawing up these agreements. Mr Goddard said that
he was seeing Mriftnderton later and would .say?that the ;Home Secretary was
anxious for the police to make sure that such agreements were drawn up
properlyi^-IThe Home? Secretary was;grateful-K:r ^ ‘ ■’       '            =t ■

OPEN GATES

5.    The Home Secretary noted that there were physical difficulties at some
grounds in gpmplying with the recommendation, for instance^Millwall.     The
clubs*£wouIcf if necessary have to argue their case.

CUTTING EQUIPMENT                                      ■

6.   It was noted that this problem was being resolved.

TERRACE CAPACITY

7.     It was noted that the Green Guide formula itself was                    fairly
conservative, ^ d ^ e                       recommended a^further safety margin on
top,-.of this; of 1 5 % This was causing difficulties, especially outside
grounds.,.. ^However-,. of ..the 11 games, delayed in the first week .of.-the ieasoa,
10 had been identified by,-officials as_almost.call;-mid-week games -where there
was more difficulty in starting matches on time anyway. “        There did not seem
to be any particular problems except that the' police were being
understandably cautious ^^st-Taylor. Mr BdltmHsaid t J ^ ^ e terraces might
look empty to supporters because people tended to bunch up towards the front
and this would encourage people to try and get in. Mr Whalley said that Lord
Justice Taylor hims€J.f ;&ad experienced tlm &reen Guide ^recommended figure of
54 and found it tight.          At Hillsborough ;the figure had mot-Ibeen properly
imposed and those controlling the crowd had not taken into account all the
relevant factors. He was very concerned about the situation. Mr Lidington
said that Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation on this point was very
specific and the Government would rightly face strong criticism if it became
known that it had been ignored. Some action should be taken against local
authorities who were not imposing the recommendation.            The Home Secretary
agreed, and said that officials should w r i t e t o loc^l authorities who had
decided not to insist on the 15% reduction and^tolS tneoackground to Lord
Justice Taylor's recommendation. Mr Mower said that if any local authority
still refused there would be a case for the Home Secretary to make this
known             t    '
RECOMMENDATIONS 19, 26 AND 42

8.    It was thought that problems in relations to these recommendations
could be solved.

PUBLICITY

9.    The Home Secretary turned to the letters in "The Times" from Mr Edey
and Mr Grayson. He said that in general when serious accusations were made
he thought that they needed to be answered. He recognised that the moment
had passed for a letter to "The Times", although clearly Mr Edey needed a
reply to his letter to the Home Secretary. He thought there might be a case
for a Written Answer when Parliament resumed to give an account of what the
Government was doing and why the accusations made were incorrect. However,
he did not want to leave the matter unanswered publicly until the spillover
began. After further discussion, the Home Secretary decided that he would
like to write a letter to an interested MP in the form of a response to a
query about what was being done to implement the interim recommendations.
This letter would be given to the press. He asked Mr Yeo if he would see
whether Mr Carlisle MP would be content to receive such a letter. Officials
should then submit a suitable draft to be sent          -Sd5Cv-i'c x o
             (NOTE: Mr Yeo has confirmed that Mr Carlisle would be content .to
receive such a letter and would be grateful to be informed before the letter
was given to the press. I should be grateful if Mr Bolton could provide a
 suitable draft ichj (5

9.   As to Mr Edey's letter, it was noted that he was a persistent
correspondent with the Hillsborough enquiry and his interest stemmed from the
deaths of the Hicks girls.     The Home Secretary said that Mr Edey should
receive a Private Secretary reply to his letter. No doubt he would seek to
publicise the reply and he requested that Legal Advisers should check the
letter before it was sent. (I should be grateful if Mr Bolton could let me
know of any amendments;, and when the letter can be sent) .




 Private Office                       MISS C J BANNISTER
 12 September 1989                    Private Secretary
                                 4
/
/
    c.c.   Ms Adams
           Ms Craig
           Ms Rex
           Mr Yates
           Mr Chi 1cot
           Mr Moriarty
           Mr Turney
           Mr Boys Smith
           HMCIC
           HMCIFS O vc^oU cotN
           Mr^£®ad«rd
           Mr Whalley
           Mr Mower
           Mr Haslam
           Mr Mould
           Mr Lidington
           Mr Yeo
4 SEP W*9
                                                       CE^/s,

12-9.AH


Mr Goddard


DELAYED KICK-OFFS

In preparation for your meeting with the Home Secretary this
morning Ms Jago asked me to provide briefing on the recent spate
of delayed kick-offeat football matches.


2.   In the first 12 days of the 1989/90 Football League season
(19-30 August) the start of 11 First and Second Division games is
reported to have been delayed by crowd problems. This is of some
concern, since such delays had previously occurred only rarely.
It is not clear whether this is a trend which will continue:
there were no First Division fixtures last Saturday (2 September)
but, encouragingly, no Second Division games were delayed.


3.   I have identified 10 of the 11 games concerned and have made
enquiries of the police. Attached is a summary of the
information obtained. As you see, none of the delays is
attributable to actual crowd violence. Rather, most have
resulted from the presence of large numbers of supporters outside
turnstiles shortly before the scheduled kick-off time. The
causes of this have varied but the effect has been the securing
of a delayed kick-off by the police match-day commander.
Recommendation 29 of the Taylor interim report was that this
officer have discretion to postpone kick-off in the light of
crowd safety considerations, and police commanders have tended to
exercise this option when a potentially-similar situation to
Hillsborough has arisen. Previously, securing a delayed kick-off
had been more problematical, usually requiring the agreement of
club and match officials. Crowd capacity was not reached in any
of the 10 crowds, but pressure at one or more points is the
crucial factor.


4.   It is significant that 7 of the games were midweek evening
fixtures and that 8 were the first League games at those grounds
this season. First, spectators tend to arrive later at evening
games than on a Saturday afternoon when most are enjoying a free
day of relaxation. Also, the first major games at grounds since
the publication of the Taylor report were something of a test for
clubs, police and spectators alike. It is quite encouraging that
all parties appear to be drawing lessons in this "learning
process": Second home League games, often with a similar sized
crowd, have begun on time. It is essential that the habits of
British football spectators change and that they begin to arrive
earlier at the turnstiles. This is particularly important at
midweek games: most kick-off at 7.30 pm and the long-established
tendeaniSg to arrive in the last 30 minutes makes it unnecessary
to open turnstiles much before 6.30 pm.   [At Saturday games
turnstiles usually open 1| - 2 hours before the 3 pm kick-off].
   »


5.   One particular worry is that, with post-Taylor reduced
terrace capacities, unless clubs with a relatively small ground
capacity impose a ticket requirement on clubs expected to bring a
large away following, police will continue to be required to
disperse and return the excess who travel.



                                       c .O .iA ^ U ^
                                        C D HOWELLS




7 September 1989
Saturday 19 August -   Wimbledon v Chelsea
                       First home League game of 89/90 season
                       No ticket requirement
                       Crowd:    14,625
                       Capacity: 19,000
                       Delayed:    15 minutes
                       Reason: The large number of visiting
                       supporters (6,000 +) exceeded the
                       capacity of the areas allocated to them
                       by 6/700 ; the police decided to delay
                       the game until this surplus had been
                       dispersed from the vicinity of the
                       ground.


                       Stoke City v West Ham United
                       First home League game of 89/90 season
                       All-ticket for visiting supporters only
                       Crowd:   16,058
                       Capacity:’ 29,000
                       Delay:    15 minutes
                       Reason: Despite pre-match publicity over
                       700 ticketless visiting supporters
                       travelled, posing a public order threat.
                       Also, many home supporters arrived in
                       the 30 minutes prior to the scheduled
                       kick-off. At 2.50 pm police decided to
                       delay kick-off to allow fans (including
                       visitors) to obtain paid admission.

Tuesday 22 August -    Crystal Place v Manchester United
                       First home League game of 89/90 season
                       All-ticket match
                       Crowd:   22,423
                       Capacity: 32,000
                       Delay:     15 minutes
                       Reason:    Home club unprepared eg
                       turnstiles locked, spectators wrongly
                       directed, tickets sold incorrectly,
                       confusion about whether game was all-
                        ticket.

                        Chelsea v Queens Park Rancrers
                        First home League game of 89/90 season
                        No ticket requirement
                        Crowd:    24,354
                        Capacity: 38,000
                        Delay:    15 minutes
                        Reason: Large number of visiting
                        supporters arrived at turnstiles close
                        to scheduled kick-off   time.


                        Millwall v Charlton Athletic
                        First home League game of 89/90 season
                        No ticket requirement
                        Crowd:    14,806
                        Capacity: 20,000
                        Delay:    20 minutes
                        Reason: flome club unprepared - some
                        turnstiles for home supporters had to be
                        closed temporarily because operators ran
                        out of change^while opening of
                        turnstiles for visiting supporters
                        delayed by search for keys.


Wednesday 23 August -   Norwich City v Nottingham Forest
                        First home League game of 89/90 season
                        No ticket requirement
                        Crowd:   18,267
                        Capacity: 24,092
                        Delay:   25 minutes
                        Reason: Large number of home supporters
                        arrived at turnstilesclose to scheduled
                         kick-off time. Aggravated by queuing to
                         purchase membership scheme cards and re­
                         direction of supporters unaware of
                         alterations to appropriate entrances.
Aston Villa v Liverpool
First home League game of 89/90 season
No ticket requirement
Crowd:    35,796
Capacity: 42,778
Delayed: 15 minutes
Reason: Pre-match briefing of police
officers and club stewards about their
duties and responsibilities following
the Taylor report delayed the opening o£
turnstiles until 6.20 pm, 20 minutes
later than normal.  [The West Midlands
police do not want thisfact to be
publicly* . The resultingvery large
numbers attempting to enter the ground
in <x shorter period led to the police
decision at 7.20 pm.


Leeds United v Middlesboroucrh
First home League game of 89/90 season
All-ticket    for visiting supporters only
Crowd:       25,004
Capacity:    31,004
Delay:       30 minutes
Reason: In order that police could move
away from the ground some 3,000 locked-
out home supporters [who were not
members of the extensive and growing
schemes and did not possess seat
tickets] and allow entry of around 1,000
late-arriving visiting supporters.

Derby Countv v Manchester Unit-.gH
Second home League game of 89/90 season
No ticket requirement
[Normally police advise, and obtain, an
all-ticket requirement for attractive
games against clubswith a large away
following (such as Man Utd), But not
feasible on the occasion as club only
made aware of ground capacity 3 days
before fixture].
Crowd:     Approx 22,000
Capacity: Approx 26,000
Delay:     25 minutes
Reason: Crowd problems inside ground
caujted by infiltration of home terracing
by over 700 visiting supporters, whose
terracing had reached capacity an hour
before the scheduled kick-off time.
Relocation of this large number resulted
in the delay.

Sheffield Wednesday v Everton
Second home League game of 89/90 season.
All-ticket match
Crowd:    19,657
Capacity:. 44,404 [including 2,980 in
still-closed Leppings Lane end
terracing].
Delay:   15 minutes
Reason: Large number of spectators
arrived at turnstiles close to
scheduled kick-off time. This was
mainly the result of traffic
difficulties on the motorway, aggravated
by bad weather.
■8 s pP 1389

2 o
