                  (LaJdf
                                      — <C££L         \^               f td l (**4—

                         )                        2^
                                                  .
                                                                        < *°

                                                       /~£s-~f~tovjLg li o *
                                                                               indfcSbl

                                           H f t L n ^ . fitft n.6 QiL)
From    A H Turney (2798)                  cc.   Ms    Nicholson
        Fire & Emergency                         Ms    Craig
        Planning Department                      Ms    Rex
                                                 Mr    Yates
        9 June 1989                              Mr    Moriarty
                                                 Mr    Chilcot
                                                 Mr    Hammond
                                                 Mr    Boys-Smith
                                                 Mr    Mower


                                     1C,         Mr    Osborne
                                                 M^    Goddard
                                                 Mr    Watts
                                                 Mr    Bampton
                                                 Mr    Stickley
                                                 Mr    Lidington
                                                 Mr    Godrey


Miss Bannister




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY : HOME OFFICE EVIDENCE

Introduction

This note seeks the Home Secretary's agreement to the attached
draft Home Office evidence for submission to the Hillsborough
Inquiry. The Inquiry have asked for this by 12 June.
Content

2.     The draft evidence is in 5 parts:

       Part I covers the history and development of the Safety of
       Sports Grounds Act 1975 (1975 Act);

       Part II deals with the operation of the 1975 Act as amended
       by Part II of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
       Act 1987 (1987 Act);


       Part III summarises the operation of Part III of the 1987
       Act - which supplements the 1975 Act by introducing a system
       of safety certification for covered stands at sports grounds
       not designated under the 1975 Act;
    Part IV deals with the origin, status and development of the
    Home Office/Scottish Office Guide to Safety at Sports
    Grounds (the Green Guide).
     Part V deals with policing, crowd control, hooliganism at
     football matches and associated law and order issues.

The Safety Legislation: Parts I - IV
3.   These sections give a factual account of the origin and
operation of the 1975 and 1987 Acts and the Green Guide.
Paragraph 45 refers to the constraints upon the Home Office
providing advice on specific safety issues at particular
grounds.
4.   The changes to the 1975 Act brought about by the 1987 Act
with effect from 1st January 1988 are summarised in paragraph 20
highlighting specific recommendations of the Popplewell Inquiry.

5.   Part III is relatively short because the provisions for the
system of safety certification for stands able to accommodate at
least 500 spectators under cover are similar to those for grounds
designated under the 1975 Act. This part of the 1987 Act came
into force on 1st January 1989.
6.   Paragraphs 67-70 draw attention to the more recent
developments of the Green Guide and, given the nature of the
Hillsborough accident, makes special mention of pitch perimeter
fences and cruch barriers. We have not thought it right or
necessary to cover the content of the Guide in detail although
references to it are made in Part V.
Crowd Control and Policing:   Part V

7.   This part    describes the incidence of hooliganism; the
criminal law, with reference to football disorder; the role of
the courts and the police; the question of who is in charge at
football matches; the control of admission to grounds; and some
references to matches overseas.

8.   Most of this is straightforward factual material but the
Home Secretary may wish to focus particularly on three areas:
     (i) responsibility for crowd control (paragraphs 105 -
     109), because this area may well be particularly relevant to
     the Inquiry;

     (ii) controls on admission (paragraphs 110 - 120), because
     of our point of difference with the police over their
     preference (and our scepticism of the need) for a new
     criminal offence of ticket touting. We do not think, as
     does ACPO, that a new offence would have any significant
     impact on aggresive and drunken pressure by ticketless fans
    quite deliberately intended to force the club or police to
    admit them.
    (iii)  restriction orders (paragraphs 121 - 126), if the
    Home Secretary does not wish to have a brief explanation of
    Part II of the Football Spectators Bill the whole section
    can come out.

Consultation
9.   Scottish Office, Dept of Environment, Welsh Office, Health
and Safety Commission have been consulted on the contents of
Parts I to IV of the draft evidence. ACPO have had sight of an
earlier draft of Part V; we will consult further with them and
may in consequence have one or two amendments to the draft
attached.

Conclusion
10. The Home Secretary is asked to agree that I submit evidence
as the attached draft (subject to possible small amendments to
Part V (paragraph 9 above) on which, if necessary, I will submit
again).




                                   A H TURNEY
