INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon L ordjustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370

Mr A Littlewood
Managing Director
Sheffield Sports Stadium
The Stadium
Owlerton
SHEFFIELD
S6 2DE                                     Date
                                             29 November 1989




Dear Mr Littlewood

Thank you for your letter of 21 November about the difficulties
you are currently encountering with Sheffield City Council over
the issuing of a Safety Certificate for your stadium. As I
explained when we spoke, although the recommendations contained
in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report are aimed primarily at
football league grounds, advice issued by the Home Office to
local authorities indicated that their application should also be
considered in relation to other designated sports grounds. That
seems to be the position here.

It is not, I am afraid, for the Inquiry, nor indeed for the Home
office, to direct the way in which a local authority carries out
its responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975,
but we would clearly hope that the application of recommendations
would be done sensibly so as to meet the safety needs of the
particular ground in question. Lord Justice Taylor is and has
been, particularly conscious of the burdens his interim
recommendations might impose on smaller clubs and non-football
grounds, but he saw little scope in those recommendations for
exceptions and modifications between different classes of ground.

I realise that all of this may not be particularly helpful, but I
hope that it is nonetheless of some assistance. I am copying
this letter to David Mould in the Home Office, to whom I
understand you have already spoken.

                                       Yours sincerely




                                       JONATHAN C SWEET
                                       Hillsborough Inquiry
DRAFT




Mr A Littlewood
Managing Director
Sheffield Sports Stadium
The Stadium
Owlerton
SHEFFIELD
S6 2DE
                                              November 1989




Thank you for your letter of 21 November about the difficulties
you are currently encountering with Sheffield City Council over
the issuing of a Safety Certificate for your stadium.     As I
explained when we spoke, although the recommendations contained
in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report are aimed primarily at
football league grounds, advice issued by the Home Office to
local authorities indicated that their application should also be
considered in relation to other designated sports grounds.       That
seems to be the position here.


It is not, I am afraid, for the Inquiry, nor indeed for the Home
office, to direct the way in which a local authority carries out
its responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975,
but we would clearly hope that the application of recommendations
would be done sensibly so as to meet the safety needs of the
particular ground in question.   Lord Justice Taylor is and has
been, particularly conscious of the burdens his interim
recommendations might impose on smaller clubs and non-football
grounds, but he saw little scope in those recommendations for
exceptions and modifications between different classes of ground.


I realise that all of this may not be particularly helpful, but I
hope that it is nonetheless of some assistance.   I am copying
this letter to David Mould in the Home Office, to whom I
understand you have already spoken.


                                       Yours sincerely




                                       JONATHAN C SWEET
                                       Hillsborough Inquiry
S heffield S pobts Stadium
                              (OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM LTD.)


                   THE STADIUM             .    OWLERTON              .   SHEFFIELD S6 2DE                                                       Tel. Sheffield
                                                                                                                                                f0742) - 343074
General Manager:   J. S. CARTER




                                                                                                          21^'t November, 1989

                   Mr. R. ^weet

                   Queen Annes Chambers,
                   28 Broadway,
                   London,
                   s.w.i.                                                   -

                   Dear Mr. Sweet,


                        Following up my telephone conversation with you I would
                   like to put on record an official "cry for help" in relation to
                   conditions being set by the Sheffield City Council,

                        Probably as a result of being the home of the Hillsbrough
                   Disaster we are being asked to comply with demands for Stewards
                   and First Aid facilities which seem surely to be intended for
                   large crowds at Football Stadia.

                        As we currently only have Greyhound Meetings with an
                   average "crowd" of only 800 we feel that these demands are
                   unreasonable and unintended by the Lord Justice Taylor
                   Interim Report.

                        We hope you will be able to offer some hope cf rational
                   thinking on this matter.


                                                                                Yours faithfully,




                                                                               A. LOTLEWOOD.
                                                                             Managine Director




                     Chairman and M anaging Director: K. S. HUNT. Directors: P. D. BRADFORD. F.C.A., T. CORDEN, J. S. CARTER, A. G. MARRIOTT.
           Registered in England No. 707406              Reg. O ffic e : THE STADIUM , PENISTONE ROAD, SHEFFIELD S6 2DE.
hs.11.2 4/owlerton.da




                                            273 3099


Mr A Littlewood
Managing Director
Sheffield Sports Stadium
(Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd)                      FEP/89 35/278/6
Penistone Road
SHEFFIELD   S6 2DE                                24 November 1989




Dear Mr Littlewood

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

Thank you for your letter of 21 November       following up our
telephone conversation.

The first point I have to stress is that the Home Office has no
role to act as mediator between a local authority, who are
responsible for enforcement of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1975 (the 1975 Act) and the ground occupier or safety certificate
holder.   Any advice which we can give has to be seen in this
context. You should bear in mind too that, as here, we do not
have detailed knowledge of the ground or stadium in question.

Under the 1975 Act requirements set by terms and conditions in
a safety certificate or the contents of any other notice issued
under the Act should be such as to secure "reasonable'' safety.
Provision is made within the 1975 Act for appeals to the courts
against requirements which are considered unreasonable. Clearly
if you feel that this is so you should consider whether an appeal
should be lodged. In so doing you may wish to consider obtaining
professional and legal advice.

You will have seen a copy of Home Office Circular 68/1989 sent
to local authorities and others with a copy of the Hillsborough
Inquiry's interim report.     The report makes clear that the
recommendations contained within it are directed at football
grounds. Our view, as expressed in the Circular, continues to
be that where the principles of the report's recommendations
apply to other sports grounds they should be implemented in a
sensible way so as to meet the safety needs of the ground in
question.   I cannot, of course, say what is necessary in order
to secure reasonable safety at Owlerton stadium. The Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds advises that the measures to secure
reasonable safety for the potential maximum number of spectators
at a large sports ground are likely to be much greater than those
required to secure the reasonable safety of relatively small
numbers of spectators, loosely packed in a way which allows
relative free movement (see paragraph 12 of the guide). On that
basis, it seems unlikely that the requirements to secure
reasonable safety for, say, the 800 spectators attending a
greyhound meeting, as mentioned in your letter, would be the same
as for tens of thousands of people attending a major sporting
event. That is not to advocate a lower standard of safety for
spectators simply because there are fewer of them, but rather a
recognition that the means to achieve that standard may be
different and, perhaps, less onerous. The consequence of such
an approach is that it is necessary to restrict the maximum
number of spectators and ensure that proper arrangements exist
to ensure that the authorised number is not exceeded.

You mentioned on the telephone that your company had       spent a
considerable amount on improvement work at Owlerton.       You may
therefore find that the local authority will take into     account
the work which has been carried out so as to reflect        in any
safety certificate their revised assessment of the          safety
capacity of the ground and various parts of it.

I hope this is of some assistance. I am copying this letter to
Sheffield City Council and to the Hillsborough Inquiry for
information.

                                         Yours sincerely




                                         D J MOULD
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)
23
