  5*s£c«fn;

                                         QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                C'C/7?5 /\)/£wcl£o/\)




   f'-'K                        /77 ~   o o - v f ^ s/7) /

        ( L e o w   I W V
    Thank you for your letter of 20 April about the provision of
first aid facilities at sports grounds.

    As Robin Ferrers explained in his letter of 21 February the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 does not empower us to issue
the sort of statutory guidelines that St John Ambulance were
seeking; but we were intending to update the Guide to Safety of
Sports Grounds and would include information on the provision of
first aid facilities.

    The system of safety certification by local authorities is
the way in which statutory requirements are brought to bear on
ground operators. The question of whether this is the best
system or whether changes need to be made are matters which the
Inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor will no doubt look at.

    I think in the circumstances it might be better not to pre­
empt the Inquiry recommendations. I know that the St John
Ambulance intend to provide evidence to the Inquiry. However, if
you are still keen to discuss this issue now, Robin Ferrers, as
the Minister of State at the Home Office responsible for dealing
with emergencies, would be very happy to see you.




Neil Thorne, Esq, OBE, TD, MP
House of Commons
-8 W   mg
i+Mrlllsi
                        F rom   T   he   P   rivate   S   ecretary
                                                                              “73
                                                                       -JF MAY 1989
                                                                         H   ome   O   ffice

                                                                       Q l’EEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                                        LONDON SWIH9AT




                                                                      4 May 1989




QtoS k         rY)


                                                                                          L~-t 0 / f \ ) c x h aft
    Thank you for your letter of 27 April enclosing one of 25
April from Sir Fergus Montgomery MP about football and the
Hillsborough tragedy.


    I enclose, as requested, a draft reply which the Prime
Minister may wish to send to Sir Fergus.


    The need to clear the text with departments responsible for
safety, policing and sporting policy has inevitably taken jus£ a
little time.




                                                            MISS C J BANNISTER




Mrs A Lakeman
Political Office
10 Downing Street
