           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 528
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, S W IH 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 4046   Fax 402 8




The Chief Executive                                            Your reference:
Nottingham Forest FC
City Ground                                                    Our reference:
Pavilion Road
West Bridgford                                                 Date:               July 1997
NOTTINGHAM




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

As I expect you know, I have been appointed by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny of
possible fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.

It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of my scrutiny is to establish whether there
is any significant new evidence which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry,
to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities. If there is significant
evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have affected the outcome of any of the
proceedings. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary by the end of the year.

If your Club knows of evidence which was not available at the Inquiry conducted by Lord
Taylor of Gosforth or at the Inquests, and which might have affected their outcome or the
decisions of the authorities in relation to prosecution or police disciplinary proceedings, I
should be grateful if you would let me have it by 1 September. It would be helpful if you
could first contact my Secretariat at the address above.

They will be happy to discuss possible arrangements with you if you wish. Please note that
the telephone and room numbers shown above are temporary - we will notify you of our
permanent address and telephone as soon as we have them.

I have sent similar letters to the chief executives of the Football Association and the Sheffield
Wednesday and Liverpool clubs. I have also written to the Hillsborough Family Support
Group, to the South Yorkshire police, and to others with an interest in the matters which I am
examining.




LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH
