                                           ^      C J




   From:   M J Addison                     cc   Miss Nicholson
           FI Division                          Mr Chilcot
           (Extn 3743)                          Mr Boys Smith
           29 September 1989                    Mr Turney
                                                Mr Nagler— '
                                                Mr Whalley
                                                Mr Bolton
                                                Mr Mower
                                                Mr Lidington
                                                Mr R Smith (PRB)


^ ^ Mr Walters

   HILLSBOROUGH : COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

   You asked for advice on the letter of 20 September from Mr Dave
  ’Nellist MP about funding the costs of the investigation by the West
   Midlands police into the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

   2.   There have been protracted discussions between the Home Office
   and the West Midlands and South Yorkshire Police Authorities on the
   costs issue.   The Home Secretary will recall that it was agreed,
   following discussions at official level with the Treasury, and an
   approach from him to the Chief Secretary, that our aim should be to
   persuade South Yorkshire Police Authority to reimburse the West
   Midlands, albeit with the help of a generous special payment from
   the Government.   Both authorities needed some persuading that the
   Government should not pay all the costs direct but both now show*
   signs of coming round to our point of view.

   3.   Lord Ferrers has met representatives of both authorities and
   in June he put a proposal to South Yorkshire about how the costs
   should be met by them with substantial assistance from central
   funds by way of a special payment.     The South Yorkshire Police
   Authority put the matter to a full meeting of its members but then
   sought further clarification from us about the scope of our
   assistance.
f*t «“<a M-uUicLfcw
         <&
V, y^ibu-a^^V .
    4.   This clarification was given in two further letters to the
    Authority and we then held a meeting with representatives of both
    authorities on 14 September.   As a result I have now received a
    letter from Mr Johnston, Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police
    Authority confirming that his Authority is now prepared to accept
    the Home Office offer of special assistance and to start
    reimbursing the West Midlands.

    5.   The latest bill from West Midlands to South Yorkshire (dated
    12 September) amounts to £2 million. The first £1.3 million will
    qualify for police grant at 51% and we can pay this now. We can
    also pay 51% on the next £0.7 million; but this will also qualify
    for additional special grant at 39%.     Parliamentary approval is
    needed for this, however, and this cannot be obtained until the
    recess is over. South Yorkshire have indicated they are willing to
    start paying as soon as the arrangements for 51% grant are in hand
    and to receive the special grant (of some £273,000) later.     The
    financial arrangements are being put in hand urgently by Finance
    Division 2.

    6.   I should also report that there may be a row over interest
    (which we have told the authorities would not rank for police
    grant, though they can consider an appropriate administration
    charge, on which we would pay grant). Also, South Yorkshire now
    believe that they are under-insured for the compensation they may
    end up having to pay to the victims of the tragedy or their
    relatives.   But that is probably for much later.   Neither point
    affects the reply to Mr Nellist.
I




    7.   I attach a draft reply to Mr Nellist


                                                A\ ,^ r *

                                                M J ADDISON
DRAFT LETTER


ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE


 TO                                            ENCLOSURES                      COPIES TO BE SENT TO

 Dave Nellist MP                                                                   hcc      Miss Nicholson
 House of Commons                                                                           Mr Chilcot
 London SW1A OAA                                                                            Mr Boys Smith
                                                                                            Mr Turney
                                                                                            Mr Nagler
                                                                                            Mr Whalley
                                                                                            Mr Bolton
                                                                                            Mr Mower
                                                                                            Mr Lidington

•
                                                                                            Mr Smith (PRB)


        (FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                                            (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY)
                                                                                                 Home secretary
                        LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE B Y ................... ..............................................
                                                                                       (NAME OF SIGNATORY)
              Thank you for your letter of 20 September about the costs of
              the inquiries by the West Midlands Police into the
              Hillsborough Stadium tragedy.

              When I said earlier in the year that the additional costs of
              these inquiries should not fall on the West Midlands Police
              Authority, I added that it would take a while to sort out the
              precise mechanics of how the West Midlands police should be
              reimbursed.

               Following meetings with representatives of both police
               authorities concerned - West Midlands and South Yorkshire-
               Lord Ferrers informed the South Yorkshire Police Authority in
               June that, in view of the exceptional and unforeseen
               circumstances of the Hillsborough tragedy, the Government was
               prepared to give South Yorkshire a special payment from
               central funds to assist them with the additional costs of the
               work carried out on their behalf by the West Midlands Police,




        H.O. EST. 112
S 536                                                                                                        35688 9.85 XNW
Following this offer of special assistance, the South
Yorkshire Police Authority sought clarification from us about
the scope of our assistance. This has been given and followed
by a meeting between Home Office officials and representatives
of both authorities on 14 September.

I am pleased to say that following that meeting the Clerk to
the South Yorkshire Police Authority has written confirming
that his authority is prepared to accept our offer of special
assistance, and arrangements are being made to put this in
hand speedily.     The West Midlands Police Authority can
therefore now look to South Yorkshire for reimbursement of
their additional costs in the near future.
