     IM( )! URY 1fsi'fX > T f l ! ; i !!! ! .Sp< M?< M '<.!!       T*i<r- I!) I ('><< * o ' d l u r - f >' <■ T-.^ V

     STAPH 'V i i > !S A V n ;K
                                                                     ■O l ^ i r r n A l i m : s ( .
                                                                    ! . <• >■ i. it i ' A X ’ I ! 1 '» \ 1




     Mr Roger Calvert                                          Your Ref:
'5   Secretary                                                 WRSC/12935
     The Pool Promoters
      Association
     25 Castle Street
     LIVERPOOL
     L2 4TD                                                    27 November 1989




      Dear Mr Calvert
%    I refer to your letter of 26 September to the
     Football League Ltd a copy of which has been
     passed to us by them at a recent meeting.  The
     contents of your letter have been noted by the
     Inquiry.

                                                               Yours sincerely




                                                               R M W H A LLE Y
                                                    S o rrotary          to the                    Ing\jiry
                                                                                25 Castle Street
    The Pool Promoters VvC Hjvt                                                 Liverpool L2 4TD


    Association       {\^lk  IasA^aK-
                                                                                Tel: 051-227 4181
    Secretary:                              rr   r,   p .~
    W. R. S. CALVERT, M.A.(Cantab), LL.M.        «    Ir-CUl                    Telex: 628169
    Consultant:                                                                 Fax: 051-227 2584
    M« ife-Qo WATKINS)*'B*MOantab) ■' 1
                                                           I^CfcwJw
     Our Ref : WRSC/12935                                              26th September 1989
                                                 ^syCjt
                                                      ~T



David Dent Esq,
Company Secretary,
                                                                          IM
                                                               — ^,r

•
The Football League Limited,
Lytham St. A n n e s ,
Lancs;                                                         -Dm.
FY8    1JG.                                                                                  ■i
                                                                                             989

    Dear Mr Dent,
    I understand that Malcolm Davidson of Littlewoods Pools has already
    spoken to you about certain misleading aspects of the submission made
    to the Taylor Inquiry on behalf of the Football Association and the
    Football League.

    I am writing to you, formally, to place on record those aspects which
    Members of this Association feel are incorrect and to ask that the
    corrected information be conveyed to the Inquiry.

    Firstly, in paragraph 5.25, at the bottom of page 18; the statement
    that, "There is an agreement between the Pool Promoters Association
    and the Football League by which 2/5ths of any money saved by them as
    a result of a reduction in the pool betting tax would go to the
    Football League for ground improvements.    Another 2/5ths would go to
    help other sports and the remaining l/5th would be devoted to the
    campaign to bring the 1996 Olympic Games to Britain"., makes
    statements about our fixtures Agreement with the Football League
    which are entirely wrong.   The supplemental Agreements, which were
    signed with the Football League on 14th December 1984, provides only
    that 40% of any reduction of up to 2.5% in Pool Betting Duty would go
    to the League.   The Agreement is silent as to the destiny of the
    remaining 60% of any such reduction which, as we pointed out to the
    League at the time, was really an entitlement of the winners and
    would in fact go to improve ’the winning dividends.

    Secondly, at the top of the following page, the suggestion, " .. or
    it could reduce the tax rate to 40% on the strict understanding that
    the agreement referred to above were amended to allow football to
    derive the maximum benefit from the money thus saved by the pools
    companies.", is misleading in that any such reduction would not
    result in savings by the Pools companies.   The benefit from such
    reduction would accrue to the winning clients in the form o£
    increased dividends.
Finally, part way down page 19, there is reference to royalties for
the use of football fixtures which says, "The percentage paid at the
moment is just over 2% which yields around £4,000,000 per year.     As
you know, the actual rate charged by way of royalties is just over
2.25% which yields, after deduction of VAT, well in excess of tbm.

I trust that you will be able to make urgent arrangements for the
corrected information to be relayed to the Taylor Inquiry.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,
 INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt H on Lord Justice Taylor
 STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
                                            London SW1H 9AT
                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370

Mr D B Sinclair                              Your Ref:
Chairman                                     MDBS/RAS
York City Association Football &
 Athletic Club pic
Bootham Crescent
YORK
Y03 7AR                                     Date
                                             30 October 1989




Dear Mr Sinclair

Thank you for your letter of 6 October to Lord Justice Taylor
regarding the recommendations contained in the Interim Report.
He has read with interest your observations and has asked me to
reply on his behalf.  I am sorry I have been unable to do so
before now.

Lord Justice Taylor was grateful for your constructive comments
and appreciates your concern.  He is, and has been, particularly
conscious of the burdens his recommendations might impose on
smaller clubs and of course recognises the distinctions between
the large 1st and 2nd Division and smaller 3rd and 4th Division
clubs.  Nevertheless, you will, I am sure, appreciate that by
virtue of its very nature, recommendations in the Interim Report
had to be universally applicable.

That said, it was recognised that in practice the licensing
authorities, clubs and other parties involved would undoubtedly
negotiate on how to meet the recommendations at individual
grounds and, as far as we are aware, the majority of clubs appear
to have been able to comply to the satisfaction of the relevant
licensing authority.  That view has been reinforced by the Home
Office's own assessment of the situation.

In the circumstances, Lord Justice Taylor has indicated that he
is not, at present, minded to elaborate on what was said in the
Interim Report.  Guidance to clubs was contained in a Home Office
Circular published on 4 August 1989, and the Home Office has been
happy to advise as far as possible on its implementation.  The
Inquiry s main task now is to address the wider issues facing it,
but Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to assure you that he will
continue to monitor the situation.
Finally, he has asked me to thank you for your kind invitation to
visit York City or any of the other Associate Member Clubs, and
should the occasion arise, we shall not hesitate to contact you
again.

I am copying our correspondence to David Mould in the Home Office
for information, and any observations he may have.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
             HOME OFFICE
                G2 DIVISION
      Fire and Emergency Planning Dept
     Queen Anne 5s Gate London SWiH 9AT
               T el: 01-273


               With Compliments                                     vJ
                                                 f                          I
                                             R          M                   J


             Hmj     0^       dsJU-vov--               s o 04,



                                V


          'd v^V     £|U-wC^vct<.(fXi)^           1^5

            O-a^v'iXLaj             G^dovS v~ J-® t


 O              HwO C                             ^
U H<1            K CL      gmA^5>s}                      F ire k ite .
                                                      T hink ab o u t it.


 IOS Pi \ v^i)=G>«>J?^    -v \0^                 )<
   INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
         STADIUM DISASTER




                 With the Compliments of
                the Secretary to the Inquiry

                               Ka-O         <Xo1cgj2JL

 fa                                                C   W

ty^o      cbajJft           LqJ c & s   is'



df'fojlO-           C b    uc^l     w   ^      ,




  50 Queen Anne’s Gate
  London SW1H 9AT
  01-273 3602

                                                   :2k |to-
DRAFT




Mr D B Sinclair Esq                                    Your Ref:
Chairman                                               MDBS/RAS
York City Association Football &
 Athletic Club pic
Bootham Crescent
YORK
Y03 7AR
                                                        October 1989




Thank you for    your letter of 6 October to Lord Justice          Taylor
regarding the    recommendations contained in the Interim          Report.
He has read with interest your observations and has asked me to
reply on his behalf.      I am sorry I have been unable to do so
before now.


Lord Justice Taylor was grateful for your constructive comments
and appreciates your concern.        He is, and has been, particularly
conscious of the burdens his recommendations might impose on
smaller clubs    and of course recognise^ the distinctions between
the large 1st    and 2nd Division and smaller 3rd and 4th          Division
clubs.   Nevertheless,    you will, I am sure, appreciate that by
virtue of its very nature, recommendations in the Interim Report
had to be universally applicable.


That said,    it was recognised that in practice the licensing
authorities,    clubs and other parties involved would undoubtedly
negotiate on how to meet the recommendations at individual
grounds and, as far as we are aware, the majority of clubs appear
to have been able to comply to the satisfaction of the relevant
licensing authority |withouL m ajor~~f>£-oferlcims .   That view has been
reinforced by the Home Office's own assessment of the situation.
In the circumstances, Lord Justice Taylor has indicated that he
is not, at present, minded to elaborate on what was said in the
Interim Report.   Guidance to clubs was contained in a Home Office
Circular publis                 1989, and the Home Office has been
happy to advise                ntation.   The Inquiry's main task
now is to address the wider issues facing it, but Lord Justice
Taylor has asked me to assure you that he- will continue to
monitor the situation.


Finally, he has asked me to thank you for your kind invitation to
visit York City or any of the other Associate Member Clubs, and
should the occasion arise, we shall not hesitate to contact you
ag a i n .


I am copying our correspondence to David Mould in the Home Office
for information, and any observations he may have.




                                             d riv
 INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                The Rt H on Lord Justice Taylor
 STADIUM DISASTER
                                              50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
                                              London SW1H 9AT
                                              01-273 2577/3602/2370

Mr D B Sinc^tir                                 Your Ref:
Chairman                                        MDBS/RAS
York City Association Foonball &
 Athletic Cluo pic
Bootham Crescept
YORK
Y03 7AR                                       Date
                                                30 October 1989




Dear Mr Sinclair

Thank you for youi ^letter of 6\ October to Lord Justice Taylor
regarding the recoi tendations contained in the Interim Report,
He has read with ii tfcerest your \observations and has asked me to
reply on his behalJ     I am soriny I have been unable to do so
before now.

Lord Justice Taylor was gratefuli for your constructive comments
and appreciates you concern.    He is, and has been, particularly
conscious of the bu ens his recommendations might impose on
smaller clubs and of course recognises the distinctions between
the large 1st and 2n Division arm smaller 3rd and 4th Division
clubs.  Nevertheless  you will, l\am sure, appreciate that by
virtue of its very n ture, recommendations in the Interim Report
had to be universall  applicable.

That said, it was recognised that n practice the licensing
authorities, clubs and other parti s involved would undoubtedly
negotiate on how to mqet the reco [endations at individual
grounds and, as far a we are aware   the majority of clubs appear
to have been able to   mply to the atisfaction of the relevant
licensing authority    hat view has been reinforced by the Home
Office's own assessment of the situ ition.

In the circumstances,    ord Justice T ylor has indicated that he
is not, at present, mi ijided to elabor te on what was said in the
Interim Report.  Guidai ce to clubs w s contained in a Home Office
Circular published on     August 1989, and the Home Office has been
happy to advise as far as possible on its implementation.     The
Inquiry's main task now is to address the wider issues facing it,
but Lord Justice Taylo:: has asked me :o assure you that he will
continue to monitor th situation.
Finally, he has asked me to thank you for your kind invitation to
visit York City or any of the other Associate Member Clubs, and
should the occasion arise, we shall not hesitate to contact you
again.

I am copying our correspondence to David Mould in the Home Office
for information, and any observations he may have.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
