Mr Rhodes




HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE INQUIRY INTO POLICING FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM




Thank you for your note of 24 October.

I attach the material you requested on attendance centre orders.
I hope this is suitable.  If you need anything more (or something
different), please let me know.




                                             G SUTTON
                                             29 October 1990



C1 Division




DS968
ATTENDANCE CENTRE ORDERS



Line to take


The Home Office memorandum explains why the Government believes
that the use of attendance centre orders should not be extended in
the way proposed by Lord Justice Taylor.     Attendance centres do
not merely impose restrictions on liberty.     They attempt to do
constructive work with offenders.    They are not suitable for all
offenders, especially older, hardened ones who are likely to be
deliberately disruptive.    Nor could the system cope with the
demands that the Taylor recommendations would put on it.     Many
more centres would be needed, and opening times would have to be
significantly extended to cater for mid-week and Sunday matches.
Attendance centre orders can already be used for young people
convicted of football-related offences in suitable cases.     They
are available for people under 21 convicted of imprisonable
offences.   A recent Home Office circular (number 69/1990 issued on
30 August) reminded courts of their powers to make such orders.


Background Note


Attendance centre orders are available to the courts in dealing
with offenders aged under 21 convicted of imprisonable offences.
For offenders under 17 (juniors) there are about 100 centres
covering most of the bigger towns in England and Wales.     For
offenders aged 17 to 20 (seniors) there are about 25 centres
situated in the largest centres of population.    Most centres are
run, on behalf of the Home Office, by off-duty police officers.
They usually open on alternate Saturdays, normally in the
afternoon, for 2 hours (junior centres) or 3 hours (senior
centres).   The maximum length of an order is 24 hours for juniors
and 36 hours for seniors.   Activities include physical education
and instruction in one or more constructive activities (for
example first aid or basic home maintenance skills).     The aim is
to punish the offenders by depriving them of some of their leisure
time whilst encouraging them to make better use of their time.
The Taylor report recommends extending the scope of attendance
centre orders as a means of enforcing exclusion orders made under
the Public Order Act 1986 for those convicted of football-related
offences.   It suggests removing the upper age limit (21) and
increasing the maximum length of orders from 36 to 72 hours.     For
the reasons given in the Home Office Memorandum (paragraph 4.18)
the Government has decided not to pursue the Taylor
recommendations.   However, it has reminded courts of the powers
they already have to make attendance centre orders and link them
with exclusion orders.   We do not know how many attendance centre
orders are imposed on young people convicted of football-related
offences.




DS968
