From: HRS S McDOUGALL                        cc   Mr Sanderson
      F2 DIVISION
      Room 525, QAG
      273-2621
      24 October 1994




Mrs Flashner - D Division
SIR MALCOLM THORNTON MP : ADJOURNMENT DEBATE ON THE DEATH OF
KEVIN WILLIAMS, WEDNESDAY 26 OCTOBER

The enclosed background note deals with the involvement of the
West Midlands Police in the investigation of the Hillsborough
disaster, the consideration of criminal and disciplinary
proceedings against those involved and the response of the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire to the Cook Report.
Do let me know if you need anything else.




                                        MRS S McDOUGALL
                      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
Background Information
     On 15 April 1989, 95 fans of the Liverpool football club
were crushed to death at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.
Following the disaster, the then Home Secretary commissioned Lord
Justice Taylor to undertake an inquiry.      Lord Justice Taylor
asked the West Midlands Constabulary to make investigations on
his behalf. This involved over 400 officers and obtained some
3,700 statements as well as about 70 hours of video evidence.

At the same time, police conducted inquiries to determine whether
the disaster resulted from criminal activity on the part of any
individual and whether disciplinary action needed to be taken
against any officer.

The Police Complaints Authority supervised the investigation of
allegations about the behaviour of police officers and
subsequently expressed itself satisfied that the investigation
had been properly and thoroughly conducted.



Lack of criminal and disciplinary proceedings

Following the police investigations, the Director of Public
Prosecutions concluded that the results of the investigations
into the disaster indicated that no one should face criminal
proceedings.

The Police Complaints Authority, however, decided that two
officers, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent
Murray, should answer to disciplinary charges of neglect of duty.
In the event, though, it was not possible to proceed with the
charges against either officer.

Mr Duckenfield retired from the force on ill health grounds in
November 1991 before any disciplinary charges could be heard.
This was a decision for the police authority, based on medical
advice.
The Police Complaints Authority subsequently announced that
Superintendent Murray would not be required to answer charges in
the absence of Mr Duckenfield. In explaining their decision, the
PCA indicated that it would be unfair to proceed with the charge,
which amounted to a joint allegation of neglect, in the absence
of the senior officer.



The Cook Report allegations

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire examined the allegations
in the Cook Report but concluded that there was no significant
new evidence in the programme on which to base further enquiries.

The allegations of improper conduct and the suppression of
evidence were examined by the High Court but it dismissed claims
that the original inquest was flawed.

Chief Constable's complaint to the ITC

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire complained to the
Independent Television Commission that the force had offered to
appear on the Cook Report to answer any allegations but had not
been given the opportunity to do so.

The Independent Television Commission subsequently ruled that the
programme had not been unfair, but it did note that there had
been certain inaccuracies which detracted from its authority.
