                                                                                s t a t i o n /?4.


NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:      29         29061959

OCCUPATION:       MACHINIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED:   270489



           I am a Liverpool supporter.     On Saturday 150489,   I went to Sheffield

          by car with four friends.      I got picked up at my house at approx

           0820 hrs.    It did seem rather early to start but by the time we

           rounded everyone up it was after 0930 hrs.

           The journey down was as pleasant as can be expected,      expected

          because w e ’d had quite a bit to drink on the Friday night before.

           I d i d n ’t have a ticket but had been talked into going to the match

          whilst we were drinking the night before.       Three of us felt very

           rough to say the least.

          After getting lost in Sheffield about three times, we finally parked

           about a mile from the ground up a very steep hill.

           We had a few pints and were talking to some Forest supporters.             One

           remarked that they had one spare ticket if one of their lads d i d n ’t

           turn up.    It meant going in the Forest end but that d i d n ’t bother me

           We had our drinks and made our way to the ground asking people

           along the way if they had any spare tickets,     "No” was the reply

           all over.

           About 1440 hrs,                said we should try nearer the ground
                                                                             PAGE


Ffor a ticket.    A man sold us a ticket for face value £6.

As we approached the ground we could see thousands of supporters

not yet in the ground,     it was about 1445 hours.

Outside there was no order,     everybody was just converging on the

turnstiles.      There were Police horses   in the crowd but they seemed

unable to do anything.

As we approached the fence before the turnstile fences,             the crush

was incredible.      The Police horses were the other side of the

fence and not putting the crowd into orderly lines.            We were

directed through a large open gate by the Police and the crush

eased.

We did not have to show our tickets.        Me and          headed straight

for the Stand stairs,     but were stopped by two Policemen and

directed into the tunnel.      This would be about 1457 hours.

As we got near the end of the tunnel,       I noticed people having a

wee.     I decided to stop and have a wee and asked Peter to wait.

After a couple of seconds           disappeared into the crowd.            As I

turned,    I was swept away in a crowd of people.        I c o u l d n ’t stop

going forward.      The pressure did not ease like it normally does

at matches.      I remember a person pushing hard on my shoulders and

shouting to get his lad out who c o u l d n ’t breath.     The lad was

trapped between me and his father.      We tried to get the lad out,

but the pressure was so great we c o u l d n ’t do it.

People were shouting at the Police to stop the game but nothing

was done.     I remember seeing someone trying to climb out and a

Policeman pushing him back.

After some time the game was stopped.        At this time I was directly

in line with a gate that was opened onto the pitch and I saw three

people get out of the gate.      There were several Police and fans
                                                                             PAGE


           :rying to get people out.    There were a few people that managed to

           climb over the fence onto the pitch.

           I think that I fainted in the crush.     I awoke with someone pulling

           at my arm.    They managed to pull me free from the crush.   I

           remember seeing what appeared to be a large number of bodies.

           I got out via the tunnel where I saw Police,    Fire and Ambulance men

           trying to assist people.     I was comforted by a Policewoman.   People

           were shouting and venting their anger at the Police.

           I injured my neck and ribs and later received treatment at the

           Royal Hospital   in Liverpool.



S ^ ' E M E N T TAKEN
                PLACE:

              TIME:             DATE:    270489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
