                                                                           (If)
E.R.
 «                                             cc   ,   Ms Craig
                                                        Ms Rex
                                                        Ms Nicholson
                                                        Mr Yates
                                                        Mr Chilcot o t f
                                                        Mr Hammond
                                                        Mr Turney, o/r
                                                        Mr Boys Smith
                                                        BM’
                                                          CTG"
                                                        HMCIFS
                                                        Mr Mower
                                                        Mr Clayton
                                                        Mr Goddard
                                                        Mr Bolton, o/r
                                                        Mr Whalley
                                                        Mr Mould
                                                        Mr Lidington
                                                        Mr Yeo




   Mr Moriarty


               HILLSBOROUGH:   PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION


   Mr Edey telephoned me this morning to say that he had received
   my letter of 18 September and did not find it a satisfactory
   response. He had two main queries:

       (i )   there was no mention of the statutory power open
              to the Home Secretary to enforce the Taylor
              Report1s recommendations (he referred to section
              6 and in particular sub-section 2 of the 1975
              Act). He said that this gave the Home Secretary
              overall authority to ensure that the correct
              safety certificates were issued, that he had a
              clear duty to lay down regulations for safety at
              sports grounds and that because this had not
              been done, the situation at grounds was still
              dangerous, as illustrated by a recent Observer
              article about the Coventry v Everton game on
              19 August and an article in the Times which said
              that only 12% of grounds had a doctor present;

       (ii)   he wanted to know which Department, the Home
              Office or the Department of Environment, would
              be responsible for the football licensing
              authority insofar as it might supervise safety.



                                                        /2.
E.R.
 #                               2.




     2. I promised that I would write to him as soon as possible
     with answers to these questions, but he said that he was
     c o n s i d e r i n g a writ of mandamus against the Home
     Secretary without'Waiting for my further letter. He also said
     that it was unsatisfactory that the Taylor Report had not yet
     been subjected to Parliamentary scrutiny as it had been
     delivered during the recess. He said that if anything went
     wrong, the Home Secretary would be in great trouble.

     3. The letter which I sent to Mr Edey deliberately omitted
     the passage about consideration being given to the enforcement
     of the Report's recommendations by means of a Statutory
     Instrument, for the reasons set out in the first paragraph of
     my note to Mr Mould of 19 September. Mr Mould has now set in
     hand a survey of local authorities to find out which, if any,
     have not implemented the asterisked recommendations of the
     Taylor Report, and if so why. The Home Secretary needs to
     have advice quickly on whether he should consider using his
     statutory powers, and this can only be on the basis of as
     accurate a picture as possible of progress of implementation
     of the Taylor Report by local authorities.

     4. I should be grateful for advice and a draft letter to send
     to Mr Edey as quickly as possible and for urgent advice on how
     we should handle any application by Mr Edey for a writ of
     mandamus, in consultation with Mr Hammond and Mr Mower.




     Private Office                          MISS C J BANNISTER
     20 September 1989                       Private Secretary
