Honorary Secretary R.G. Brooke   Westminster City Hall, Victoria Street, London SW1E 6QP Telephone 01-798 2 7 3 6 Fax 01-798 2 0 2 2




          Mr R M Whalley                                                 Contact:          Helen Cutts
          Secretary to the Hillsborough                                  Direct line:      01-798 2737
          Disaster Inquiry                                               Reference:        G7.5
          50 Queen Anne's Gate                                           Date:             30 May 1989
          London SW1H 9AT




          Dear Mr Whalley

          HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
          Thank you for your letter of 23 May concerning the above inquiry addressed
          to Mr Brooke, Honorary Secretary of the Association.

          The Association does not however consider that it is in a position to be of
          assistance to the inquiry and does not therefore propose to submit a written
          submission.

          Yours sincerely




          Assistant Secretary (Legal)




                                 ^ondon^oroughs^ssociation - promoting borough government
&
&
                                  Association of Metropolitan Authorities




FOOTBALL VIOLENCE
THE METROPOLITAN VIEWPOINT


REPORT OF THE AMA JOINT WORKING GROUP

ON FOOTBALL VIOLENCE




36 Old Queen Street                                             ^
London SW1H 9JE       REPRINT NOVEMBER 1984         JU 1       K f l
01-222 8100                                         ^      * , w    w
     FOOTBALL VIOLENCE: THE METROPOLITAN VIEWPOINT




INTRODUCTION

The Association of Metropolitan Authorities represents local
authorities in Greater London and the Metropolitan areas of
Merseyside, West Midlands, Greater Manchester, Tyne and Wear,
South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire. In March 1983 a Joint
Working Group was established to consider the causes, incidence
and effects of violent behaviour associated with Association
Football. The Group was composed of members and advisers to the
Police and Fire and Arts and Recreation Committees of the
Association under the Chairmanship of Councillor John Cornwell,
Chairman of the Arts and Recreation Committee.

The main objective of the Group was to recommend measures which
local authorities could take to reduce the problem of football
violence, because of the concern expressed by member authorities.
Local authorities are better placed than most other bodies to
suggest solutions for one of society's growing problems because
they represent the interests of every member of the community.

The Working Group, whose membership is set out at Annex A, visited
a number of football clubs and talked to representatives of the
bodies listed in Annex B.
1.    REMIT

The member authorities of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities have 40
football clubs in membership of the Football League within their boundaries.
They have been concerned for some time about the causes, incidence and effects
of violent behaviour associated with association football and have formed a
Joint Working Group representing police and recreation interests to consider
the available evidence in order to establish what local authorities can do to
improve the situation. The Group have noted the frequent assertions made by
all those concerned, that the problem is not simply restricted to football but
is a major social issue. As local authorities represent the interests of each
and every member of the community and their service departments form the relevant
agencies for coping with problems arising from violent behaviour, the Group have
prepared a list of recommendations which will be of assistance to any local
authority seeking to reduce the incidence and impact of football violence in
their area.

2.    EVIDENCE OF CAUSES, INCIDENCE AND EFFECTS

2.1   Causes

Despite falling attendances at professional football matches, the game remains a
major spectator sport which is readily accessible to all ages, classes and
ethnic groups. As such, it constitutes a magnet attracting a wide spectrum of
spectators, a small number of whom use the presence of a crowd as a cover for
both anti-social behaviour and crime. It is impossible to draw precise
comparisons between criminal behaviour ^t Association Football matches and in
society generally (although some examples are provided for illustrative purposes
in the section on incidence) but it may well be that what draws particular
attention to the problem of violent and anti-social behaviour at football matches
is a combination of:-

      (a)     the relatively short time-scale during which the activity occurs;

      (b)     the restricted location in which matches take place;

      (c)     the high profile which football enjoys in the media.

2.2 The age profile of the crowds at Association Football matches has changed
in the post-war period so that there are fewer adults present and their modera-
tine influence has diminished. Young adults have been marrying earlier and
this has affected levels of attendance across the whole range of public enter­
tainment, presumably because domestic considerations have assumed a higher
priority. In addition, the relative affluence of young people during the 1960s
enabled them to become independent of their parents at a much earlier age than
had been the case in the 1950s. Consequently the age gap at Association Football
matches widened and this resulted in a break up of family attendance patterns
which has been replaced by teenage groups with their own behaviour patterns,
interests and ritualised violence. As attendances at Association Football
matches were already declining in the 1950s and violence at matches only became
part of a wide public debate in the 1960s, it would be wrong to make an automatic
assumption that the decline in popularity of the professional game has been
solely the product of an increase in hooliganism.  It may well be held, however,
that anti-social behaviour is a factor which reinforces a decision to stay away
formed for other reasons such as:-

      (a)     poor performance on the field;

                                        2
     (b)   lack of spectator facilities;   and

     (c)   inadequate public transport.

2.3 Unemployment is frequently cited as a cause of violent behaviour. As far
as Association Football is concerned, however, it would be difficult to
establish any clear link because the phenomenon arose in the early sixties when
there was relatively little unemployment. Moreover, violent behaviour at foot­
ball matches is often attributed to the activities of visiting supporters, and
there must be some considerable doubt about the ability of any large number of
unemployed young people to afford the costs involved in travelling       toaway
matches with any regularity in the present economicclimate. Studiesdemonstrate
a steady   change in the sort of work available toyoungpeople, in recent  years,
from skilled and semi-skilled trades formerly available, to unskilled employment
offering little of interest and little hope of advancement. Some of the surveys
of young people convicted of offences of violence at football matches have
identified a significant level of employment in unskilled jobs and       itmay well
be that type of employment rather than unemployment is a factor.

2.4 Comparison between poor behaviour at Association Football matches and
good behaviour at rugby or cricket matches is frequently quoted as evidence that
violence at Association Football matches is entirely criminal in nature and
not attributable to other factors.   It is difficult to sustain comparison at
any length however, because each sport takes place in an entirely different
social context. Rugby League still retains support across a wider age range
and takes place in a relatively tight geographical area with usually sparser
crowds. It does not attract the same media coverage and does not involve the
transfer of large sums of money in tfee pursuit of success as does Association
Football. Rugby Union as an amateur code, similarly has a more restricted
following and rarely achieves media coverage other than through the reporting
of international and representative matches. Cricket, a summer sport, more
closely resembles Association Football in its mass appeal, but usually takes
place over a much longer time—scale and attracts spectators of a wider social
and ethnic mix. Given the emotion generated and sustained by th^ action of a
football match and the lack of maturity of a significant proportion of the
crowd.it is perhaps not surprising that there are outbursts of violent behaviour
from time to time. Football is essentially the people s game and a high
degree of partisanship is, therefore, automatic.   It is possible that the
 enthusiasm and support for individual teams spills over into violent behaviour
 on occasion as a result of the intense loyalty generated by young people for
 individual football teams.

2.5 The intensity of support and the comparative lack of maturity of the
spectators most likely to indulge in anti-social behaviour has been reflected
in the traditional style of reporting football matches. The use of militaristic
jargon to describe almost every aspect of the game - even team selection - re­
inforces partisanship to a level where trouble is expected weeks before a match
takes place. This simply does not happen on the same scale to other sports.
The practice of sending news reporters in the expectation of crowd trouble, as
well as sports reporters to particular grounds is one which is subject to major
consideration at present. It may well be that, on consideration, decisions
about reporting policy may follow the example of the television companies in
giving less prominent exposure to crowd misbehaviour, so that it can be seen
in context rather than become an emotive means of influencing the relevant
authorities into further action which may be over hasty and ill considered.
The mixture of social and economic factors contributing to violent behaviour




                                     3
at football matches exists irrespective of continuance of football matches
as a focus.  It has to be noted, however, that outbreaks of anti-social
behaviour associated with football receive a degree of exposure in the press
and on television and radio which they might not receive in different contexts.
Although the media coverage can not be regarded as causal it has potential
influence as an amplification factor.

3.    INCIDENCE

Violent and anti-social activity at Association Football matches must be placed
in context.  In the season 1982/83, returns made to Football League by their 92
member clubs showed that the number of ejections from grounds was, 4,641;   the
number of arrests inside stadiums was 1,994 and the number of arrests outside
stadiums was 1,907. This has to be set against 4,056 actual League matches
and total attendances of 18,766,000. Even allowing for some incomplete returns,
the ejections and arrests are less than i a percent of attendances.

From September 1982 to May 1983 a comparison of indictable crimes in the Leeds
Holbeck Division of West Yorkshire where Leeds United have their ground shows
the following:-

                                  Assault            Damage        Theft        Total

Associated with Football    )          5               2               2               9
 Matches                    )

Committed in the    Holbeck )
 Division                   )      191               701           3124          4816
                                           /

In addition there were 189 other arrests for non-indictable offences at matches
such as offences against public order and drunkenness.

Figures for the early season matches in August 1983 at Old Trafford where
Manchester United enjoy larger support than any other team in England were:-

     Fixtures                       Arrests                Ejections       Total Spectators

QPR                                            0               6              48,742
Nottingham Forest                              1               4              43,005
Liverpool                                      11*             9              56,121
(*only 5 inside the stadium)

These examples are not set out as a defence of anti-social behaviour at football
matches, but they do illustrate that volume of attention given to outbursts
is not consistent with that given to similar crimes committed outside the
association football context. Nevertheless, the problem is sufficiently large
to cause well founded public concern.

4.    EFFECTS

Local authorities are concerned for the well being of all their residents and of
visitors to their areas. All effects of violent behaviour ultimately fall
to the local authority, in greater or lesser degree, for remedy.  If the
effects of anti-social behaviour at football matches were confined solely to
the football grounds and the rival supporters themselves, then the role of
local authorities would be similarly restricted, but this is not the case.


                                   4
Violent behaviour affects the immediate environment of football grounds and spreads
along the lines of access to the ground. People living close to the grounds are
frequently disturbed by any form of running battle which may take place between
rival supporters or between crowds and the police. Even where there have been
no actual incidents at a particular match, the problems of arrival and dispersal
connected with football matches can have distressing effects on communities
which were never designed to allow for them. In each case the effects will be
different but local authorities will be affected in some of the following ways:-

     *Housing: damage to property both public and private and to light
       industrial and commercial premises;

     ^Transport:   damage to buses and trains;   disruptions of services;

     *Social Services: distress and anxiety to people already
       experiencing disadvantage; creation of larger case loads where
       young people are referred;

     ^Recreational Services: disruption and destruction of amenities
       such as public parks, gardens and recreation grounds;

     *Environmental and Planning Services: disruption and damage to
       town and city centre amenities;  interruption of trading;

     ^Councillors and Officers: time taken in attempting to mitigate
       the effects of violent crowd behaviour;

     *Other Services: with which local authorities are concerned as
       a result of violence at football matches are:

         Police: Heavy costs in manpower which have to be met by rate­
         payers especially where manpower is deployed outside the football
         grounds: disruption of the strategic deployment of police
         officers across a wide area, thus reducing ability to react to
         either serious crime or major accidents before, during and after
         matches.

         Health Authorities: Increases in volume of accident cases on
         match days: disruption of the strategic deployment of the
         ambulance service.

         Probation: Increase in the number of references for report
         by courts and follow-up action thereafter.

5.   LOCAL AUTHORITY RESPONSIBILITY

As many of the effects of violent behaviour by football supporters are
experienced outside football grounds, local authority services may provide
some solutions Broadly, these will fall into two groups:-

     (a) preventive measures which seek to alleviate some of the
     causes of violent behaviour;

     (b) strategic measures designed to reduce the impact and incidence
     of disturbances.

A.   Preventive Measures

5.1 Where a local authority has established clear objectives, these can be
turned into effective schemes which are attractive to young people. Such


                                      5
schemes may be organised to use the combined skills of a number of local
authority departments or may be the province of a particular service.
Illustrative examples are given below based on possible action by separate
services, but effective action in any particular situation will probably
depend on a combination of measures.

Recreation and Leisure Services

5.2 There is a considerable potential for joint schemes between local
authorities and league football clubs and examples of successful schemes
include:-

     (a) Manchester City AFC/City of Manchester Recreation Department
     where a Football and the Community Scheme has involved over 52,000
     people in sporting or sports related activities during the three
     year period since September 1980(there have also been some 35,000
     spectators during the same period). The activities have been organised
     in such a way that 60 to 70% of the courses or competitions are aimed
     at the 8-18 age group. One of the major objectives has been to
     encourage the growth of good links between the football club and the
     community around it, and as 85% of the people taking part have
     been from the local community, the scheme has clearly been a success.

     (b) South Yorkshire County Council Urban Action Programme which has
     provided a mobile Sports Van service throughout the county so that
     training sessions take place on a regular basis at the different
     professional football clubs in the county. The County Council
     provides the part-time leaders and the equipment in the van and the
     clubs provide all the other facilities. At the same time county-
     wide five-a-side football competitions have been organised by the
     South Yorkshire Police with the help of the County Council's
     programme using street leagues' brought together by youth workers
     and police officers as motivators using established youth clubs
     and previously unattached groups of young people.

5.3 There have been a range of football and community schemes around the country
which have had the same general objectives as the examples given above but have
not had the same measure of success.  It is important, therefore, to idendify
positive factors which can lead to achieving satisfactory results. These
include:-

     (a) Recognising that local authorities are essential to the
     success of any scheme.  It is unrealistic to expect that schemes
     run by other agencies or by professional football clubs themselves
     can reach young people as quickly and effectively as those which
     involve local authority services which are in daily contact with
     potential users;

     (b) Jointly managed schemes. Joint funding is only a partial
     answer. The involvement of football clubs, local authority
     services, the police force and voluntary organisations in a joint
     management committee is essential because this provides a means
     of ensuring that all the partners agree what their common
     objectives are to be, and they can be seen to be co-operating
     at the highest level;

     (c) Establishing clear managerial responsibility. The workers
     responsible for carrying out the scheme on a day to day basis must


                                     6
havp job security and a job description so that they can
concentrate on making the scheme work rather than having to
work in a climate where they do not know how long they will be
funded or by what means their success will be measured;

(d) Clear forward planning. The need for schemes will not
ceape!4f               3 budget year. Successful schemes should
have p replii^afele: expectancy of continuation if they are
making a pdsitive contribution to the community;

(e) Positive targetting. The young people for whom schemes
are created must be clearly identified and it is essential
to ensure that there is effective communication with them both
before and during schemes. Effective management will include
ensuring that the schemes reach the young people who are most
at risk and who have been involved in, or have a potential for,
anti-social behaviour particularly at football matches;

(f) Ensuring open access. It is essential that joint schemes
should not fail, for example, because they are located at venues
which are inaccessible to clients. This may mean that elements
of the scheme have to be taken from a central point to dispersed
target groups. Timing of sessions is also important and staff
will have to be capable of adopting a flexible attitude towards
working hours and seasonal pressures;

(g) Involving football clubs at every level. The glamour of
well known players and the prestige of long established clubs of
national reputation in attractiag young people to joint schemes
is immediately apparent. However, equally strong links can be
created between football apprentices and local football league
teams which are not constantly in the public eye with the young
people of the locality. Greater involvement by players and
clubs strengthens the schemes and builds better links between
club and community. Ex-players are a valuable asset in this
respect because they can contribute both their knowledge and
their skills and can also provide an additional bridge between
young people and their parents' generation. The use of club
facilities for a wide range of activities, some sporting and
competitive and some of a more social or community nature both
during and outside the football season is another important means
of making progress;

(h) Marketing and promotion. However good the schemes which
have been provided in an area, it is essential that the people
at whom they are aimed know about them.  In simple terms this
means that the original budget must contain funds which are to be
used for this purpose and that no opportunity should ever be lost
to keep the scheme attractive and in the public eye;

(i) Following u p . The need for many of these schemes will have
been dictated in part by the social and economic conditions under
which the participants live. These conditions may not change
greatly as the young people mature, and there will some a point
at which the participants feel that they are too old for the
activities provided, or at which the pressure from new entrants
means that a maximum age has to be imposed.  If young adults are
then "lost" the overall effect of the scheme in some cases may



                               7
     only have been a postponement or a channelling elsewhere of anti­
     social behaviour. Local authority leisure services, however,
     provide a wide range of cultural, recreational and sporting
     activities for all ages of resident and it is essential that young
     people should be made aware of everything that their council has
     to offer.

Education

5.4 There is an important role for the education service in encouraging
children to foster a positive attitude towards spectator sports. Young people who
take part in violent or anti-social behaviour at Association Football matches
often have a history of non-participation in sports at schools. It is vital
to encourage young people to become involved through participation in sports
and also to seek to educate them to an appreciation of the effective use of
their leisure time. Schools can help to achieve this process (in co-operation
with parents) through their curriculum at a very early age when children are
beginning to build up their own set of values. A wide range of sporting
activities which provides ways in which the largest possible number of young
people can achieve a measure of success either in team games or in individual
sporting pursuits can help to stimulate attitudes of good sportsmanship.  It is
important to achieve a balance between involvement and a win at all costs
attitude to sport, especially as many of the people involved in anti—social
behaviour at Association Football matches appear to have no history of joining
in team or club activities.

Environmental and Planning Services

5.5 Although the main thrust of these services is likely to be in strategic
terms, the expertise of these services £an be turned to improving the environment
around football stadiums and access to matches. Encouragement of local projects
to improve the environment around football grounds (often in conjunction with
other local authority departments such as cultural, social or leisure services)
may aid a process of positive identification with the team, the ground and the
locality.   It is an accident of history that many football grounds are located
in residential areas which were not designed to cater for the occasional but
significant influx of people and motor cars which football matches create.
However, it would be unrealistic to suggest wholesale relocation of grounds at
the boundaries of towns, especially as these are precisely the areas to which
residential population moves out over a period of time. Rather, it would seem
practical to use the skills of urban planning and environmental development
to improve the total environment around a ground and to use it as a natural
social focus. This could be done in conjunction with effective recreational
schemes (as cited above) and would improve links between the community, the
local authority and the football clubs. It is essential that the areas around
 football grounds should benefit from positive planning and not become wastelands
with every appearance of having been cleared of all amenity in order to
 facilitate wide ranging battles between rival supporters and the police.

Policing

5.6 It is axiomatic that modern policing is as much concerned w i t h the prevention
of crime through building a positive relationship with young people as it is
with the detection and prevention of criminal behaviour. There are a number of
examples of the ways in which police forces have found it beneficial to carry
out preventive   action prior to important matches or where a club's supporters
have included a significant element of potential trouble-makers. At Leeds
United, for instance, the Club has a close liaison with the West Yorkshire
Police and held open discusions with supporters in mid-season 1982/83 after
early season disturbances in order to encourage the supporters to air their
views about any aspect of the club's activities they wished, including how to
ensure the best behaviour at matches. The police had a major role in helping
to set up these meetings but did not actually attend in order not to inhibit
discussion.  Early results appear to have been positive. In South Yorkshire,
as has been indicated above, the police force have been involved in organising
county-wide football competitions as a focus for healthy activity and to build
a better relationship with young people. There is nonetheless a constant
tension between the requirements for effective policing and the necessity to
bring about changes in behaviour which will only be resolved over a number
of years. An example of practical issues open to wide debate is closed-
circuit television inside football grounds which may be justified as an effec­
tive police tool, but which may also act as a stimulus to anti-social behaviour
in some cases and also infringe the rights of those not involved in criminal
behaviour especially if CCTV is extended to the approaches to ground. There
is a growing belief among some police authorities that if football clubs can
be encouraged to introduce improved stewarding arrangements both for home and
away matches, this will reduce.the potential number of incidents and may
ultimately bring the cost of policing down also.

Leadership and Co-ordination

5.7 If local authorities are to be effective in introducing measures which
will reduce the causes of violent behaviour, it is essential that two aspects
of their work are given careful consideration.   For any package of measures to
succeed it is essential that the leaders of the local authority and relevant
service committees regard the project as essential. Wherever possible, the
existence of a special task force within the local authority under the
Chairmanship of the Leader or a senior foember of the Council is the best way of
securing early and effective action. This will also be aided by effective regular
consultation through a standing committee of local authorities, the police and
the football clubs themselves over the whole range of issues of mutual concern,
rather than annual meetings about charges for policing or emergency meetings
when trouble occurs. There is great merit in these being public meetings where      a
practical, and for the press to participate as well as observe and report. A        %
local task force will also be able to co-ordinate the contributions of the
different service departments in order to ensure the best uses of the
resources available, so that the needs of differing groups can be targeted
and appropriate provision made. Wherever possible there should be an attempt
to take on ventures jointly with football clubs so that previous lack of
co-operation between clubs and councils is overcome.   Local authorities may take
a view that the local team is part of the community's assets and that financing
of joint ventures is entirely appropriate.   In such circumstances it would be
hoped that clubs, often in severe financial difficulty, would accept a more
active presence in their affairs from their local authority. This is not an
easy matter to arrange but it is vital that local authorities and clubs should
recognise the ways in which they can help each other for the benefit of the
community as a whole.

Another important aspect is that local authorities use their legal and financial
services in co-ordination because individual local authority services have
certain powers and duties which be may be applied to the prevention of' violence among
football supporters. These include:-

     (a)  implementation of the 1975 Safety in Sports Grounds Act which is
     largely preventive   (in attempting to ensure that grounds are
     adequately equipped to deal with the potential crowds expected at
     matches) but also of strategic importance;

                                    9
     (b) the 1944 Education Act (as amended) imposes a duty on local
     education authorities to provide adequate facilities for recreation
     and social and physical training (Section 53);

     (c) the 1937 Physical Training and Recreation Act (as amended) gives
     a concurrent power to District Councils and County Councils to
     provide gymnasia, playing fields, holiday camps, camping sites
     and community centres for the use of clubs or organisations having
     athletic, social or educational objects. These can be managed by
     the local authority or the facilities may be let to other persons
     or voluntary bodies for management purposes;

     (d) the 1971 Town and Country Planning Act makes County Councils
     responsible for preparation of Structure Plans and District Councils
     for the promotion of Local Plans which must comply with the basic
     objectives of Structure Plans. In preparing draft Structure Plans
     a survey is required which takes into account the principal physical
     and economic characteristics of an area, population size and
     distribution, traffic an transportation elements. Where urban
     renewal is being considered, the proximity of football grounds
     to residential areas can be taken into account;

     (e) grant aid made available under various Government programmes
     has been applied by some local authorities to the improvement of
     facilities linked to football clubs. Money may be available from the
     European Community Social Fund and through schemes such as Sport in the
     Community (Sports Council). The Football Trust also makes money
     available to local authorities and^football clubs.

B.   Strategic Measures

It will be recognised that even the best preventive measures will take some time
to take effect and that in the interim period it will be necessary to reply on
strategic measures to cope with the effects of violent behaviour rather than
the causes. Among strategic considerations will be the following:-

Policing

6.1 The police have ultimate responsibility for the control of football matches.
At the present time, a heavy police presence is normally necessary at major
matches and even at lesser games there is a considerable impact on police
general operations;   the more police directly or indirectly involved with foot­
ball matches, the less are available for other duties. Alternatively, rest
day work is required and this puts a considerable burden on public funds
because, although clubs are responsible for the whole or part cost of police
inside the grounds, the cost of the heavy police presence required outride (but
in the vicinity of grounds) falls on the police authority and therefore on the
ratepayer. Charges in respect of 'in ground' police supervision vary in
different police areas and there are clear indiciations that these charges
could prove crippling to many clubs in the present financial situation. Serious
consideration needs to be given to whether such charges should be maintained or
whether the police authority should consider accepting a heavier financial
responsibility. Raising the charges made to football clubs for services would
certainly have a drastic effect on violence at football matches because many
of the clubs would go out of business if they had to pay the full economic
cost.   However, it would not solve the problem of violence and alienation among
 young people, but would add to it by removing one of the few social activities
 still generally within the reach of all.   It has to be recongised that charges


                                     10
for policing will be determined locally in the light of differing circumstances.
If local authorities are to be expected to take a flexible approach, however,
it must again be noted that there is a strong reason for local authorities
having an enhanced role in the general affairs of the clubs.

Public Transport

6.2 Local authorities have a role to play here too. In many of the major
conurbations where football is played, the metropolitan county council is the
Passenger Transport Authority, with a joint role with its PTE of providing and
promoting an efficient co-ordinated system of public passenger transport. Through
PTE it generally controls all bus services and most local rail services (s.20
Transport Act 1968). Certain clubs troubled by crowd violence admittedly lie
outside metropolitan areas, but generally speaking, the larger clubs and crowds
are metro-based. PTAs should carry out studies of their arrangements for
transporting supporters to and from grounds, with particular reference to visiting
supporters. The provision of improved facilities would be a positive step towards
reducing the incidence of hooliganism, assault and theft which occur on the way
to and from football grounds. Consideration may be given, for example, to the
provision of railway halts close to grounds and also adequate parking facilities
particularly for mini buses and coaches. It is possible to provide a basic
simple station at a cost of between £100,000 and £200,000 which can provide close
access to a football ground and prevent the problems of moving large numbers of
rival supporters from a distant rail head, through a town centre, to a match.
The provision of such facilities can also mean that football matches become
more accessible to the handicapped and disabled and that the stadium can be
considered for use as the venue for a wide range of public activities outside
the football season because it is more accessible. Joint financing of such
installation by the clubs, local authorities, British Rail, with the help of other
agencies such as the Football Trust can ^ensure that the financial burden is
shared.

Courts and the Probation Service

6.3 There has been considerable pressure in the media from a number of sources to
increase sentences and fines on those convicted of violent crimes at Association
Football matches. Neither courts nor probation services are the direct respons­
ibility of local authorities although they share many joint concerns and clients.
A number of experimental schemes are emerging (the Halifax Town AFC scheme and
the metropolitan police work at Isleworth for example) which may provide useful
guides as to alternatives open to the courts. If non-custodial means are sought to
deal with offenders who have been convicted of violent and anti-social crimes at
Association Football matches, the local authority services most concerned with
the rehabilitation of such people will have a valuable role to play both in
treating individual cases and in creating a better climate among those at risk.
The particular skills of workers in the social service, youth, community and
recreational services can all be brought to bear.

Licensing

6.4 There is no clear evidence (but much division of opinion) that the sale of
alcohol either within football grounds or outside is a causal factor in
producing violent behaviour at football matches. Undoubtedly, however, local
authority Licensing Departments may need to give careful consideration to the
sales policies of some licensees and to decide what action to take when licences
come up for renewal before licensing justices. A blanket ban on the sale of
alcohol around grounds and on public transport as provided for in Scottish Law
does not appear to be entirely appropriate to the English situation. For example,
the geographical spread of grounds in England is generally much wider and the
distances travelled to fixtures often greater, It would be difficult to judge
how wide a ban would need to be to have any measure of success whilst at the same
time the effect on the general (non football going) public in large conurbations
of blanket bans on the sale of alcohol around football stadiums may be felt to
be harsh and unacceptable. The practical problems of enforcibility could also
be considerable.

Environmental and Planning Services

6.5 These have been touched on in considering preventive measures.      In the
overall strategic context, the planning and environmental aspects of the siting
of football grounds and access to them, need to be given a priority which will
ensure that considerations of improvement and enhancement of the environment
will not be overlooked when any development takes place adjacent to a football
stadium.

7.   RECOMMENDATIONS

The Working Group was impressed, in particular, by two aspects of the problem
of football violence. The first was that there is no one single identifiable
cause, different outbreaks occur for differing reasons and therefore local
solutions are often based on local knowledge where they are successful. The
second was thatthere are a number of initiatives taking place which can be
adapted to meet the needs of particular situations. With these factors in
mind, the Working Group have identified a number of measures which have been
successful in differing situations and which can be adapted to local needs. All
of these arise out of the considerations set out in the preceding paragraphs, but
for ease of identification are re-emphasised as follows:-

     (a) Council and Club Co-operation: Local councils and football league
     clubs have much to offer each otherv It is essential to improve, and
     in some cases create for the first time, effective day-to-day working
     relationships between councils and clubs. Co-operation is a far more
     effective way of using the limited resources available to the
     community and its clubs than attempting to deal with the effects of
     violent and anti-social behaviour after the event. Football clubs
     are private companies but they represent a major social asset for the
     people of the town in which they are located and local authority
     support for clubs can be mutually beneficial across a wide range of
     common interests;

     (b) Joint Recreational Schemes: Both local authorities and football
     clubs have resources such as training facilities and skilled manpower
     which if combined and funded as joint schemes can be harnessed to
     provide facilities for the young people most at risk in towns and
     cities and most likely to be involved in anti-social or criminal
     behaviour;  (see para 5.3).

     (c) Getting the Message Over: The good work being done by local
     authorities and football clubs is often over-shadowed by reports of
     incidents of bad behaviour. With the positive help of the media,
     coverage of new initiatives can be used to attract young people
     into schemes where they can build a closer relationship with their
     own community;

     (d) Education: Local authority schools and youth clubs have many
     opportunities to encourage young people to take part in sporting
     activities from an early age and to learn to enjoy the activity
     whether they win or lose;

     (e) Transport: Better access to football grounds through joint
     schemes to provide railway halts, coach parks and better parking
     facilities makes possible greater use of the stadium and its
     facilities both by and for the local community and may provide
     greater public benefit whilst improving the viability of the
     club;

     (f) Amenity: Local authorities have knowledge and skills in
     their environmental, recreational and planning services which
     can be used to improve the general environment around football
     grounds for the benefit of both residents and spectators. Any
     urban renewal scheme in the vicinity of a football ground
     provides a major opportunity for planning crowd and transport
     movements in such a way as to improve the amenity of the area;

     (g) Policing: Local authorities recognise that positive policies
     are essential at football matches if violent and anti-social
     behaviour is to be controlled.   Every chief officer of police has
     to make operational decisions in the light of the situation as he
     finds it. Some police forces arrest all offenders at matches,
     others eject for some offences.  It is a matter of judgement
     whether those ejected will cause further problems outside the
     ground, but whatever the case, it is in the interests of the
     community that the police should succeed in exerting firm control;

     (h) Rehabilitation: Persistent offenders may need to be treated
     in different ways if any lasting change in their behaviour is to
     be achieved. Local authority services can make a contribution
     to the rehabilitation of offenders through their services and if
     schemes can be created by the probation service involving the clubs
     and their facilities, these may have a more lasting effect in the
     long run than longer jail sentences*and heavier fines;

     (i) Money: There are various sources of funds available to
     local authorities for the renewal of urban areas and for social
     development - some are national and some European. Where a local
     authority wishes to reduce the effects of violent and anti-social
     behaviour at football matches, these funds can be used to support
     schemes associated with and close to football grounds.

8.   CONCLUSION

The recommendations made above are based either on successful schemes already
being used by the local authorities or on putting existing resources to work in
ways. If the problem of football hooliganism is to be treated successfully from
a local authority standpoint there are three relevant elements:-

     ^Confident support from the Community which the local authority
     represents and on whose behalf it acts;

     *Co-operation between councils and clubs;

     *Co-ordination of all the relevant services and resources which
     the local authority has at its call.




February 1984
                                                       ANNEX A




    Membership

    Councillor J C Cornwell (South Yorkshire) (Chairman)
    Councillor E T Shore (West Midlands)
    Councillor R Robinson (Greenwich)
    Councillor R Darrington (West Yorkshire)
    Councillor F Harbourne (Knowsley)
    Mr K Williams (Chief Executive, Wolverhampton)
    Mr P Kearsley (Town Clerk's Department, West Yorkshire)
    Mr S Ratcliffe (Inner London Probation Service)
    Chief Superintendent Walker (West Yorkshire Metropolitan Constabulary)
    Mr R G Perkins (AMA Secretariat)




                                       *




o
                                                    ANNEX B




The Group met or received written views from a large number
of people concerned with the problems of football violence
during the course of preparing the report. A number of
bodies were consulted on more than one occasion and they
are listed below.



The Football Association
The Football League
The Football League Executive Staff Association
The Professional Footballers’ Association
The Department of Psychology, University of Southampton
Leeds United Association Football Club
Manchester City Association Football Club
The City of Manchester Recreation Department
The Football Trust
                                   Association of
                                   Metropolitan
                                   Authorities
 35 Great Smith Street London SW1P3BJ Tel: 01-222 8100




         t




LOCAL AUTHORITIES
AND PEACETIME
EMERGENCY PLANNING                      X   ■




A Review of
Current Arrangements
and Proposals
for Improvement
November 1988
                                    F O R E W O R D



    The Association of Metropolitan Authorities represents the 36 Metropolitan
    District Councils, 31 London Boroughs, the City of London, the Inner
    London Education Authority and the Joint Authorities responsible for
    Police, the Fire Servicc and Public Transport in the Metropolitan Areas.


    The Association's role is to promote and protect the interests of its
    member authorities and the community they serve, to provide a forum for
    member authorities to discuss and act collectively on matters of common
    concern and to provide a service to member authorities, including the
    dissemination of good practice.


    In January 1987, the Association’s Fire and Emergency Planning Committee
    established a Sub-Committee to give detailed consideration to peacetime
    emergency planning. A series of major disasters over recent years has
    brought the subject into particularly sharp focus. As a result advisers
    to the Committee drew up a set of comprehensive proposals for reviewing
    current arrangements for pcMiclimc emergency planning following wide
    consultations with concerncd organisations and individuals. At the
    request of the Sub-Committee the material was made available to
    interested AMA Committees for consideration, and Metropolitan Districts
    and London Borough Councils were canvassed for their views.
#
    The present document sets out the resultspf the review which has detected
    serious caps in the present arrangements, an'l contains proposals which are
    designed to place peacetime emergency planning by local authorities on an
    acceptable footing.
     LOCAL AUTHORITIES AMD PEACETIME EMERGENCY PLANNING:

A REVIEW OF CURRENT ARRANGEMENTS AMD PROPOSALS FOR IMPROVEMENT




           ASSOCIATION OF METROPOLITAN AUTHORITIES




              EMERGENCY PLANNING SUB-COMMITTEE

                           OF THE

            FIRE AND EMERGENCY PLANNING COMMITTEE




                        November 1988
CONTENTS


1.   Introduction                                             Paras 1.1-1.4

2.   Definition of Major Emergencies/Disasters                Paras 2.1-2.3

3.   Local Authorities and Current Arrangements for
     Peacetime Emergencies                                    Paras 3 . i-3. 10

     (i )   Introduction                                      Paras 3.1-3.2

     (ii)   Metropolitan Authority Involvement in
            Emergencies : I Districts                         Paras 3.3-3.4

     (iii) Metropolitan Authority Involvement in
           Emergencies : II FCDAs                             Paras 3.5-3-o

     (iv)   Legal Basis                                       Paras 3.7-3.10

4.   The Problems with Current Arrangements                   Paras 4.1-4.21

     (i)    The Priority of Civil Defence and the
            Politics of 'Civil Protection'                    Paras 4.2-4.4

     (ii)   The Inadequate Statutory Basis for
            Peacetime Emergency Planning                      Paras 4.S-4.S

     (iii) The Practice of Local Authority Peacetime
           Emergency Planning                                 Paras 4.10-4. 1 7
                                         t
            a)    Inadequate Hazard Appraisals and Lack of
                  Specific Plans                              Para 4.11

            b)   Ambiguity of Responsibilities                Paras 4.12-4.14

            c)   District/FCDA Relationships                  Para 4.15

            d)   A Restricted View of the Role ofSocial
                  Services                                    Para 4.16

            e)   Information Provision to the Press     and
                 Public in an Emergency                       Para 4.17

     (iv)   The Resourcing of Local Authority Peacetime
            Emergency Planning                                Paras 4.<8-4.19

     (v)    Gaps and Problems at National Level               Paras 4.20-4.24

     (vi)   Summary of Problems                               Paras 4.25-4.26

5.   Proposals for Improvement                                Paras 5.1-5.17

     (i)    Prioritising Peacetime Emergency Planning         Para 5.2

     (ii)   Decoupling Peacetime Emergency Planning
            from Civil Defence                                Para 5.3

                                      - 2 -
        (iii)   Legal Changes                                   Paras 5.4-5.9

        (iv)    The Practice of Local Authority Peacetime
                Emergency Planning                              Paras 5.10-5.15

                a)    Hazard Profiles and Specific Plans        Paras 5.10-5.11

                b)   District/FCDA Relationships                Para 5.12-5.13

                c)   The Role of Social Services                Para 5.14

                d)   Information Provision in an Emergency      Para. 5.15

        (v)     Resourcing                                      Paras 5.16-5.18

                a)   Physical Resources                         Para 5.16

                b)   Finance                                    Paras 5.17-5.18

        (vi)    National Emergency Planning and Disaster        Paras 5.19-5.27
                Response Arrangements

                a)    Emergency Planning: Overseeing Progress   Para 5.20

                b)    Emergency Planning: Investigation and
                      Learning                                  Para 5.21

                c)    Emergency Planning: Training              Paras 5.22 - 5.23

                d)    Disaster Response: 9ack-up Support and
                      Advice                                    Para 5.24

                e)           Disaster Response: Coordination    Paras 5.25 - 5.27

6   .   Concluding Remarks


Notes and References




                                           - 3 -
LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND PEACETIME EMERGENCY          PLANNING   : A   REVIEW   OF   CURRENT
ARRANGEMENTS AND PROPOSALS FOR IMPROVEMENT

1 .    INTRODUCTION

1.1   At its meeting on 18th March 1988, the AMA's FEPC passed a resolution
      calling for a review of current arrangements for peacetime emergency
      planning and the preparation of proposals for legislative, resourcing and
      organisational improvements.

1.2   This resolution was passed by FEPC in the light of recent developments
      which have created a window of opportunity for significant improvements
      in arrangements for peacetime emergency planning in Britain.  Much of the
      impetus for change arises from the spate of recent tragic disasters at
      Bradford, Chernobyl, Zeebrugge, Hungerford and Kings Cross.   In the wake
      of these events, the Bradford Disaster Information Seminar (1) concluded
      that any specific proposals should be placed in the context of a thorough
      review of disaster management in Britain.  In early March, the Government
      announced that it was ’’looking closely at arrangements for disaster
      planning" (2).   The statement made it clear that Central Government is
      seeking "to build on the expertise of our emergency services ... and on
      the effectiveness of the local response."     In addition, it was stated
      that : "We need to consider what new facilities or skills ought to be
      introduced which are not covered in some form already."

1.3   Whilst agreeing with the Central Government view that "it would be wrong
      to knock down the whole edifice of organisation which we have at present
      and start from scratch", this paper argues that in the light of all
      pertinent developments any review must be comprehensive and necessarily
      wide-ranging in scope.     In addition to the issues arising from the
      disasters referred to earlier and the proposals being put forward by the
      Bradford Disaster Information Seminar, account must also be taken of:

      a)     Commission of the European Communities,     ’Co-operation in the
             Community on Civil Protection’ (3): the Commission has proposed
             action to deal with disasters beyond the capacity of individual
             countries, and is encouraging Member States to exercise emergency
             plans   more   regularly  and  to develop  schemes for   training
             volunteers.     In general, the Commission wishes to see a more
             comprehensive and co-ordinated approach to emergency planning by
             Member States.

      b)     Amendments to CIMAH Regulations : The first amendment to the
             Seveso Directive, amending directive 87/216/EEC was adopted by the
             European Council of Ministers on 19th March 1987.        The HSE has
             stated that UK legislation in accordance with this directive in
             the form of amendment to the CIMAH Regulations will be in place by
             24th September 1988 (4). This will result nationally inabout
             50-70   additional   industrial  sites   coming   under   the   CIMAH
             Regulations    increasing    the   off-site     emergency   jplanning
             responsibilities of    some county-level local authorities.       The
             second amendment to the Seveso Directive was submitted by         the
             European Commission    to the Council earlier this year.         This
             amendment was agreed with minor changes to the proposal on 16th
             June 1988 and is far more wide-ranging.    For the UK to implement
             this directive the CIMAH Regulations will need to be amended
             covering in the range of 400 to 6 00 new sites, thus increasing the
             off-site emergency planning responsibilities of county-level local

                                       -   4   -
             authorities.   As experience is gained there are likely to be
             further amendments to the Seveso Directive and corresponding
             national legislation altering emergency planning requirements.

      c)     Emergency Planning for Nuclear Accidents : following the Chernobyl
             nuclear disaster a series of reviews was set in motion by Central
             Government.  These have resulted in the Department of Environment
             'National Response Plan'    for nuclear accidents overseas, and
             should soon result in the publication of a revised version of the
             HSE's booklet 'Emergency Plans for Civil Nuclear Installations’.
             The National Response Plan envisages a substantial role for local
             authorities# particularly in relation to information provision to
             the public.    With regard to domestic nuclear site emergency
             planning, the CEPO Society Working Party is proposing an enhanced
             role for local authorities, particularly in the preparation of
             composite off-site emergency plans (5).

1*4   The review below attempts to take account of these developments.        It
      acknowledges that peacetime emergency planning has to confront a wide
      range of types and scale of disaster, requiring the involvement of many
      different organisations and professions*   The review considers the wide
      range of problems that have to be tackled for an effective peacetime
      emergency planning service to be developed in Britain.   These range from
      the priority given to civil defence, the inadequate statutory basis for
      peacetime emergency planning, the current practice of local authority
      emergency planning and its inadequate resourcing, and, finally, the gaps
      and problems at national level.     The review then goes on to develop
      proposals for improvement, ranging from local to national level, with a 0
      p®rticular focus on the most effective role for local authority emergency
      planners (6).    Although thet review takes as its starting point the
      situation in the metropolitan areas of England, most of its conclusions
      and proposals are generally applicable to the whole of Britain.




                                     -   5 -
DEFINITIONS OF MAJOR EMERGENCIES/DISASTERS

Minor emergencies are a routine, almost daily occurrence in all parts of
the country.     The response to these are normally confined to the
emergency services - police, fire and ambulance services.        A major
emergency or disaster requires definition to distinguish it from the
routine incidents that are the day to day sole concern of the emergency
services.    There appears to be broad agreement with the following
definitions

       A major emergency or disaster is a serious disruption of life
       arising with little or no warning, causing or threatening death,
       serious injury or homelessness to greater numbers of persons than
       the emergency services and local authorities can deal with
       operating under normal conditions and which therefore requires the
       special mobilisation and organisation of these services.  (7)

A major emergency or    disaster   as   defined   above    can   arise   from many
different sources :

       Natural   - floods,   storms,    hurricanes,       drought,   snow,    fire,
       earthquake, landslide etc.

       Technological   -  engineered structures,           industry      (chemical,
       biological and nuclear), transport (air,           rail, road     and sea),
       power failure etc.

       Social - epidemics, mass-murder, riots, terrorism etc.

The scale of the emergency can also vary, requiring a local,              district
county, regional, national or international response.
                                     t
This review concerns itself with the full spectrum of major emergencies
or disasters as defined in para 2.1, focussing initially on those which
require a district or county-based response, and then moving on to
consider the response to larger scale events.
     LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND CURRENT ARRANGEMENTS FOR PEACETIME EMERGENCIES

     (i)   Introduction

1     As stated by the Home Office in its 'Emergency Planning Guidance to Local
      Authorities', "no single organisation is responsible for dealing with
      major accidents or natural disasters in the United Kingdom"           (8).
      Instead,   Government   relies  largely   on   the   emergency  services,
      supplemented by local, health and other public authorities (9) •        In
      relation to local authorities it is stated in the EPGLA that:

              Local Authorities have two main roles in an emergency, first to
              maintain their own services and help people in distress; and
              secondly a general duty to co-ordinate what is being done by the
              various organisations which are giving help. (10) (our emphasis)

      The statutory basis for the view that local authorities have "a general
      duty to co-ordinate" is far from clear.  It is sufficient to note at this
      stage that there is no general statutory duty on local authorities to
      plan for major peacetime emergencies or disasters.(11)

2     Having set out its view of the main local authority role in an emergency,
      the Home Office goes on to explain in the EPGLA the tasks it sees
      involved in the preparation of local authority emergency plans:

      a)      planning to obtain "additional manpower or specialised equipment,
              providing temporary accommodation, meals and other forms of relief
              to people in urgent need";

      b)      "consultation with the police • • . who would have an operational
              role in such matters as evacuation, crowd and traffic control,
              public safety •••"; and

      c)      taking   account of   the contribution of the other emergency
               services, water authorities, the health service, public utilities,
               the armed services and voluntary organisations);

      The Home Office adds that : "Local Authorities may find it convenient to
      make overall plans at county-level, with plans for districts being made
      within that framework.    Plans should provide for mutual assistance to
      adjacent local authorities."   (12)

      (ii) Metropolitan Authority Involvement in Emergencies : I Districts

.3     Normally, the police, fire or ambulance services will be the first to be
       alerted in the event of an emergency or disaster.       The senior police
       officer at the scene of the incident undertakes the role of Incident
       Controller, except in the case of a major fire or release pf hazardous
       materials when responsibility lies with the senior fire officer present.
       If the emergency is of a relatively minor nature, it is usual for the
       police   to make   requests  direct  to the    relevant district   council
       department if additional resources are needed.    If the emergency is of a
       scale or nature which cannot be dealt with under normal procedures, the
       police will contact the district's Chief Executive with a request for
       assistance under peacetime emergency procedures.

.4     In principle, relevant district departments should have sets of emergency
       procedures relating to the following key tasks:
i)      Control and Co-ordination - control over the mobilisation and
         deployment of district resources and co-ordination of voluntary
         organisation   involvement   (involving   the  Chief Executive's
         Department and Departmental Liaison Officers)*

ii)     Emergency  Accommodation   - during    or immediately after the
         emergency, in 'rest centres' such as sports centres, leisure
         centres, schools or church halls (involving Education, Social
         Services and/or Recreation Departments);

iii)    Emergency Feeding - utilising the school meals service or WRVS
        (involving Education and/or Social Services Departments);

iv)     Emergency Welfare   -    providing   clothing   and    bedding   (Social
         Services Department);

v)      Emergency Rescue - providing a back-up      or heavy    rescue service
         (Engineer's and Surveyor's Departments);

vi)     Emergency    repair,   demolition  or    clearance   -   (involving
         Architect's, Engineers, Housing and/or Direct Works Departments);

vii)    Emergency Transport - providing transport for people,* equipment
         and supplies (can involve various departments);

viii)   Emergency   Monitoring  -   eg., advice    on   chemical  spillages,
         pollution monitoring, provision of a clean water supply, etc (can
         involve  Environmental   Health,  Trading    Standards  and   Public
         Analysts);

ix)     Emergency Information Service - dealing with the media, providing
         information to the public (involving Public Relations and/or
         Libraries);

x)      Emergency    Communications    -     arrangements       for   emergency
         communications    can   include     additional       telephone   lines,
         teleprinters or radio contacts.

xi)     Liaison - ensuring adequate liaison with statutory bodies, the
         emergency services, other local authorities and voluntary bodies.

In practice many metropolitan districts have not been able to develop
adequate emergency plans and procedures covering all the above tasks.
The reasons for this are set out in Section 4.

(ii)    Metropolitan Authority Involvement in Emergencies : II FCDAs

When it comes to metropolitan local authority involvement in emergencies
and disasters, districts have the key role in relation to operational
response.   The only circumstances in which a FCDA's emergency planning
team might get involved in an emergency response is if the resources of
the district concerned are inadequate to deal with the situation, or if
the emergency involves a number of districts ie. , in larger scale
emergencies or disasters.     In such cases, it is possible that the
district would request the FCDA to take on a co-ordinating role, with
individual districts and their departments retaining control of their own
resources and operational managements (13).     (The lack of a clear or
specific legal power to take this action is discussed in paras 4.6-8.)
3.6   In Section 5 below, it is argued that FCDA’s should be able to prepare
      county-level peacetime emergency plans, ensuring effective co-ordination
      and liaison arrangements between districts and with statutory, public and
      voluntary organisations on a county-wide basis.  They should also be able
      to give considerable assistance to districts in the preparation and
      exercising of their own peacetime emergency plans, and in the training of
      volunteers and staff.   In addition, they should be able to ensure that
      adequate mutual aid arrangements exist with neighbouring county-level
      authorities.   In Section 4 below, we explain why all this is not
      currently possible.

      (iv) Legal Basis

3.7   Metropolitan districts have a general power which can be used in the
      event of any major emergency or disaster.  Under Section 138 of the Local
      Government Act 1972, they are empowered, when an emergency or disaster
      involving destruction of, or damage to, life or property occurs, is
      reasonably apprehended, or is imminent, to incur whatever expenditure
      they consider necessary (14).  FCDAs have not got Section 138 powers.

3.8   The Civil Protection in Peacetime Act 1986 provides for a local authority
      to use its limited civil defence resources in responding to a peacetime
      emergency.  It also provides for civil defence plans to include provision
      for non-war emergencies and disasters.

3.9   Under the Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazards Regulations 1984
      (CIMAH), FCDAs are under a statutory duty to prepare and keep up to date
      adequate off-site emergency plans in respect of certain industrial sites
      used for the production or processing of specified toxic, explosive or
      flammable substances and where^ the quantities of such substances exceed
      the amounts stipulated in the Regulations.      As noted in para 1.3(b)
      above, the Regulations are currently being amended.

3.10 There is a range of additional legislation or circulars which       is   of
     relevance to local authority emergency planning. For example :

      a)     The MAFF circular on the Food and Environment Protection Act 1985
             provides that local authorities should nominate investigating and
             enforcement officers who would,     in the event of a relevant
             incident, be capable of being authorised to act as investigating
             and enforcement officers by ministers at the time.

      b)     Where an authority is satisfied that a person is homeless or
             threatened with homelessness as a result of an emergency such as
             flood, fire or other disaster, the authority shall ensure that
             accommodation becomes available for that person, (see Sections 59
             and 65 of the Housing Act 1985).

      c)     After an initial emergency involving the transport xof hazardous
             substances by road, highway authorities are under a statutory duty
             to remove spillages from the highway.

      d)     Local Authorities have responsibilities under the Rabies (Control)
             Order 1974.

      This list is incomplete, but illustrates the piecemeal nature of relevant
      legislation.


                                      -   9 -
4.    THE PROBLEMS WITH CURRENT ARRANGEMENTS

4.1   The problems with current arrangements are many and varied : some are
      specific   to   metropolitan   areas,      but  most apply   equally  to
      non-metropolitan authorities.    For    the purposes of this review  the
      problems are grouped into five categories:

      i)      the priority   of   civil    defence   and   the   politics   of    'civil
              Protection';

      ii)    the inadequate statutory basis for peacetime emergency planning;

      iii)   the practice of local authority peacetime emergency planning;

      iv)    the resourcing of local authority peacetime emergency planning;

      v)     gaps and problems at national level.

      Each category of problems is considered in detail below.

      i) The Priority of Civil Defence and the Politics of 'Civil Protectio n 1

4.2   In the EPGLA, the Home Office states that:

             County  emergency   planning   teams  are   well   placed   to   make
             contingency    plans.     Although their primary task        is    the
             development of civil   defence plans there are common features in
             the plans needed for wartime     and peacetime emergencies.    in many
             local authorities emergency planning teams do both jobs and there
             is no real objection to this provided that the Home Secretary is
             satisfied   with the local authority's performance of its civil
             defence functions. (15) (our emphasis)

      Serious problems result from Central Government's priority             of   civil
      defence planning over peacetime emergency planning.        The         Bradfom
      Disaster Information Seminar, for example, concluded that:

             The statutory requirement on local authorities       to plan fai
             war-time disaster but not for peacetime disaster except in so far
             as a hazard came under the ... (CIMAH) Regulations was thought to
             be a deterrent to a uniform level of peacetime planning across all
             authorities. (16)

      Similarly, the following was expressed at the Association of Directors of
      Social Services Seminar on Disaster Planning:

             ... most authorities reported that disaster planning appeared nor
             to take place partly perhaps because many local authorities
             associated emergency planning with nuclear (war) disasters and
             many had declined to participate in this. (17)            x

      There is a widespread view that the preoccupation with civil defence nae
      seriously hindered the development of effective peacetime emergency
      planning practices by local authorities in Britain.   This is because it
      takes valuable staff time and resources away from peacetime planning, but
      also because it has damaged both the practice and image of emergency
      planning in general (18).



                                          - 10 -
4.3   Central Government’s own    recent   actions   on   civil   defence   make   the
      position more critical:

      a)     In October 1986, the Home Office circulated the 'Planned Programme
             for Implementation'  (PPI) to local authorities setting out six
             monthly targets for the staged preparation of civil defence plans
             and linking grant approval mechanisms to progress towards the
             completion of plans which satisfies the Home Office (19).     This
             monitoring regime serves to further concentrate both FCDA and
             District emergency planning effort on civil defence, as opposed to
             improving procedures and planning for peacetime emergencies and
             disasters.

      b)     In December 1986, the Home Office launched its 'Civil Protection'
             publicity campaign, including a video, booklet, magazine, leaflet
             and exhibition,   in which it argued that "Planning for civil
             protection covers the whole spectrum of      possible catastrophes
             ranging through    natural  disasters,  industrial and transport
             accidents and wartime emergencies."        The   'Civil Protection'
             campaign has been widely criticised as an attempt to hide the
             primacy of civil defence planning (20).        Indeed, the public
             relations package actually gives the erroneous impression that the
             Home Office's priorities are with peacetime emergency planning
             (2 1 ).

4.4   The apparent rationale for 'civil protection* is the so called 'all
      hazards' approach to emergency planning.       The key argument behind the
      'all hazards' approach is that the problems in planning to alleviate the
      effects of war are in many ways the same as those faced in coping with
      peacetime emergencies, and that the methods and resources employed to
      deal with them are basically * similar.       However, there are decisive
      differences   between  planning   for war    and planning    for peacetime
      emergencies.     For example, for peacetime emergencies, plans should
      usually make provision for concentrating and combining resources at the
      point of disaster, and emergency procedures will build on the normal
      roles and functions of the emergency services and local authorities.
      During a period of rising tension and conventional   war, the concentration
      mode may well hold good albeit with    difficulty.   However, civil defence
      planning for nuclear war is quite different : it is not possible to
      concentrate resources at the point of emergency because the emergency is
      everywhere.   And in civil defence, a completely new structure of command
      and control comes into operation which is not used in other emergencies.
      This utilises a network of hardened emergency centres across the country.
      Furthermore, special emergency provisions are rushed through Parliament
      to change the legislative framework so as to allow civil defence plans to
      operate.    It is important to realise that if pursued to its logical
      extreme, the    'all hazards'   approach would actually straight jacket
      planning for peacetime emergencies to the apparatus of civil defence.
      Such a top down approach, attempting to base planning for peacetime
      emergencies on wartime civil defence structures is wholly inappropriate.
      As the former Principal of the Easingwold Civil Defence College wrote in
      1983:

             the connection between planning for recovery from peacetime
             disasters and war emergency planning is tenuous in the extreme,
             and to overplay it is conducive to bad practice and to ambiguous
             and inappropriate procedures and systems of control. (22).


                                       - 11 -
      ii) The Inadequate Statutory basis for Peacetime Emergency Planning

4.5   In paras 3.7-3.10 of this review we introduced the legal basis for local
      authority peacetime emergency planning.    In the paragraphs that follow,
      we set out some of the problems arising from current legislation.

4.6   Section 138: as noted in para 3.7,   thishas normally been interpreted as
      giving districts   but not FCDAs     the   power to plan for peacetime
      emergencies.  Despite vigorous representations by FCDAs and the AMA., the
      Government has refused to give the FCDAs this power on the grounds that
      it was not needed.      The problems in relation to S138 powers have
      therefore been commonly understood as:

      a)    the role of FCDAs in the preparation of peacetime emergency pi a as
             is severely restricted by their lack of S138 powers (23).

      b)    since S138 confers a power and not a direct duty, districts have
             exercised discretion in the preparation of peacetime e m e r g e n c y
             plans, leading to a patchy and inconsistent level of preparation
             across the country (24).

      In addition to these problems a further complicating factor has recently
      emerged.

4.7   This arises from the judgement in the test case concerning flooding
      Cardiff in 1979 (heard in Cardiff in 1987).      Local residents suffered
      damage to their property during flooding which could have been avoided xr
      adequate warning had been given. They thus sought financial compensation
      and damages for distress and inconvenience.   The cause of action against
(p    the defendants - Cardiff City Council, the Welsh Water Authority anc
      South Glamorgan County Council - was negligence.          In making hi.s
      judgement, Mr Justice Michael Davies Concluded that it was fair and
      reasonable to superimpose upon a local authority which decided to use
      Section 138 powers, a "common law duty of care" to exercise those powers
      without negligence (25).     In doing so, the Judge rejected Counsel’s
      submission that where there is a power, discretion whether to exercise
      power, if exercised bona fide, cannot result in liability even though
      there is fault.   The Judge went on to conclude that there was a 'prior
      duty' and 'duty on the day' for the local authorities to take reasonable
      steps in relation to flood warning once the authorities had decided ro
      exercise their power to make a plan (26).     This judgement clearly has
      important implications for metropolitan districts in the exercise of S138
      powers.   Where there is an identifiable risk, Districts that decide to
      exercise powers under S . 138 appear to be under a "common law duty of
      care" to take reasonable steps in relation to plans and procedures to
      meet that risk.

4.8   Civil Protection in Peacetime A c t : as noted in para 3.8, this Act enables
      local   authorities   to   use  civil     defence  resources   in  peacetime
      emergencies, and for civil defence plans to include provision for non-war
      emergencies.   However, this is of extremely limited value:

      a)     Districts - very few have any identifiable civil defence resources
             other than their wartime emergency centres whose communications
             equipment is directed towards the county wartime emergency centre,
             rather than the outside world.




                                        - 12 -
      b)    FCDAs - in practice FCDAs have few civil defence resources which
            could be utilised under the Act in peacetime emergencies.     Civil
            defence  staff   ('emergency planning officers')     are primarily
            planners so their main use is to exercise the powers to make civil
            defence plans which allow for the possible occurrence of a
            peacetime emergency.   However, by linking this planning power tc
            the Civil Defence Regulations, the Act provides a power limited to
            those planning matters specified in Schedule 2 of the Regulations
            and nothing more (27).   The power is also limited because it is to
            produce plans which facilitate the use of the FCDAs civil defence
            resources, and there is no power to plan to facilitate the use of
            non civil defence resources.

      In practice, unless both Members and Officers are prepared to ignore the
      letter of the law, the powers in the Civil Protection in Peacetime Act
      serve no useful purpose.

4.9   CIMAH Regulations: the one area where county-level local authorities do
      have a clear statutory duty to prepare peacetime emergency plans has also
      been subject to important criticism:

      a)    CIMAH Regulation 3 lists exempted industrial activities which
             include, for example, ordnance factories, nuclear sites, and toxic
            waste disposal incinerators.    This means that for such sites : n o
             one  has   statutory responsibility   for co-ordinating off-site
             emergency plans; no clear statutory framework exists for informing
             the public; and those local authorities who do take the initiative
            with co-operative site managers cannot be sure who will pay t h e
             bill    (28).    This clearly frustrates a unified approach t o
             emergency planning for m^jor hazard sites.

      b)    The requirements of the CIMAH Regulations are triggered by t h e
             presence of threshold quantities of hazardous substances.    This
             approach does not therefore bring requirements to bear on smaller
             scale industrial activities where the danger arises d u e      to
             proximity to highly populated areas rather than the presence of
             threshold quantities.    Also at present, sites can have several
             different hazardous substance each in quantities below their
             respective threshold limit and no account is taken of cumulative
             risks.   This will be rectified to some extent when the second
             amendment of the Seveso Directive is implemented as amounts of a
             similar class of hazard will be additive.

      (c)    There has been much variation country-wide in the way parts of the
             CIMAH Regulations have been implemented and enforced.   Regulation
             15 allows a local authority to charge a site owner for an off-site
             emergency plan.   Some authorities have not charged, others have
             only charged a nominal amount, while others have charged the full
             cost.  This inconsistency has not been welcomed by industry.    In
             some areas the HSE have required off-site emergency plans for
             certain Small Inventory Top Tier Sites where similar sites in
             other areas have not required plans.       This inconsistency ir.
             enforcement reduces confidence.

      iii) The Practice of Local Authority Peacetime Emergency Planning

4.10 In addition to the problems arising from the priority of civil defence
     and the inadequate statutory basis, t h e r e a r e a range of p r o b l e m s

                                        -   13   -
    relating to the current practice of peacetime emergency planning.
    this category of problems it is possible to identify five key aieas of
    concern:

     (a)    Inadequate hazard appraisals and lack of specific plans;

     (b)    Ambiguity of responsibilities?

     (c)    FCDA/District relationships;

     (d)    A restricted view of the role of Social Services;

     (e)    Information provision in an emergency.

     Each of these is considered in more detail below.

     iii)(a) Inadequate hazard appraisals and lack of specific plans

4.11 Where   local  authorities   have   prepared plans   for major peacetime
     emergencies or disasters they are usually attempts to provide a general
     framework of procedures for adaptation to try and meet any type or
     peacetime situation.   It is usually argued that this g e n e r a l approach is
     necessary because it is not normally possible to deteraine in advance
     what type of incident will be involved, where it will occur, when it wiil
     happen and who will be affected.          Having said this, there is ar.
     increasing recognition that certain emergencies can be anticipated and
     specific emergency plans drawn up to deal with them (30).            It is tne
     contention of this paper, however, that where local authorities have
     prepared a general peacetime emergency plan, too much reliance is placer:
     upon it and not enough is done to develop plans, procedures or measures
     to meet specific threats (31).     In order to do this much greater reaa,-:.
     ought to be paid by local authorities to building up a far better
     overview of hazards to their particular area and to preparing specific
     plans accordingly.     This proposal is returned to in Section 5 or.
      •proposals for Improvement'.   It is pertinent to note at this stage that,
     even if specific plans are        prepared, problems can arise         if local
     authorities do not have a full picture of the nature of hazards to tha_r
     area (32).

     iii)(b) Ambiguity of Responsibilities

4.12 In relation to major emergencies or disasters which require a district or
     county scale response, there is a certain amount of ambiguity about who
     has responsibility for co-ordination. (The question of co-ordination for
     major emergencies or disasters which require a regional or        national
     response is considered insub— section    (v) below).     The     following
     quotations demonstrate conflicting perceptions of the situation:

      (a)    "Local Authorities have ... a general duty to co-ordinate what is
             being done by the various organisations which are giving help."
             (EPGLA ref 33).

      (b)    "In most (emergencies) the police are required to co-ordinate
             plans and  indeed the practical execution of them if  disaster
             strikes." (Police ref 33).

      (c)    "The role of Kent's CEPO ... in responding to the ferry disaster
             was mainly accomplished well in advance of the accident.   it is

                                        - 14 -
          our job to help all the various organisations that may be involved
          in a ferry disaster to draw up detailed plans.     As Kent CEPC I
          have an overview of these emergency plans and make sure as far as
          possible that everyone is talking in the same terms and that all
          plans dovetail."  (35).

   (d)    "A total of 23 different bodies play a part in disaster planning
          in this country and while there is some co-ordination, there is no
          one in overall authority".  (36)

   The ambiguities relate to two areas of responsibility:

   1.     responsibility for ensuring that the emergency plans of different
          organisations "dovetail".

   2.    responsibility for co-ordinating action during an emergency;

13 The ambiguity relating to (1) is genuine : despite the statement by the
   Kent CEPO, no single organisation has a clear responsibility for ensuring
   that the emergency plans of different organisations "dovetail" (37).
   Strong corroboration comes in the Fennell Report on the King's Cross Fire
   (37A)  in recommending    "Advice on the    co-ordination of   individual
   emergency plans should also be available at a national level."       This
   point is returned to in paras 5.4 and 5.13 below.

14 In relation to (2), as set out in paras 3.3-3.6, it is normally the case
   that the police have overall responsibility for control and co-ordination
   during and immediately after an emergency.   Within this framework, loci:
   authority emergency planners would co-ordinate the involvement of l o c i
   authority departments and in some cases voluntary organisations.      The
   Home Office's 'civil protection' campaign has served to exacerbate the
   potential for misconception concerning this point.

  iii)(c) District/FCDA Relationships.

15 In most metropolitan areas, the process of building up a good peacetirr.e
   emergency planning relationship between Districts and the FCDA has been
   very s lo w. This is largely a result of the problems already referred to
   in this report: firstly, the FCDA's have to give priority to civil
   defence and have very limited powers for peacetime emergency planning
   (paras 4.2-4.8)? and, secondly, a substantial number of departments in a
   substantial number of metropolitan districts have not been able to
   thoroughly assessed what would be expected of them in an emergency and,
   as a result, have not developed adequate emergency plans and procedures.

  iii)(d) A restricted view of the role of Social Services

16 The traditional view of the role of Social Services in an emergency has
   been in terms of the organisation of rest centres and tfie provision of
   meals, blankets and bedding.  Recent disasters have given Social Services
   a new significance.   There is a growing recognition that the timescale
   for Social Services involvement in post-disaster care can be very long
   indeed, as there is often a need to develop a counselling and supportive
   network.   It has been argued that as a result of the experience with
   Zeebrugge and Bradford, there is an urgent need for the role of Social
   Services to be more broadly defined and to be programmed into emergency
   planning (38).  It is further argued that Social Services should be more
  closely involved in emergency planning and in reviews of what has been
  learnt to date.

  iii)(e) Information Provision to the Press and Public in an Emergency

17 As indicated in para. 3.4, a district council's emergency plans should
   cater for the provision of an emergency information service.         The
   difficulty and magnitude of this task is often underestimated.        In
   relation to recent disasters, the Bradford Disaster Information Service
   concluded,   for  example,  that:  "Communication problems   were  noted
   particularly when the ability of the media to bring a disaster to public
   attention very quickly meant that enquiries were being received before
   either arrangements could be made to handle them or any information on
   individuals was available.  The difficulties where in at least two cases
   the volume of incoming calls had swamped the local exchanges were
   commented upon".  (39)

  iv) The Resourcing of Local Authority Peacetime Emergency Planning

18 Local    authority     peacetime    emergency     planning    is    seriously
   under-resourced^:

   (a)   Staff :

          (i)    most metropolitan   districts   do  not  have  a   full-time
                 emergency planning officer.  The emergency planning brief is
                 usually added to the job description of an existing member
                 of staff  (40).

          (ii)   As  described earlier,   the central tasks of emergency
                 planning staff in the FCDAs are to develop civil defence
                 plans under the PPI, and tp prepare off-site plans for CIMAH
                 sites.

  (b)    Finance : the EPGLA outlines the financial assistance that may be
         available for individuals and local authorities :

         (i)     The DHSS can pay individuals sums      if they are in urgent
                 financial need as a result of a       peacetime disaster, for
                 items such as food and fuel. Where     a local authority makes
                 such payments to individuals, the      DHSS has discretionary
                 powers in deciding whether or not      to reimburse the local
                 authority.(41)

         (ii)    Under  S138   of  the   Local   Government   Act   1972,  local
                 authorities   can   incur   expenditure   in   the   course   of
                 preventing or alleviating peacetime        emergencies.     Some
                 authorities use this power to establish special budgets for
                 use in emergencies.
                                                                            y
         (iii)   Under exceptional circumstances the Government is prepared
                 to make special financial assistance to local authorities
                 who incur an undue financial burden as a consequence of an
                 emergency.  (42)

19 The reality is that in the context of centrally imposed spending cuts,
   metropolitan authorities are finding it very difficult to devote any
   significant amount of staff time to peacetime emergency planning.   In
    addition, the abolition of the right of local authorities to raise a
    supplementary rate during a financial year has meant that raising extra
    finance for unpredictable emergencies, leaves authorities entirely in the
    hands of the Secretary of State.

     (v) G aps and Problems at National Level

4.20 In addition to the wide range of problems set out above, various seminars
     and studies have identified a range of gaps and problems in arrangements
     at a national level. These are outlined in the paragraphs that follow.

     (v)(a) Inadequate arrangements for the provision of additional    necessary
            advice and support

4.21 The first gap in existing national arrangements has been highlighted by
     the Bradford Disaster Information Seminar.. It was argued at the Seminar
     that for major emergencies or disasters which involved large numbers of
     deaths and injuries there was a need for arrangements to provide
     experienced teams   of people   to assist with casualty bureaux and
     counselling the bereaved (43).

     (v)(b) Co-ordination in regional and national scale emergencies

4.22 In para. 4.12 above, we drew attention to the apparent ambiguity in
     responsibility for co-ordinating action during an emergency on a district
     or county scale.   In para. 4.14 we pointed out that the police normally
     have overall responsibility for control and co-ordination during and
     immediately after such emergencies.   It is argued, however, that there is
     a very real and serious gap in identifying who should take responsibili||
     for co-ordinating responses in emergencies or disasters which transcend
     county boundaries.   Thus, ffor example, the Chief Constable of Cleveland
     has stated that:

            The real problem in such disasters is who co-ordinates, who is
            responsible for additional aid and who knows the point of entry
            (for example) into the Ministry of Defence or chemical industry
            should their help be needed. (44)

     The problem is exacerbated by the fact that different Central Government
     Departments are supposed to ensure a co-ordinated Government response in
     different types of emergency.    Widespread concern has been expressed
     because there is no single department with overall responsibility for
     peacetime emergency planning.

                 There should be a clear determination as to which Department
            of State was to carry the co-ordinating responsibility. (45)

                 we are very concerned that no single Government Department
            has overall responsibility for peacetime emergency'-planning. (46)

     (v)(c) A lack of arrangements for national learning

4.23 There is an obvious need to learn the lessons from past disasters.
     Emergency planning requires constant review to incorporate new learning
     and good practice.   Individual services carry out their own assessments
     of emergency responses, but as pointed out by the Bradford Disaster
     Information Seminar, there is no institutionalised process of national


                                      - 17 -
     learning,    nor   for   sharing   and   disseminating   emergency   planning
     information.

     (v)(d) Inadequate Training

4.24 Following on from the above, there is no proper focus for the training of
     people engaged in emergency planning.    At the current time, no formal
     training exists in Britain     for local authority emergency planning
     officers.  Given the EPO's key role in the preparation and exercising of
     plans, and in assisting with the training of other local authority staff,
     this constitutes a serious gap in British emergency planning.

     (vi) Summary of Problems

4.25 In this section of the review we have considered five categories of
     problems.   In paragraphs 4.2 - 4.4 we argued that the priority of civil
     defence and the politics of 'civil protection' have seriously hindered
     the development of effective peacetime emergency planning.   In paragraphs
     4.5 - 4.9 we examined the inadequate and ambiguous statutory basis for
     peacetime emergency planning,     outlining the problems posed by the
     allocation of S138 powers, the severe limitations of the Civil Protection
     in Peacetime Act, and the inadequacies of the CIMAH Regime.             In
     paragraphs 4.10 - 4.17 we argued that there are five key areas of concern
     in the practice of local authority peacetime emergency planning.     These
     are : inadequate appraisals of local hazards and lack of specific plans;
     an ambiguity of responsibility in relation to ensuring that the plans of
     different organisations dovetail together? underdeveloped relationships
     between districts and the FCDAs; a restricted view of the role of Social
     Services? and inadequately developed procedures for information provision
     in an emergency or disaster.    In paragraphs 4.18 - 4.19 we argued that
     local    authority    peacetime    emergency    planning   is    seriously
     under-resourced.   Finally, we argued tfyat there are a number of specific
     and additional gaps and problems at a national level.           These are:
     inadequate arrangements for the provision of additional necessary advice
     and support? no clear responsibility for co-ordination in regional and
     national emergencies? lack of arrangements for national learning; and
     inadequate training.

4.26 It is little wonder that arrangements for peacetime emergency planning in
     Britain have come under such close scrutiny after recent emergencies and
     disasters.   It should be clear that a combination of many problems means
     that local authority peacetime emergency planning in the metropolitan
     areas of Britain is seriously underdeveloped.    Where plans do exist they
     are often little more than a series of call-out lists and telephone
     numbers.   There is a distinct lack of specific plans to meet identifiable
     local threats.     Plans are not adequately exercised.      Staff are not
     properly trained.    Liaison with and co-ordination between organisations
     with an emergency planning role is sadly lacking (47).        In the next
     section, we propose ways of changing this unacceptable situation.




                                        - 18 -
5.    PROPOSALS FOR IMPROVEMENT

5.1   As explained in the introduction to this review there is a momentum
      building up for improvements in peacetime emergency planning.    In this
       section, we put forward specific proposals, based on our analysis of
       current problems and drawing on some of the proposals arising, for
      example, from the Bradford Disaster Information Seminar. These proposals
      are grouped into six categories, so as to parallel the discussion of
      problems with current arrangements in Section 4:

      (i)      Prioritising Peacetime Emergency Planning

      (ii)     Decoupling Peacetime Emergency Planning from Civil Defence

      (iii) Legal Changes

      (i v )   The Practice of Local Authority Emergency Planning

      (v)      Resourcing

      (vi)     National Emergency and Disaster Response Arrangements

      (i) Prioritising Peacetime Emergency Planning

5.2   Central Government should give peacetime emergency planning a higher
      priority.  It should stop asserting under the guise of "Civil Protection"
      that a comprehensive and effective peacetime emergency planning service
      exists when in fact it does not.   It is our view that peacetime emergency     ^
      planning should not continue to be the poor relation of civil defence.
      It should be given a higher pritority at the expense of civil defence for
      the following reasons:

      (a)      Major peacetime emergencies and     disasters are occurring with
                worrying regularity.  In contrast, the Government's assessment of
                the international situation is that the risk of war in Europe is
                very low.

      (b)      Effective peacetime emergency plans can and should be made.  Lives
                can be saved and survivors assisted.    In contrast, it is widely
                thought that there is little civil defence could achieve should
                Britain become involved in war in Europe, given its status as a
                nuclear weapon power and its key role within NATO (48).

      (c)      The current priority given to civil defence (see paras 4.2 and 4.3
                above) takes valuable staff time and resources away from peacetime
                emergency planning.

      It is recognised, however, that despite the strength of the case, the
      current Government is unlikely to give greater priority to peacetime
      emergency planning at the expense of civil defence(49).      In these
      circumstances, other ways will have to be found for giving peacetime
      emergency planning a higher priority.

      (ii)     Decoupling Peacetime Emergency Planning from Civil Defence

5.3   In addition to being given a higher priority, peacetime emergency
      planning needs to be 'decoupled' from civil defence. This would involve
      putting a halt to;


                                     -   19   -
      (a)   simplistic   attempts   to   integrate  planning   for   peacetime
            emergencies with the apparatus of civil defence (for example, in
            the operation of the Civil Protection in Peacetime Act);

      (b)    attempts to legitimise civil defence by exaggerating its relevance
             to peacetime emergencies and disasters (as in the Home Office's
             'Civil Protection* package);

      These steps would enable political consensus to emerge in support of
      peacetime   emergency  planning,    thereby  facilitating  greater  local
      authority and public support.      Once decoupled from civil defence, a
      genuine peacetime emergency planning service        can be promoted   and
      developed.   This would also enable a wider range of potential emergency
      planners to emerge, with qualifications and experience derived from local
      government and the private sector.

      (iii) Legal Changes

5.4   Peacetime emergency planning will remain piecemeal and haphazard in its
      application until it is established on a proper statutory basis.      The
      authors   of this report envisage      legislation imposing duties upon
      appropriate public and private organisations to undertake comprehensive
      peacetime emergency planning, supervised by an Inspectorate (see paras
      5.19-5.22 for the proposed Inspectorate role).     The duty should oblige
      local   authorities,  in  consultation with    the  Inspectorate and the
      emergency services, to assess the range of peacetime threats to or in
      their own areas.     In order to achieve this aim, enhanced access to
      information powers should be provided.      On the basis of comprehensive
      statutory hazard assessments, local authorities, in consultation with the
      Inspectorate and the emergency services, should be obliged to determine
      what plans should be prepared and then to pr.epare them, ensuring that
      such plans dovetail with those of thue other organisations involved.

5.5   It should be noted that the proposal for local authorities specifically
      to be under a statutory duty to prepare emergency plans is widely
      supported and in line with existing AMA policy.        For example, the
      Bradford Disaster Information Seminar listed as its first recommendation:
      "That Local Authorities should be made by statute responsible for
      peacetime disaster planning"(50)•

5.6   We propose that the new legislation should require local authorities, in
      liaison with the FCDAs/County Councils,       to prepare two groups of
      emergency plan : general and specific.    With regard to the general, all
      local authorities should prepare a Major Disaster Plan.       This should
      establish an organisation at local authority level which can be mobilised
      flexibly to meet a wide range of peacetime emergencies.     Elements that
      might be prescribed by law include provision of an Emergency Operations
      Centre, adequate communications, call-out lists, liaison arrangements and
      agreed procedures for emergency accommodation, feeding, welfare, rescue,
      repair, demolition and clearance, transport, monitoring and information
      services (as outlined in para. 3.4 above for districts).   In addition to
      the preparation of a Major Disaster Plan, local authorities would also be
      expected to ensure that adequate 24 hour call-out and stand-by systems
      exist for small scale incidents, usually requiring the response of single
      departments.   These minor schemes must clearly be consistent with the
      major scheme, and must allow for it to come into operation should
      circumstances require it.   The Major Disaster Plan should be approved by
      the Inspectorate before specific emergency plans were undertaken.


                                   -   20   -
5.7   With regard to specific threats to or in an authority's area, we propose
      that planning for three types of emergency or disaster need to be catered
      for in the legislation:

             Fixed location

             Unpredictable location, including "corridor"

            Area-Wide

      Each of these is described in more detail below:

      a)     Fixed location.      Plans would be prepared as necessary for
             industrial sites, power stations, munitions factories, airport
             crashes,    underground   stations,      blocks   of   flats,   major
             entertainment venues, localised flooding, waste tips, and so on.
             The statutory duty to plan or to assist in plan-making would fall
             on (i ) the operator or owner (i i ) the emergency services (iii) the
             local authority (iv) the Inspectorate.        This requirement would
             complement the existing CIMAH regime and amendments in train, and
             tackle the problems identified in para 4.9 above-

      b)     Unpredictable location. Specific provision would be made in local
              authority plans as necessary for gas explosions, aircraft or
              satellite crashes, terrorist bombs and "corridors" for road and
              rail—tankers, and aircraft flight—paths.  For some of these events
              specific plans may be necessary; for others annexes to the Major
             Disaster Plan may be sufficient.        In either case, the local       j
             authority may require the assistance of the operator.           The     ®
             proposed legislation should therefore impose a duty on operators
             or their Associations to* cooperate.  Overall the statutory duty to
             plsn or to assist in plan—making would cover (i) the operator or
             Association of operators (ii) emergency services (iii) the local
             authority (iv) the Inspectorate.   Local authorities should also be
             given the task of ensuring that the systems operated by responding
             agencies are coordinated.

      c)     Area-Wide Plans would be prepared for hurricanes and storms, snow
             and ice, widespread flooding, loss of water, electricity or gas
      t-     supplies, health epidemics, and so on.     For disasters involving
             public utilities, the duty to plan would be placed on the relevant
             public or private corporation.   For natural disasters, the duty to
             plan would rest principally on the local authority.        Thus the
             statutory duty would cover (i) public and private corporations or
             local authorities,   (ii)  emergency services,    (iii) the local
             authority, (iv) the Inspectorate.

      It is suggested that a list of possible hazard categories be attached as
      a schedule to the legislation.     Having conducted its statiitory hazard
      appraisal, the local authority would know which of the scheduled hazards
      were prevalent in the area.  The local authority would seek approval from
      the Inspectorate to prepare, say, three specific emergency plans each
      year addressing hazards listed in the schedule.

5.8   To sum up, the authors of this report propose:

             a statutory hazard appraisal



                                  - 21   -
             a statutory general emergency plan

             a statutory requirement    to address   three   categories   of specific
             emergency planning

             a schedule of potential hazard categories

             five separate agents specified in the legislation on whom the duty
             to plan or assist in plan-making might fall, i.e. the operator,
             the Association of operators, the emergency services, the local
             authority and the Inspectorate.

      We suggest that these proposals provide a practical outline for a new Act
      of Parliament.   Obviously much work would have to be done in defining
      thresholds, that is, volumes or frequencies or some other measure, below
      which the duty to prepare emergency plans would not apply.     A new Act
      could remove the ambiguity concerning the "common law duty of care” ,
      recently brought to public attention (see para. 4.7).     It should also
      give local authorities, the emergency services and the Inspectorate the
      power to require information from other bodies pursuant to their duty of
      public protection.   This new Act should replace the Civil Protection in
      Peacetime Act.

5.9   At least two other currents of thought exist on the type of legislative
      change necessary.   The first has been suggested by the Association of
      Civil Defence and Emergency Planning Officers, the National Association
      of Fire Officers and George Innes, Chief Emergency Planning Officer of
      the London FCDA (51).   In their view, the terms of the Civil Protection
      in Peacetime Act should be strengthened so as to impose on local
      authorities the duty to make plans for peacetime emergencies.         The
      authors of this report are opposed to this view on the grounds that the
      Civil Protection in Peacetime Act is poorly drafted (52) and that such a
      move would further integrate peacetime emergency planning and civil
      defence, which is undesirable.  The second current of thought, with which
      we have more sympathy, calls for a complete overhaul of the legislative
      structure, bringing all existing legislation from the 1948 Civil Defence
      A ct onwards into a new and comprehensive "Civil Protection Act" (53).
      This proposal does address the problem on the scale which we think is
      desirable, but again undermines its value by linking peacetime planning
      directly with civil defence.

      (iv)   The Practice of Local Authority Peacetime Emergency Planning

      (iv)   (a) Hazard Profiles and Specific Plans

5.10 As outlined     above, it is proposed that local authorities should, in
     consultation    with the proposed Inspectorate, build up hazard profiles for
     their area       relating to possible natural,     technological or   social
     emergencies    and disasters, and prepare specific plans, procedures or
     measures as    necessary.   In order to do this, authorities will obviously
     need access     to all relevant information.     Such information should be
     gained from:

       1.    the police and fire services which both carry out assessments of
              specific hazards in their areas;

      2.     other statutory and public bodies,        e.g.    met.   offices,   water
             authorities, gas boards etc.;


                                    -   22   -
     3.    Central Government departments;

     4.    local industry.

     To assist them in this task, local authorities should be able to require
     any necessary information from such bodies (subject, of course, to any
     usual confidentiality rules), and such bodies should be obliged to
     provide the information.

5.11 Once hazard profiles have been drawn up, a rational basis needs to be
     adopted for assessing which hazards pose the greatest risk to the local
     area, and which are therefore the priority from the emergency planning
     point of view.  Risk is often defined as the product of the frequency (or
     probability) of the incident and its effects (or consequences).       The
     analysis of risk is often a problematic subject, involving complex
     calculations of probabilities and attempts to define up to worst credible
     incidents.   We are not suggesting that emergency planners should carry
     out original risk analyses.    However, it is argued that they should be
     equipped or trained to review and assess available literature and
     information regarding the risks posed by particular hazards, including
     specific risk analyses when available. This process should assist in the
     task of making reasonable and informed recommendations about which
     hazards pose the greatest risk to the local area.       If an authority's
     general peacetime emergency plan is not capable or suitable for meeting a
     particular risk, then the emergency planner should consider preparing a
     specific plan or procedures,     aimed at coping with what the local
     authority considers to be the worst credible incident involving a
     particular hazard (54).    A local authority's hazard appraisal and its
     nomination of priorities for specific emergency     plans or procedures,
     should be submitted for appraisal by the proposed Emergency Planning
     Inspectorate.
                                      t
     (iv)(b)District FCDA Relationships

5.12 As indicated earlier, an FCDA's emergency planning team would only get
     involved in an actual emergency if the resources of the district
     concerned are inadequate, or if the emergency involves a number of
     districts.    In such cases, the FCDA might take on a co-ordinating role.
     Districts are,    in other words, in the frontline in terms of the
     operational response    in   an emergency.    It  is therefore of great
     importance that relevant district departments have well developed sets of
     emergency plans and procedures, with adequate training and exercising.
     The key tasks which should be covered by these plans and procedures are
     set out in para. 3.4., and include control and co-ordination, emergency
     accommodation, emergency feeding, emergency welfare, emergency rescue,
     emergency repair, demolition or clearance, emergency transport, emergency
     monitoring, emergency information, emergency communications and liaison.
     In other words, practically all metropolitan district services need to be
     drawn much more closely into a corporate emergency planning activity.   In
     order to achieve this, particularly in the context of any new statutory
     duty, it is argued that all metropolitan districts should have at least
     one full-time peacetime emergency planning officer.         This officer/s
     should   have   responsibility for   preparing    or assisting   with  the
     development of all the necessary plans and procedures.    This role should
     be complemented by the role of the FCDA emergency planning teams (as
     discussed below) (55).




                                  -   23   -
5.13 If the proposals set out so far were enacted, certain desirable changes
     would be necessary in the role of FCDA (and county council) emergency
     planning teams. Their role would become:

     (a)   to build up hazard profiles for the area of the county and, in
           consultation with the Inspectorate, to consider the need for
           specific emergency plans. (see paras 5.10 - 5-11);

     (b)   to liaise with and assist the districts in the preparation          of
           appropriate departmental and district plans as necessary;

     (c)    to prepare county-level peacetime plans as necessary;

     (d)    to ensure the emergency plans of different organisations dovetail
           with district and FCDA emergency plans, (see paras 4.13 and 5.4)

     (e)   on the basis of local risk appraisals to advise the Inspectorate
           on the need for regional or national planning, including mutual
           aid arrangements with neighbouring authorities, and to initiate
           necessary arrangements;

     (f)     to organise or assist with the training of volunteers and   district
            staff as appropriate (see para. 5.14 below);

     (g)     to organise or assist with regular exercises to test district and
            FCDA plans•

     It is argued that FCDA emergency planning teams should have a role that
     complements that of the districts.    This includes a key role in risk
     assessment, preparing county-level plans, ensuring the dovetail of all
     plans, ensuring that local authority emergency responses can be built up
     from local to regional scale and assisting with or organising the
     training of staff and volunteers and the exercising of plans. This would
     necessitate a substantial improvement in the training of emergency
     planning officers (56).

     (iv)(c)The Role of Social Services

5.14 The role of Social Services needs to be more broadly defined and better
     taken into account in emergency planning.    We support the proposal that
     Social Services Departments should plan to establish special units at
     time of disaster to enable appropriate staff to concentrate properly on
     disaster relief work (57).   Social Services Departments need to actively,
     consider whether they have effective       training programmes   for key
     personnel who may be called upon to respond to disasters (58).

     (iv)(d)Information Provision in an Emergency

5.15 The importance of planning information systems for major emergencies and
     disasters cannot be overstressed.     We support the conclusion of t|je
     Bradford Disaster Information Seminar that the media need a single,
     central facility, located away from the disaster area.      This facility
     should be used to ensure a regular flow of quality information and to use
     the media to provide information, advice to the public and to publicise
     appeals.   The planned provision of such a facility needs to be agreed
     between the emergency services and each district authority.




                                  -   24   -
  (v )    Resourcing

16 Physical   Resources: Closer   attention needs   to be paid by       local
   authorities   to potential   physical  resource   needs  in  response   to
   emergencies and disasters.   These needs should be assessed on the basis
   of the hazard profiles referred to earlier.   Emergency plans should then
   include information about the source, location and availability of
   resources, both from within the local authority and outside.      We note
   that three pilot projects are underway to "discover the best method of
   setting up and maintaining a detailed up-to-date local register of
   resources" for civil defence purposes and we stress the importance of
   providing such a register for peacetime emergency planning (59).       The
   Government should issue guidance on how to develop and improve resource
   registers at the earliest opportunity.

17 Finance: if the proposals set out above were enacted, the financing of
   local authority emergency planning would need a firmer basis.    Possible
   ways of financing local authority peacetime emergency planning are:

   (a)    by the   local    authority making use of    its normal budgeted
          resources - this is problematic in the light of centrally imposed
          spending cuts;

  (b)     by an increase in revenue support grant which was specifically
          excluded from having any      impact in terms of penalties or
          restrictions on raising or spending finance as it affected the
          local authority;

  (c)     by the provision of specific grant to     cover salaries and other
          costs - this is problematic because the establishment of specific
          grant directs the utilisation of resources without increasing the
          total pool;               t

  (d)     by payments for   site-specific planning      from the   site owners   or
          occupiers as appropriate.




18 We also propose that the Government strengthen its commitment (see para,
   4.18(iii)  above)  to provide   special financial assistance to local
   authorities who incur financial burdens as a result of their response in
   an emergency or disaster (as defined in para. 2.1).

   (vi)   National Emergency Planning and Disaster Response Arrangements

19 In paras 4-20 - 4.24 we identified a range of gaps and problems in
   arrangements at national level.       In this section we propose new
   arrangements to plug these gaps and tackle the problems. The tasks that
   need carrying out can be summarised as follows:-

          I    Emergency Planning

               a)      ensure the adequate development of peacetime emergency
                       plans by local authorities and other relevant agencies;

               b)       provide a national learning process to gain experience
                        from disasters;
               c)    act as a focus for training;

         II    Disaster Response

               d)    facilitate the provision of back-up support and advice
                     in major emergencies and disasters;

               e)    ensure a co-ordinated response in large-scale
                     emergencies and disasters.

  Various proposals have been forthcoming as to how to deal with these
  tasks, including the creation of a National Disaster Agency with a
  'National Disaster Director' (60).   We are grateful for comments on our
  initial thoughts in this regard, particularly from the Association of
  Civil Defence and Emergency Planning Officers and Eric Alley (61), who
  both pointed out the problems of creating an additional bureaucracy and a
  post with ill-defined executive powers.        As a result of further
  discussions we would suggest the following new arrangements are needed:

         I     Emergency Planning

                A new Emergency Planning Inspectorate to be created and a
                new Advisory Committee on Emergency Planning to be set up to
                advise the Secretaries of State as necessary.

         II    Disaster Response

                A small National Disaster Unit be created within the head
                office of the Emergency Planning Inspectorate.      In a
                situation of disaster or emergency the Unit Head would
                report as necessary to the Cabinet Office.
                                           t
  The functioning of these three new bodies in relation to the five tasks
  (a) to (e) is discussed below.

   (vi)(a) Emergency Planning: Overseeing Progress

20 The function of the Emergency Planning Inspectorate would be to ensure
   the adequate development of the new statutory emergency planning system.
   Six points are worth highlighting in this regard.      The Inspectorate
   would:

   (1)   Assist local authorities in developing Major Disaster Schemes and
         approve these general plans;

   (2)   Ensure that information be made available to local authorities and
         emergency services to facilitate a sound hazard appraisal for each
         local authority area;

   (3)   Appraise the local authority's hazard appraisal and its nomination
         of priorities for specific emergency plans according to an annual
         timetable;

   (4)   Assist  local authorities,   the emergency    services and other
         agencies on whom the statutory duty falls to co-ordinate their
         plan-making to ensure the 'dovetailing' of plans;

  (5)    Approve the specific emergency plans;
     (6)   Monitor the updating of    the     general plans,   the hazard appraisal
           and the specific plans.

    There are several feasible options for the new Inspectorate's location
    and reporting lines.   These options need further evaluation and at this
    stage in the development of our proposals, we offer         them without
    expressing a favoured solution.

     (1)   alongside   the  existing  Inspectorates   of  Health   and   Safety
            Executive and its Area Organisation.  It follows that the Advisory
            Committee would be part of the Health and Safety Commission.

     (2)   alongside the Police and Fire Inspectorates at the Home Office.
            The Advisory Committee would sit alongside similar systems in the
            Home Office.

     (3)   within the National Audit Office as an extension of its function
            to audit the accounts of government departments generally and
            Value for Money studies in particular.      Further work on this
            option would need to examine the role, functions and achievements
            of the General Accounting Office of the United States Congress.
           The   Advisory Committee would report to Parliament via the
           Comptroller and Auditor General.

     (4)   a new body modelled on the monitoring and licensing functions of
            consumer product and service organisations such as the Office of
            Fair Trading and the Office of Telecommunications.

    Doubtless there are other models available for evaluation.      We firmly
    assert the need for the Emergency Planning Inspectorate and the Advisory
    Committee.  It goes without saying that independence and effective powers
    are pre-requisites.              >

     (vi)(b) Emergency Planning: Investigation and learning

5.21 It is essential that we learn from experience.     The Emergency Planning
     Inspectorate should have the duty of investigating major emergencies and
     publishing reports of its fundings.    It should also have responsibility
     for studying the response to a wide range of emergencies and disasters in
     this county and overseas.  It should be responsible for the dissemination
     of guidance incorporating new learning and good practice.

    The Fennell Report into the King's Cross Fire (62) adds powerful support
    in recommending "Consideration should be given to a national disaster
    planning desk where the experience gained from disasters and their
    investigation and civil emergencies can be retained."

     (vi)(c) Emergency Planning: Training

5.22 We propose that the Emergency Planning Inspectorate, subject to guidance
     from the Advisory Committee on Emergency Planning, be given a brief to
     develop guidelines for, and to promote, training courses and professional
     qualification in emergency planning and in the management of the response
     to disasters.   Polytechnics and Universities should be invited to submit
     course outlines for approval.   Any such courses should take full account
     of the role of district and county level emergency planning officer. The




                                     27   -
        development of this education and training role would necessarily lean
        heavily in the early years on the skills and experience possessed by
        existing practitioners in the emergency services and emergency planning.

5.23 In accordance with the earlier arguments in this review (paras 4.2 - 4.4
     and 5.2 - 5.3)/ we seriously doubt that the Civil Defence College would
     be appropriate for the courses proposed above, steeped as it is in the
     traditions  of civil defence planning and the politics of          'civil
     protection1. If the college were to be given a role, it would require a
     change of name.and a profound change in its terms of reference.

         (vi)(d) Disaster Responses Back-Up Support and Advice

5.24 Turning to the handling of a disaster which was of sufficient scale or
     importance to warrant a national response, we envisage the creation of a
     small National Disaster Unit within the headquarters of the Emergency
     Planning Inspectorate. The Unit should have the following in its brief:

               the establishment of a list of people experienced in aspects of
               major disasters or emergencies who would be able to assist if
               requested (e.g. in the setting up of major casualty bureaux and
               for counselling the bereaved);

               the provision of a 'hot line' so that advice could be given on the
               location and availability of expert assistance;

               the provision of a 'warm line' so that a more comprehensive
               back-up service could be provided, e.g. on data services.

f       The staff in the Unit should either be drawn from people with direct
™       experience of responding to emergencies and disasters, or be fully
        trained in responding to emergencies or ^disasters• The Head of the Unit
        should be able to act in a consultancy role when necessary.

         (vi)(e) Disaster Response: Co-ordination

    5.25 In a major disaster or emergency, the National Disaster Unit should
         report as necessary to the Cabinet Office so that procedures can be
         initiated to co-ordinate executive action at Central Government level if
         required.    This could be      necessary if an emergency or disaster
         transcended  county boundaries or was of a particular type requiring a
         response from a number of Government departments.

    5.26 There must also be a clear and accepted definition of lead department
         responsibility.  This is essential for a clear line of decision-making in
         emergencies or disasters of a scale or nature in which the police are
         unable to fulfil their traditional control and co-ordination role.

    5.27 In para. 5.13(e) above, we argued that a key role of the county-level
         emergency planning team should be to advise on the need for regional or
         national planning to cater for particular local risks.  We propose that
         the Emergency Planning Inspectorate should assess such advice and, if
         appropriate, ensure that the   necessary regional or national planning
         takes place.




                                     -   28   -
6.    CONCLUDING REMARKS

6.1   It is the central contention of this paper that to develop a truly
      effective peacetime emergency planning service in Britain, a wide range
      of problems at both Local Authority and Central Government level have to
      be tackled.   In line with the announcement describing the nature of the
      current Central Government review, we have developed a range of proposals
      which seek to build on     what is already in place.      These proposals
      include the prioritisation of peacetime emergency planning, establishing
      emergency planning on a proper statutory basis, improving the practice of
      local authority emergency planning in a number of key ways, adequately
      resourcing local authority peacetime emergency planning, creating a new
      Emergency   Planning  Inspectorate  and   National  Disaster   Unit,  and
      establishing a new Advisory Committee on Emergency Planning.      We have
      stressed the importance of all relevant district council departments
      having well developed sets of emergency plans and procedures, and argued
      for complementary changes in the role of FCDA (and County Council)
      emergency planning teams.

      In the near future, the introduction of Competition and Competitive
      Tendering is likely to bring a new dimension to the problems and our
      proposals for reform.     Local government's access to its staff and
      resources in responding to a major emergency is currently a major asset.
      If the privatisation measures result in substantial functions being
      undertaken  by   the private    sector,  local government's  ability to
      concentrate resources will require pre-planned agreements and procedures.
      It is worth stressing that local government's protective and regulatory
      functions will remain after C.C.T. but the activation, execution and co­
      ordination systems will require radical restructuring.        Some local
      authorities are insisting on including the tenderer's ability to respond
      to disaster and provide resources in their tender documents.
                                         t
6.2   A final point needs to be made: the problems and inadequacies with
      current arrangements   cannot   be   solved by  simply "adding on" new
      facilities at national level.      If, for example, a 'national disaster
      unit' with a limited remit is simply tacked on to current arrangements,
      it will probably only serve to obscure the chronic underdevelopment of
      local authority peacetime emergency planning.        As Eric Alley, the
      President of the Institute of Civil Defence and former Civil Defence
      Adviser to the Home Office, has recently stressed:

             ... in the final analysis it is the local authorities, and
             particularly the district authorities, which bear the brunt of the
             burden for coping with the effects       of    disaster and no amount of
             central command will     compensate for ineffective,   inefficient
             disaster planning on the ground (63).




                                  -   29   -
References and Notes

(1)    'Disaster Information Seminar', Appendix to FEP 88 10.

(2)    'Government Reviewing Arrangements        for   Disaster Planning',    Home Office
       Press Release, March 2, 1988.

(3)    'Co-operation in the Community on Civil Protection'/ Commission of the
       European Communities/ COM(87) final, 12 April 1987.

(4)    'Amendment of Control of Industrial             Major   Accident   Hazards   (CIMAH)
       Regulations 1984', AMA FEP 87 71.

(5)    'Nuclear Site Emergency   Planning', Report        of   the   CEPO Society Working
       Party, January 1988.

(6)    By the term "local authority emergency planners" this review refers to
       the non-uniform Emergency Planning staff employed by Fire and Civil
       Defence Authorities and by some districts, and not to the emergency
       services, ambulance, fire brigade and police.

(7)    Definitions of major emergencies or disasters vary slightly between the
       emergency services.   See, for example, 'Peacetime Emergency Planning -
       the Role of the Police', AMA Seminar July 1987, and 'Dealing with
       Emergencies' GM Fire Service, AMA Services July 1987.

(8)    'Emergency Planning Guidance to Local Authorities', Home Office, Section
       22, 1985.

(9)    There are a large number of organisations that either prepare emergency
       plans or who might get involved in an emergency response.     These range
       from the emergency services - police, ^fire and ambulance - who have the
       key operational role; through various public bodies such as health
       authorities, water authorities and Passenger Transport Organisations;
       various  industries,  including the Electricity Broads,     British Gas,
       British Telecom and British Rail; voluntary organisations such as the Red
       Cross, St. John's Ambulance and the WRVS; Government Departments and the
       Armed Services.

(10) As above (6), para. 22.4

(11) In his comments on the draft version of this document, Eric Alley,
     President of the Institute of Civil Defence, added that "Not only is
     there NO statutory duty on local authorities to plan for peacetime
     emergencies, but there is no statutory duty to co-ordinate either....",
     letter of June 1st 1988.

(12) As above (6), para. 22.6

(13)    It should be noted that the development of adequate relationships between
       districts and FCDA's is very uneven across the country.

(14)    The envisaged scope of usage of this power was first set out by theHome
       Office in circular ES7/1975, 'Major Accidents and Natural Disasters'.

(15) As above (6), para. 22.7




                                    -   30   -
(16) University of Bradford, Disaster Information              Seminar,    26th    November,
     1987, Conclusions and Recommendations, pi.

(17)   'Disaster Planning', report from the Association of Director of Social
       Services' Seminar, November 1987, AMA FEPC Agenda and Papers, March 1988.

(18)    Eric Alley has argued that it is not so much the prioritisation of Civil
       Defence that has damaged progress with peacetime emergency planning, but
       "that some councils have carried their historic antagonism to civil
       defence into the overall field of emergency planning", letter of June 1st
       1988.   The authors of this report do not agree with this view and point
       out that the AMA has consistently supported peacetime emergency planning
       for major accidents and natural disasters.

(19)   'The   Planned   Programme   for    Implementation',      Home     Office   Circular
       ES1/1986.

(20)   AMA, Fire and Emergency Planning Committee, 8th April, 1987

(21)    Support for this view has been e^qpressed by the Association    of Civil
       Defence and Emergency Planning Officers who state that: "The report quite
       rightly points out the absurdity of the current Home Office posture on
       public relations.  The policy and practice is to give priority to Civil
       Defence, but nearly all the emphasis in Home Office publicity material
       relates to civil emergencies."     (Letter to the authors of June 2nd,
       1988).

(22) Co-ordinator of Voluntary Effort in Civil Defence, Quarterly Newsletter
     No. 7, July 1983.    In making the arguments in para 4.4 the authors seek
     to set out criticism of the so-called all-hazards approach where it tries
     to legitimise civil defence plans and preparations by exaggerating their
     relevance   to   peacetime  emergencies  and   disasters.    The  authors
     acknowledge that there are common elements in planning for peacetime
     emergencies   and disasters and     for war,  but argue that peacetime
     emergencies and disasters need to be planned for specifically.      It is
     stressed that local authorities cannot rely on civil defence plans and
     procedures to provide adequate and effective responses to peacetime
     incidents.

(23) It is noted that in Greater Manchester the Districts have requested the
     FCDA to take on a co-ordinating role in peacetime emergency planning on
     their behalf under Section 101 of the Local Government Act 1972.   This
     practice has not been followed in other areas.

(24) 7£t should be noted that Section 138 is primarily drafted to take account
     of disasters or emergencies that have actually happened.      It makes no
     explicit reference to planning and the right to plan has been inferred as
     a sensible activity pursuant to the general power.    The extent to which
     planning can take place before a disaster, depends on whether there is
     reasonable ground for apprehending the disaster.

(25) Judgement in Frederick     Robinson       etal versus   Cardiff    City Council   eteil,
     December 1987, p.55.

(26) As above,   (25), p.56.

(27) Schedule 2 of the 1983 Civil Defence Regulations sets out the subject
     matter to be covered by civil defence plans and includes, for example,


                                     -    31   -
       utilising buildings for civil defence public shelters and providing
       rescue, temporary accommodation, prevention of disease and emergency
       feeding services.    However, the power given by the Civil Protection in
       Peacetime Act is a power to plan for the matters specified in this
       Schedule, and nothing more.    To give an extreme example: para. 5 of the
       Schedule is concerned with the rescue of persons, but only "from damaged
       buildings and debris".     Responses to the draft version of this report
       demonstrated the existence of a range of views on the Civil Protection in
       Peacetime Act.    The National Association of Fire Officers, for example,
       stated that the "powers in the . .. Act serve no useful purpose" (letter
       to the authors of June 1st 1988).    Eric Alley on the other hand, argued
       that the Act "has much greater value than appears at firstsight" (letter
       to the authors of June 1st, 1988).

(28)   'Unified Approach to Major Hazard Sites Needed', A. Jones, CEPO, Somerset
       County Council, Civil Protection Magazine, No. 4, Autumn, p . 17.

(29) As above in (4) and see also 'Local Authorities and Hazardous Industrial
     Development', South Yorkshire FCDA, October 1987, Section 2, paras 24-25,
     for a fuller discussion on the extent of the limitations of the HSE.

(30) The CIMAH Regulations are, of course, an example of this trend. Specific
     emergency plans also exist for a range of other threats, for example, for
     major nuclear sites (see (5) above).

(31) It should be noted, for example, that in thesecond report ofthe      CEPO
     Working Party on 'Nuclear Site Emergency Planning' , the argument is made
     that "there is little practical evidence to support the validity of
     general peacetime emergency plans in large scale evacuations" (para.
     2.4.3).   The point is that where specific procedures or measures are
     required to meet specific threats, then they have to be planned for
     specifically.

(32) As an example, we refer again to the recent judgement relating to the
     1979 Cardiff floods.    In this case the Welsh Water Authority was in
     receipt of a report which showed that tides were a secondary factor in
     flooding in Cardiff.   The Officer responsible for initiating the flood
     warning by Cardiff City Council was unaware of this report and assumed
     that once high tide had passed, the threat of flooding would also recede.
     The flooding resulting in the court action, however, occurred two hours
     after high tide.

(33) As in (8), para. 22.4.

(34) As in (7) above.

(35)   'Zeebrugge : The British Response', Civil Protection Issue No. 3, Summer
       1987, p.4.

(36) M. Sibson, Essex CEPO, quoted in The Times, March 4th, 1988.
                                                                      y
(37) This point is graphically illustrated by a description in The Times
     (March 4th 1988) of emergency plans for the port of Harwich: "There is no
     one, therefore, to sort out the inconsistencies at Harwich or even to
     inspect the various plans to see if they are viable".
(37A) Investigation into     the    King's        Cross   Underground       Fire    (CM    499)    HMSO,
      November 1988.

(38)   As in (17) above,    p.3

(39)   As in (16) above

(40)   Out of Greater Manchester's ten districts, for example, only one has a
       full-time EPO.

(41)   Following the changes in social security law that took effect from 1st
       April, 1988, the DHSS will no longer make emergency needs payments.
       Instead, 'clients' are required to obtain crisis loans from the Social
       Fund, which has only a limited amount of money allocated to it (see the
       'National Welfare Benefits Handbook', CPAG 1988, Section 9.3.3.).

(42)   Such arrangements were made to assist in covering the costs incurred by
       local authorities after the storms in October 1987 (see Hansard, 21st
       October 1987).  However, these arrangements are coming under increasing
       criticism (see 'Treasury profiting from storm aid, says committee",~ The
       Times March 4th 1988).

(43)   As in (16) above.  It is acknowledged that the police service has a well
       tried and tested system of casualty bureaux, but it is suggested that
       this system may need supplementing in very large scale disasters.

(44)   'Call for new law to plug yawning gaps in disaster planning', The Times,
       2nd April, 1988.

(45)   As in (16) above

(46)   As in (5) above, para.     1.5*

(47)   It is suggested that the situation in the non-metropolitan areas is only
       marginally better since many of the problems outlined are common to both
       metropolitan and non-metropolitan authorities.   Where progress has been
       made   it  will  have   been  subject   to  many   of  the   legislative,
       administrative and financial constraints set out here.

(48)   This argument provoked some forthright criticism, for example from the
       Association   of  Civil   Defence   and   Emergency Planning  Officers.
       Nonetheless, successive reports such as the BMA's 'The Medical Effects
       of Nuclear War', and Openshaw etal's 'Doomsday: Britain after a Nuclear
       Attack', have clearly indicated the marginal impact of civil defence
       measures after nuclear attack on Britain.

(49)   Fred Elton, Chief Fire Officer in Tyne and Wear, has suggested that at
       the end of the current three year 'PPI' timetable, the Government may be
       prepared to sanction significantly more time being spent on peacetime
       emergency planning, at the expense of the further development of civil
       defence measures (letter to the authors of May 23rd).

(50)   As in (16) above

(51)   In letters to       the    authors     of       June   2nd,   June     1st    and     May    24th
       respectively.



                                         -   33    -
(52)   In advice to the AMA, 8th January 1987, Turner-Samuel QC and William
       Birtles stated agreement with an AMA report severely criticising the
       Civil Protection in Peacetime Act.

(53)   Eric Alley, letter to the authors,     1st June 1988.

(54)   For a discussion of the problems of risk and safety assessments in
       relation to the CIMAH regime, see 'Local Authorities and Hazardous
        Industrial Developments.' SYFCDA, October 1987, Section 2, paras. 17-
       22   .
(55)   The need to employ emergency planning officers at district level has
       been questioned by Bill Holland, CEPO for Merseyside, and by Eric Alley,
       who consider that the bulk of the emergency planning workload can be
       carried at FCDA level (letters to the authors of 27th May and 1st June
       respectively).   The authors, however, consider that the tasks outlined
       in para. 5.10 require the employment of an officer or officers at
       district level.     (It should be noted that in London there is the
       intermediate level of Group between boroughs and the FCDA.       Several
       London groups have drawn up mutual aid plans for peacetime emergencies
       beyond the capacity of a single borough).

(56)   It should also be clear that the carrying out of the tasks described in
       paras. 5.10 and 5.11 by existing emergency planning staff would be very
       difficult to achieve if the current priority given to civil defence is
        sustained.

(57)   As in (17) above, p . 3.

(58)   It is understood that the DHSS is convening a working party with local
       authority representation to draw up guidelines for an enhanced role for
       Social Services Departments, Letter to the AMA, 25th May 1988.
                                                  t
(59)   'Resources Project', Civil Protection, Spring 1987, Issue No. 2, p . 13.

(60)   See 'Call for National Disaster Director' Sunday Times, 13th March 1988.

(61)   Letters to the authors,June 2nd and June 1st 1988 respectively.

(62)   Investigation into    the   King's Cross       Underground   Fire   (CM 499) HMSO,
       November 1988.

(63)   'Emergency Planning - The Local Authority Dimension', Eric Alley at the
        'Disaster  and  Emergencies  -   The  Need  for   Planning' Conference,
       April 12-13th, 1988.




November 1988




                                     - 34 -
