                                                   WP( 8 9 )   1 s t MEETING




TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY ON THE GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS




                               AGENDA



1.   To note the Working Party's terms of reference and the
     introductory paper W P (89)1   (attached).


2.   To note the Interim Report (attached).


3.   To identify the areas for future consideration by reference
     to the Green Guide and otherwise.


4.   To consider:-   i)    other references
                     ii)   the method of working
                     iii) timetable.


5.   Any other business.


6.   Date and place of next meeting.
                                                             WP(89)1


TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY ON THE GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS



Introductory Paper


The disaster at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989, which claimed the
lives of 95 people and injured several hundred more, and the
subsequent Public Inquiry hearings in Sheffield highlighted a
number of failures, both human and structural.   Although the
immediate cause of the disaster was the gross overcrowding in
Pens 3 and 4 on the Leppings Lane terraces, the Interim Report
published in August 1989 also acknowledged other elements.       It
emphasised in particular the existence of a number of serious
structural weaknesses at the ground.   In some cases, these were a
result of clear departures from the recommendations set out in
the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the "Green
Guide") which, although it has no statutory or legal force, is
the only official advice available about safety at sports
grounds.


2.   These departures included the spacing of crush barriers, the
width of perimeter gates and the gradient in the tunnel leading
onto the terraces (see para 287 of the Interim Report).     In
addition, research carried out during the course of the oral
hearings cast doubt on some of the underlying assumptions behind
the Green Guide figures themselves.    It is intended therefore
that the Working Party examine the technical aspects of the
Guide, identify areas needing amendment or clarification and
recommend accordingly.


3.   The purpose of this introductory paper is thus to set the
scene.   It highlights those areas of the Guide which emerged from
Part I of the Inquiry as warranting further, more detailed,
study, but it is by no means an authoritative statement of the
Working Party's remit.


4.   Comprehensive guidelines on spectator safety at sports
grounds first appeared as recommendations in the appendix to the
Wheatley Report on Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds published in
1972.        Those recommendations formed the basis of the original
"Green Guide", published in 1973.         A new version was published in
1976, and a new edition in 1986, the latter taking into account
the recommendations of a working party established under the
aegis of Mr Justice Popplewell1s Inquiry into Crowd Safety and
Control at Sports Grounds following the Bradford City disaster in
1985.        Most people would probably accept that the Guide has
developed more as a piecemeal response to particular events than
as the result of a coherent and cohesive process.


5.      Recommendations in the current Guide which Inquiry evidence
suggests may need critical re-examination include the following:-



        i.      Packing density.    Paragraphs 221 and 222 recommend a
                range of maximum packing densities up to 54 persons per
                10 square metres.   That figure was reached following a
                series of tests carried out in the early 1970s
                involving healthy, predominantly male adults as test
                subjects.    Copies of those papers are attached at Annex
                A.   Density tests set up by the Health and Safety
                Executive (HSE) at Sheffield during the course of the
                hearings, and experienced by Lord Justice Taylor and
                his Assessors, suggest, in the light of the discomfort
                experienced, that those figures may need to be re­
                evaluated.    The Working Party needs therefore to assess
                whether the method of calculation employed in drawing
                up the Green Guide figures remains acceptable, whether
                the tests need to reflect more closely the actual
                age/sex composition of football crowds and whether, in
                any event, Paragraphs 221 and 222 need clarification.
                The Interim Report (para 177 and Recommendation 2)
                recognises that the figure of 54 per 10 square metres
                has been regarded not as the upper extreme of a range
                of maximum figures but as the norm - a feature probably
                attributable to imprecise drafting;
 Crush barriers.    Annex C to the Guide specifies the
 method of testing to be employed in respect of crush
 barriers and handrails, but is open to different
 interpretations.    Dr Eastwood's, recorded at Paragraph
 238 of the Interim Report, involved recovery in
 relation to the barrier's position before the third and
 final application, rather than before the first
 application of pressure, of each test.    The Report
 accepts that his interpretation is tenable, but it is
 almost certain that the Home Office intended recovery
 to be measured against the barrier's position before
 the first application.    Indeed, that is the more
 commonsense approach.    Such an obvious ambiguity in the
 Guide needs to be addressed, along with a re­
 examination of the suitability of the relevant forces
 set out in the Annex.


 In addition, in the light of oral evidence already
 given as to the mechanics of testing individual barrier
 spans (see for example, Transcript Day 26 pp 112-114),
 the Working Party might consider the possible need for
 a more explicit description of the testing process.
 Certainly, even though the method employed at
 Hillsborough by Dr Eastwood resulted in the omission of
 testing results for one span in each barrier,    it did
 not expressly conflict with the Guide;


. Corrosion.   Paragraph 240-242 of the Interim Report
 indicate the degree, and effect, of corrosion on the
 barriers at Hillsborough.    Tests carried out by the HSE
 showed corrosion of the metal at vulnerable points, and
 paragraph 242 specifically recommends that the question
 of corrosion be explicitly addressed in any revision of
 the Guide;


 Tunnel gradients.    Evidence given to the Inquiry
 established that the tunnel gradient into Pens 3 and 4
 was, in places,    1 in 6 as against the Green Guide
 maximum of 1 in 10 (Para 88 G Guide).     In addition,
insufficient thought appears to have been given in the
past to the impact of tunnel gradients on ingress, as
opposed to egress.    The problem has always been posited
in terms of rapid evacuation from terraces, rather than
of intense pressure directed into the standing areas;


Perimeter fences.    Much has already been said during
the course of the Inquiry about the need to retain or
to abolish perimeter fencing.    The subject is an
emotive one and opinions are divided.    In conjunction
with this debate run parallel questions about the
height, strength and material involved in construction,
and of the need for, width of and open/shut state of
perimeter gates.    The Working Party will need to
examine all of these issues.
                   CRUSH BARRIER STRENGTHS AND SPAC DIGS

1.0    INTRODUCTION

Until recently there was little guidance available on the strengths and

spacings suitable for crush barriers used on football terraces.      The only

problem in the design of barriers was often seen as that of ensuring they

did not collapse under crowd pressures.      Uhile it is of paramount importance

that collapse does not occur, it is also important that crowd pressures

cannot be generated so as to caus'e injury particularly to those spectators

pressed against the barrier«

1.1    The supporting evidence for the spacing and strength of crush barriers

recommended in the 'iheatley Report is given below.     In brief, the

determination of the pressure that can be generated on a terrace is explained,

a distinction being made between the levels of pressure that can be

generated in "peak viewing areas" e.g. behind penalty boxes, and in "other

viewing areas"; a figure is obtained for the pressure that can be generated pe;

man (or alternatively per foot width of barrier par foot spacing as a

function of slope);     and measurements of the pressures that can be

tolerated by the human body when pressed against a barrier are described.

Other supporting evidence is also mentioned.

1.2.    It is assumed that only on rare occasions will all the spectators

between 2 consecutive barriere up a slope contribute simultaneously to

crowd pressures.      VJhen this "maximum pressure" does occur it causes grave

discomfort but, owing to its transient nature, is unlikely to cause injury<>

It is assumed that the pressures which occur frequently will be generated

by half of these spectators and, for the purpose of this paper, this

frequently generated pressure is called the "tolerable pressure".       The

recommended barrier spacing is based on it, the actual distance recommended

between barriers being the standing room required by twice the number of

spectators who exert the tolerable pressure.      It is also assumed that each

spectator occupies an area of 2 square feet, standing on a step of 14" depth
and exerting his pressure over 21" of barrier.      Two series of spacings

are given each of which is based on a different level of tolerance to

crowd pressure:     one level of tolerance is for safety only and the other

for safety plus comfort, these being 300 lbf per person (or 170 lbf per

foot width) and 200 lbf per person (or 115 1bf per foot width)

respectively.

1.3    Since the collapse of a barrier could lead to an incident escalating

in severity, the barriers should withstand the greatest pressure ever

likely to be exerted on them.      Accordingly the recommended barrier

strengths are based on the "maximum pressure" i.e. that pressure which

could be generated by all the spectators who could be involved.      Using

the tolerable pressures quoted in paragraph 1.2, the desired barrier

strengths are 340 lbf per foot width and 230 lbf per foot width for the

2 levels of tolerance.         Should the barrier spacing be less than the

maximum recommended, the barrier strength may be reduced proportionately

provided none is less than 206 lbf per foot width.       (This is the value

quoted in the British Standards Code of Practice for barriers in

buildings).


2.0     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

        Research commissioned by Wheatley Inquiry

        (i)   Measurements of required strength of crush barriers on terraces

              Home Office

       (ii)   Tests to determine the forces tolerated by people when against

              crush barriers — Department of Bio mechanics, University of

              Surrey

      (iii)   Measurements of crowd pressures generated at Liverpool Football

              Club ground — Bingham Blades, & Partners, Consulting Structural

              Engineers 1972

       (iv)   Literature search for levels of force/pressure at which injury

              occurs - Home Office.

                                      2
       Oth^r Research

       (v)     Measurements of required strength of crowd barriers (horizontal

              only) - Ministry of Public Buildings and Work3 1948

      (vi)    Measurements of crowd pressures generated at Everton Football

              Club ground - Bingham Blades & Partners 1971

      (rii)   Strength tests on crush barriers at a football club ground

              Kingston Polytechnic 1971 .


3.0    MEASUREMENTS' OF CR0V7D PRESSURES THAT_..CAN BE GENERATED

Measurements were made by the Home Office of the pressure that could be

generated on the terraces during a match,        (reference paragraph 2.0).

Thirty police cadets were used to simulate spectators.        Two levels of

force were defined - (a) 'lean', corresponding to spectators bearing on

one another but exerting no additional force, and (b) 'push', as 'lean'

but with the crowd exerting an additional force in order to see, but not

pushing aggressively.     The cadets in varying numbers of rows were asked to

'push' or 'lean' against a well padded test barrier attached to an existing

crush barrier at a football ground.         The forces were measured using

pressure gauges.     The experiments were carried out on 3 slopes of 0°, 15 »

and 23r°.     It was considered that condition (b) 'push' corresponded

to the state of the crowd in the "peak viewing areas" of the terraces

 and that condition (a) 'lean' corresponded to the other areas.         Pressures

of up to about 300 lbf per person were tolerated with some discomfort

by the cadets for a few seconds.      Signs of considerable discomfort were

shown for longer periods of time or for greater pressures.

3.1    It was assumed that the force propagated down a slope would have

2 components:       (i) the force measured with a slope of 0°, and (ii) a

component proportional to the weight of the spectator and the size of

 the slope angle.     The following relationship was found to hold for the

 force per spectator.



                                 3
        slope      =        Po + 84 sin Q

where P slope is force in lbf per spectator

       Q is angle to horizontal of the slope
                                                               o
       Po is the force per spectator when Q              =    0
and    Po (push)       =    40 lbf and       Po (lean)   =■ 21 lbf.

However as the police cadets were above average ifeight, a normalising

factor is needed and the relationship becomes:

       P slepe     =       Po + 73.5*sin Q

where Po (push)        =     35.5 lbf and Po (lean)       =   18.5 lbf.

For example, using this relationship it can be calculated that 9 rows

of spectators all pushing on a 14° terrace will press the foremost

spectator against the barrier with, a force of 480 lbf (or 274 lbf per

foot width of barrier).

3.2    The values for Q = 0° were in agreement with siailar aeasurements

made in 1948 by the Ministry of Public Buildings and Works (reference

paragraph    2.0 (v)).         The force as a function of sl®pe was not

measured on that occasion.

4.0    MEASUREMENTS OF CROWD PRESSURES ACTUALLY GENERATED

Measurements were made at 2 football matches of the forces actually

ezerted on a barrier.           The measurements using calibrated strain gauges

were made at 2 different grounds on barriers situated behind the

 penalty box (reference paragraph 2.0 (iii) and (vi)),

 4*1   Match A.    Barrier spacing behind the test barrier varied from

13' to 25'         the terrace slope was 14° (1 14).           Forces of 100 to

 200 lbf per foot width ©f barrier were eeasured with occasional

 peaks to 300 lbf per foot width.               The forces did not exceed 200 lbf per

 foot width for 3 or ®ore seconds.

       Match B     Barrier spacing varied froia 13*5' to 26' and the terrace

 slope was 14°.        Forces of 100 to over 200 lbf per foot width were

 measured with occasional values of 300 lbf per foot width.


                                         4
4.2   Neither match was crucial nor particularly exciting.   At the

second match there were 14 casualties including a man with a

fractured leg and a boy with concussion.    Two experienced plain­

clothes men who were stationed in the crowd stated that apprehension

and fear were generated by crowd movements and pressure, and that seme

spectators stood back and braced themselves against the crowd pressure

with one foot on the barrier.


5.0   MEASUREMENTS ON HUMAN TOLERANCE TO CROWD PRESSURES

A series of measurementt; were made on men and women to determine

the maximum pressure which could be tolerated by a person vihen

pressed against a crush barrier.   Each person while standing was

pressed against a steel tube located horizontally against various

positions in turn on his trunk.    The pressure was applied to him by

means of a pack frame on his back with various weights which forced

him on to the barrier.   Three subjective levels of discomfort were

defined and each person was asked to say when they were reached.

In particular the third level of discomfort was defined as that which

became intolerable after a few seconds.

For men (42 subjects) the height of the barrier rail at which maximum

force could be tolerated was found to be 41 y " t which corresponds well

with the usual barrier height of 42".     The mean value of this force

for men when passive was found to be 107 lbf and when they were

allowed to resist by pushing against the barrier was 179 lbf (with

a range of 98 to 233 lbf).   For the passive tests the force tolerated

was increase!by a third to 140 lbf by substituting a 4" wide plank

for the steel tube.   The values in respect of women were considerably

lower.
5.1   It is felt that although the above results give an order of

aagnitude of the tolerable force, the following comments could be made.
       (i)   The maximum force tolerated was clearly not at the threshold

             of injury.

      (ii)   Although the force was defined as being intolerable after a

             few seconds, periods of surging and pushing in a crowd on a

             terrace may be more transient, and for these very short

             periods greater forces can apparently be tolerated.

  (iii)      Persons with loiver levels of tolerance may well be protected

             by their stronger companions.


6.0    MEASUREMENTS OF BARRIER STRENGTH AT A FOOTBALL GROUND

A nunber of measurements were made of the strength of existing crush

barriers at a London Football Club (reference paragraph 2.0 (vii)).

In particular, tests were made on barriers in the same area and similar

to a barrier which had collapsed during a match.      Three similar

barriers failed at pressures of 260, 290 and J00 lbf per foot width.

The distance to the next barrier above the collapsed barrier varied

from 10' to 22'.

6.1     The consulting engineers i,ecomnended that crush barriers should

be designed and checked to a significantly higher loading than 200 lfcf

per foot width, and that no spacing between barriers should be greater

than 12' and should be less on steep terraces.      They also recommended

that for design purposes there was need to determine the lead which

people can exert on barriers and the maximum pressure which the human

body can bear without injury.

7.0     OTHER MEDICAL EVIDENCE FOR THE LEVEL OF FORCE/PRESSURE AT WHICH

        INJURY OCCURS.

A search in medical papers for evidence ef the level of pressure at

which injury occurs te the human body was undertaken by a Heme

Office doctor (reference paragraph 2.0 (iv)).

7.1     Among the infomation brought to notice by this search were

2 cases of traumatic asphyxia where the pressures (as calculated by the
weight of the objects causing the pressures)differed to a marked

extent.    In the first case the pressure was 1400 pounds for a period

of 15 seconds, and in the second case 300 pounds for scae 4 to 6

minutes.   The reason for the difference in the pressures reported in

these cases *say be due to the 1400 pounds being far in excess of the

minimum required to cause the fatality.    Certainly the amount and

duration of the pressure in the second case were similar to those

reported at the Bolton Wanderers accident in 1946 where layers of 3 or

4 bodies were sufficient to cause death by traumatic asphyxia.

This evidence does indicate that if a barrier should collapse end people

are piled on top of each other even for only a short time, traumatic

asphyxia is a definite hazard.

7„2   The search disclosed no other information about injury to the

body due to static forces, but did reveal that as far as dynamic forces

are concerned the liver can be injured by impacts of 3-5 mph.    There

was also brought to notice that bone finds increased strength when

subjected to a dynamic as opposed to a static loading:    this may be

the reason why larger forces of a transient nature, can be tolerated.


3.    RECOMMENDED BARRIER STRENGTHS AND SPACINGS

Spectators can be safeguarded.against injury from crowd pressures by

the careful positioning of crush barriers of suitable design.    The

barriers should never collapse under pressure and should be spaced

to limit the number of spectators between 2 barriers so that their

combined pressures can never be sufficient to cause injury.     For

financial reasons there is need to determine the minimum adequate

strength and the maximum acceptable spacing of barriers for this

purpose.     The following summary of the information presented earlier

in this paper provides the basis for the recommendations which haTe

been made in this regard.
8.1    The pressures which can be generated by spectators when they

'lean' or 'push' on a terrace have been measured (see paragraph 3).

For a 14° slope the 'lean' force per person was calculated to be

36 lbf (or 20 lbf per foot width of barrier) and the 'push' to be

53 lbf (or 30 lbf per foot width).

8.2    Pressures measured on 14° slopes during 2 catches (see paragraph 4 }

were of the same order of magnitude, being 200 lbf per foot width as

a regular occurrence for periods longer than 3 seconds, and with

occasional    peaks of 300 lbf per foot width.   Although it was

unlikely that all spectators were involved in exerting these pressures -

the matches were not considered to be exciting - the pressure that

could have been exerted by each ofthe persons in the 12 to    22 rows

behind the barriers ranged from 17    to 9 lbf per foot width(and 27

to 14 lbf during the occasional peaks).     These figures are certainly

of the same order of magnitude as those in paragraph 8.1).

8.3    Further support to these figures is given by the deduced pressure

of 260 to 300 lbf per foot width at which a barrier collapsed (see

paragraph 6).    There were 9 to 19 rows of spectators behind the

barrier and so the 260 represents a pressure per person of 29 to

14 lbf per foot width and the 300 a pressure of 33 to 16 lbf per foot

width.

8 .4   It is felt that the measurements mentioned in paragraph 8.1 are

reasonable for calculating the maximum pressure that could be generated

between 2 consecutive barriers up a terrace slope.     Furthermore, the

'push' values should be U3ed for 'peak viewing* areas and the 'lean'

values for other areas.

8.5    The measurejsents by the University of Surrey of pressures

tolerated by the human body are surprisingly low'(see paragraph 5);

the mean figure for men being 107 lbf when passive and 179 lbf when

resisting by pushing against the barrier.    These figures are lower


                              8
                                                                            tSeki,-




than the pressures of 200 lbf per foot width, with peaks to 300, which

were recorded at a match (see paragraph 4 );   but these pressures may

have been exerted for shorter periods, and they did generate fear (and

some injuries were infact reported on that occasion).     The Surrey

figures are also lower than the pressures of 300 lbf per person

tolerated by police cadets (see paragraph 3 ) but in that case the

barrier was well padded and .the cadet3 may have been prepared to

tolerate more in the company of their colleagues.

8.6.    Given the supporting evidence of paragraph 8.5 > it is reasonable

to use a figure of 200 lbf per person (or 115 lbf per foot width) as

the tolerable pressure for comfort and safety, and a figure of 300 lbf

per person (or 170 lbf per foot width) as the tolerable pressure for

safety only.

8.7    As mentioned in paragraphs 1 .2 and 1.3 the "tolerable pressure" is

half the "maximum pressure" and so the recommended minimum strengths

for barriers are 230 and 340 lbf per foot width when the barriers are

spaced for "comfort and safety" and for "safety only" respectively.

Should the space between 2 barriers be less than the maximum

recommended, the strength of the front barrier may be reduced in

proportion provided that none is less than 206 lbf per foot width.




Hose Office

March 1973.




                            9
                                                                   A-




 TESTS ON LITE SUBJECTS TO DBTFRMI^B TEE! TOLERABLE FORCES

    THAT MAY BE EXERTED BY GROP'D CONTROL CRUSE BARRIERS




                          by




E. J. Evsms, M«B»f B.Sc. (Lond), L.H.C.P.? M.H.C.S. (Lond)y M«i^c. ^Sux'xsy)
F. Hayden, B.Sc.(Eng.)(Lond), C.Eng., M.I.Mech.E.




                                            NOVEMBER 1971
                                       2


    INTRODUCTION

            This study deals with experiments, performed on live subjects,

    to determine an individual’s tolerance to static loads applied to the

    thorax and abdomen.     The tests were designed to provide information,

    hitherto non existent, which is necessary to formulate standards in

    connection with crowd control crush barriers.

            Two series of tests were carried out:

            1.     Each subject was pressed against a steel tube located

    horizontally against various positions on the trunk.

            2.     Each subject was pressed against a wooden plank, again

    located horizontally against various positions on the trunk.

    Since the tests involved live subjects there was no question of using

    loads of such a magnitude which might conceivably cause injury.        Con­

    sequently the decision on what was considered tolerable was left

    entirely at the discretion of the individual undergoing the test.

£   APPARATUS

            Figures 1, 2 and 3 show photographs and a line drawing of the

    apparatus used in the tests.

            The basic iron framework is 36 inches long, 28 inches wide and

    25 inches high.     The subject is drawn forward on to the barrier by means

    of a pack frame via four cords which are mounted on an adjustable T-frame

    which is constrained to move in the horizontal direction only.         The

    constraint consists of a precision-machined, one inch diameter steel bar

    which runs freely in a multi-race bearing.      The load is applied to the

    subject by two wires attached to the T-frame end of the steel bar which

    run over pulleys to a weight hanger which can take a dead load.         In order

    to apply the barrier to various positions on the trunk the subject’s height

    above ground level is adjustable by means of wooden boards of various

    thickness.

            Incorporated on the steel bar is an adjustable stop ;/hich limits

    the travel of the T—frame to 0.|> indie .•> at any state of loading.
         5




FIG. 3
                                  6



METHOD

1.       Each subject was asked to confirm that he had no disease or injury

which might "be influenced "by the tests.     In the first series of tests, an

ECG was first taken from each subject.

2.       Immediately before the test the purpose of the experiment and

details of the experimental procedure were explained to the subject and

each was asked to sign a form giving "informed consent” to the procedure.

3.       The age, sex, height and weight of the subject were noted.

4.       The position of the first load application point was identified

on the subject’s body, and the height of the point above the ground was

noted.

5.       The subject stood against the barrier on the appropriate number

of wooden boards.     Subjects wore normal clothing, without jackets, and

any hard objects etc. were removed from their pockets.

6.       Weights were placed on the weight hanger in suitable increments

until the subject stated that he felt the onset of discomfort.       The

load was noted.     Further weights were added until the subject felt the

second level of discomfort and similarly for the third level.       The

subjective levels of discomfort were defined as follows

         Subjective load level A - the first sensation of discomfort

                                      felt by the subject.

         Subjective load level B - discomfort which was estimated by

                                      the subject to be tolerable for

                                      about half an hour,

         subjective load level C - discomfort which was estimated by

                                      the subject to become intolerable

                                      after a few seconds.

7.       Stages 4, 5 and 6 in the method were then repeated for the

remainder of the load application points using the tube or the 4" wide

plank.    In the first series of tests the load application points were as

defined in fig. 4, but it later became apparent that no more useful
information would be obtained from further tests at points 1 and 2 and

the remainder of the tests were only performed at the application points

3 and 4, and in addition at the conventional barrier height of 42 inches

from the ground.

8.       Using the tube at the height of 42 inches, the subject was loaded

in the usual way to load level C.     He was then asked to adjust his

position by bending or standing on tip-toe in an attempt to improve his

tolerance of the load.   He was then asked to push against the barrier

with his Vian rig in any way that he chose and the load was increased until

the subject again felt discomfort corresponding to load level C.

SAFETY

         Only healthy adults were used as subjects for the tests.       An

electrocardiograph was taken from most of the subjects.     There is

evidence that a blow on the chest over the heart may cause some disturb­

ance of function of the heart even in a normal person.     Although it was

felt highly unlikely that the slowly applied pressure of our experiments

would have any effect on the heart, we thought it prudent to exclude any

subject with any abnormality of the heart.      The subjects were therefore

screened by recording the ECG and blood pressure, and briefly examining

the cardio-vascular function of each subject.      The ECG’s were also

checked by Dr. P. Kidner of the Cardiac Unit, King’s College Hospital.

No abnormalities were detected, although one ECG which was unsatisfactory

on technical grounds could not be repeated as the subject declined to

continue with the experiments.      In the second stage of the tests the

testing procedure did not require pressure over the heart and it was felt

that the ECG screening was no longer necessary.

         Particular care was taken in the design of the apparatus to ensure

the safety of the subjects.      The method of loading by dead-weight was

chosen as a failure could never result in an increase in the load.           Two

experimenters were present during each test so that the load cou? d be
                               8


'rapidly removed by one experimenter pushing against the ram and so

releasing the load from the subject.   An adjustable stop was provided

so that, should the subject become fatigued, the maximum increase in

deflection which could occur was 0.5 inches.

        An alarm bell was provided for the subject in case speech was

impeded by pressure on the chest.
LOAD APPLICATION POII7TS




 Kanubrio-Stemal Joint

 Stemo-Xiphistemal Joint

 Lower border of costal margin

 Anterior Superior Iliac spine




       FIG 4
RESULTS

          'itie results are tabulated for each of the 48 subjects and the
                                                V
obesity factor calculated from the formulas    — x 1000.     These tables
                                                W
are included in Appendix l(pages 27 - 75).

          In the first series of tests 17 male and 12 female subjects

were tested at all four load application points and then a further 15

male subjects were tested at points 3 and 4 * and 42" inches from ground

level only.

          The results obtained are presented in histogram form in Tables

1 to 8 (Pages 13 - 20).

REPRODUCIBILITY

          For a given individual it was found that, if the tests were

repeated after an interval of a few days or mere, the two sets of

results corresponded in all cases to within 20% or less.

CAUSES OF DISCOMFORT

          Subjects reported four main causes of discomfort from the tests.

(a)    Localised pain.     If the tube or plank was at a level where it

rested on a bone immediately beneath the skin, the force was applied only

to a small area and considerable pressure developed in the trapped skin.

This was painful in the area over which the pressure was applied.       The two

sites at which this phenomenon occurred were level 1 (the manubrio-stemal

angle) and in subjects of slim build at level 4 (the anterior superior

iliac spine).

(b)    Restriction of breathing.     When force was applied over the lower

chest or upper abdomen (levels 2 and 3 and 42 inches in short subjects)

many subjects complained that they found difficulty in breathing and asked

for the tests to be stopped.     It is unlikely that this difficulty was

caused by a simple mechanical restriction of the chest.      In most cases

subjects contracted their respiratory muscles (the diaphragm and intercostal

muscles and the muscles of the upper abdominal wall) to support their ribs
                                 11


against the applied force.      The contracted muscles were then unable to

provide respiratory movements.        Some subjects were able to hold their

breath during the time the load was applied and so restriction of breathing

did not constitute a reason for stopping the test.

        High loads which restricted breathing were never applied to any

subject for longer than about 30 seconds.       If loads were to be applied

fora longer period the need to breathe would, in many cases, produce a

considerable reduction in the marimam tolerable force.

(c)     Muscular Fatigue.      Loads applied to the lovrer chest and the

abdomen were resisted by contraction of the underlying muscles, and this

strong muscular contraction was sometimes a source of discomfort.

(d)     Internal Pain.      In some cases tolerance is limited by an

ill-defined "deep" discomfort which is presumably caused by deformation

or displacement of internal organs.
                                   12

    I
                      SUBJECTIVE   LOAD   LEVEL
I
I
I       35ie Subjective load levels are defined as follows:-


I
           A   -   the first sensation of discomfort felt
I                  by the subject.


I
           B   -   discomfort which was estimated by the
I
                   subject to be tolerable for about half

I                  an hour.




' •        C   —   discomfort which was est.im=? fced by the

I                  subject to become intolerable after a

                   few seconds.




I
I
          .._3 t1E£L J u &E.. L^RUS*                  BARRtEfK._n                Su&jECTS : MA> ~
            L oad      A p p l / c a t io n      P o in t        /


 S U B J E C T IV E                           17      Su bjects       t e s t e s ,>

     £ CAT3— --

    Leveu
                                                                                                                 ■5--
                                                                                     MEAN:          9 4 IL j
                                  n   r ^ n                               H-i         n                            •O--

                                                                                                                   i*
                                                                                                                h5-|
                                                                                                                   <0
                                                          J in                                                               !~n

                                                                                                                             &
                                                                                                                -)D -
                                                                                                                          Hi
           A
                                                                                                                          l
                                                                                                                -5-^



                              ZQ       60          7£        ico     125         150       !7‘5    20C
                                              .iO A D _


      . - L o a d ...A p p l ic a t io n                     2l...



S u b j e c t /v e .                        17      SUBJECTS T E S 7 Z D
— i - O A D -------

  Lbve i

          c                             r_r1] ,—          r pT"!
                                                                       XI
                                                                                 MEAN:
                                                                                Q.
                                                                                                  8 8 /if


                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                               -5 ■S

                                                                                                                         co
                                                                                                                        U.
                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                               -/o

      i   A                                                                                                             &

                            Ft                                                                                 -5    .  1     .



                               L n ^
                                                                                                               o
                             25       >50        75        Toe       Us         l$0       /75     200

                                            —L 0 A Z > X -fy )-
  DTELEL      I USE        K^RusH JDAZR/EK — O O B J £.073 : MiA la 1

 ; L oad      A   r p u c a tio n       P    q /m t    3


                                   36    SUBJECTS          TESTED




                                                                    MEAN :   9 0   Mj




                                                                                        ? i 0 3 r9 (7 5 . :^/0
                                                                                        t/3 '^l'vntsj
                                                                                        j
              o       25                75       too       125   >50   175   200
                                              LOAD     (ib f)




                                                                                        i
.L o a d   A p p u c a t i q n ... P o i n t .. ..4-




                                                                                        i
                                                                                        :
                               3 6 s u q j e c r-5         tested




                                                                                        •
                                                                                        '
                                                                                        JO
                                                                                        'z3 W \ 0 N




                     25       SO        75       10C             /SO   175   200
               Steel.        Tu s,e.   C rush        B   a r r ie r         42L   in c h e s      fr o m   G round L e v e l ,
I
                                       3 Z        M ale.     Subjects             Te s t e d .

I

                         SueJEcnvE
    COMDUIQN- -~toAD~

                         L e vel

                                                                                                       MEAN : 1 7 9 h f
        SurZjECT
                           -G—
        PuSH/N $
                                                                       £L                                                 EZL
    S u b je c t
                                                                                                       M E A N : 12.0 ilj-
    A   djustinq

    "cw/v—
    P o s it/o n                                                                   H
                                                         _Q
                                                                 fJinf
                                                                                        rs n




                                                                                                                                        s u p j e c . rc>
                                                                                                      k e a w .■ I Q 7 / i f .
                         - e -                                                                                                   -5
    SuBJEjCT .
                                                     i l k
                                                                 ru
                                                                       S     n     y    n           rin                          C




                                                                                                                                        or
    S t a n d /n $
                     —     a-                                                                                                —    o -




                                                                                                                                          mumper
    Up r   ig h t                                    L r^
                                                                   n                                                             o-


                           A-                m                                                                                   ■5-
                                                   Lfl
                                                         n
                                             23     SO        IS           'OO    /25       iSQ      ITS    200     225

                                                     TtoATS




                                         T a b le.           3
          .W ootdslm       P lam<         C rush          & a r r i £:r             —          S u &j & c t s : M a l e ,

          jLoACJ App>U>CAT/QN Pq/NT * 2i

 S u e jE C T 'V E -
                                            : 17 S u b jec ts              j&stb d
~~/jJAO----
  L   e ve l



          c                                      nn r                           n
                                                                                            - M EAN l
                                                                                            :: ,_n n ___________
                                                                                                                /1 4 - I b f
                                                                E l

                                                                -


          s
                                                T                  —            ■
                                                                                    -   -     - —    ■


                                      j£_                 n



      .   A



                            m
                                15        50        7-5       /OO        /2 5               /S o     175         200

                                          1— J-OA ZZ.JCM) _

          L oad      A p p l / c a t io n       P o in t               *4-2/nch £S frc^a Grouud Le v e l .



S u b je c tiv e .                             32l subjects TESTEO
   tOAJO----

 Le v e l -

          c                                               r-TT— i *~L l T
                                                                                                             MSAN ! 4 0 t f

                                                                                                             -ELD      n       ■o—
                                                                                                                                      V)
                                                                                                                                      K
                                                                                                                                      U
          & ■                                                                                                                  •5 -


                                  «   n
                                                f    a
                                                              _EL
                                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                                      CO
                                                                                                                                      u.
                                                                                                                                      o


      IA ;                            I                                                                                        •/o-
                                                                                                                                      Js
                                                                                                                               5 -
                                                                                                                                      k
                                a J
                                r~        i ■       i          i          r             "i               1        r
                              25      SO         75           too        12.5           IS 0        I7S         200
                                                 -LMD. J i y ) .
           LQ HT.S— o r . — A P P L t C/1 TJO tl                  / / / TS.

               F   rom      G   round       Level             •

                          JJ6 S u Bj e z -TS




             A p p i/C A T fo ft   P   o i n t   .   3

                                                                        MEAN ;    4 6 iNCHE. S




 38   39                                                 45                              49




           -A p p l ten riot/... Pb/NT. .4.

                                                                      M e a n : 4~} * 5" jncmzs




38    39      AO                                                                 *46 . *43
_ST£/zL T u b e . C r u s h 3 a rr/er.                    UEJECTS : . . F e M A L

L .o a o   A p p l ic a t io n     P o in t     /




                              JZ   S u & J E C TS . J T E S T E D




                                                     MEAN .* '3 O / b f




                                                                                SUBJECTS
                                                                                OF
                                                                           o




                                                                                NUMBER
                                                                                    •
           O     25      oo        75                       150     17 5

  -________           __:___ LoAD-(jbf).




                                                                                    ;
  L oad .. A p p u c a t / o n ^ P o/n t ..2 .




                                                                                    !
                                                                                    '
                             12. SUBJECTS TESTED

                                                                                    !
                                                                                OF' SUQJE-C.TS




                                                                           O
                                                                                A/oM&£R:




                 23     50         73     IOO       122    >50      175
                                 J-QAD..(&f)_______ ;_______



   t
                                                           19
        S   teel.      T   ube.    C    rush         £ > A P S'-/Efz. —    S   ubjects      :      F   e m a l e


 L OA.D            A   p p l ic a t io n        P    o in t       3




S u b j e c t /v e .                             12 S U B J E C T S        TESTED

' 'L O A D

  L   ev e l   .

                                                                               mean':      3 9 ibf
        C




                                                                                                                   svej£cr3
                                  n —   h   —          i                                   ...            .



- •      B     ..... -




                                                                                                                   or
                             f U l — F“]




                                                                                                                   nl'Mzep
      •A           ...

                            K            ... .....................:................
                                   25       So             75     /oo      IZ5      .'50    '75
                                        Load            ( l b f ) ~ ....       —


   __Lo /MD            A   P P L / CA T / O f j        P o IN T       4-



                                                            u& j e    c t s res tejd .




                                                                               MBA N       5 !!t
                                                                                                                   Subjects
                                                                                                                   of
                                                                                                                   nuKlht.




                                                50         75     IOO      125      /SO

                                                . In Ac^JJbf)                  ______
                                              20


W   o o d e n     P   u k n k   C   r u s h        B   a r r i e r   —   S   ubject   's :   F   e m a l e   :




JL o a d        A p p l ic a t io n      P o in t           cL




                                12 subjects              Tssmo




                                                        too      125     fSo    >75
                                       21


 CONCLUSIONS

 1 .1      S te e l Tube Crush B a rrie r - Subjects passive

           The mean values of the maximum tolerable force as defined

 by subjective load level C (Tables: 1, 2, 3, 6 & 7) were as follows

                                         Male                  Female
 Application Point 1                        94 lbf             30 lbf
                       2                    88 lbf             34 lbf
                       3                    90 lbf             59 lbf
                   4                    106 lbf                51 lbf
 42" from ground level                  107 lbf                Not measured

           Evidently application point 4> at the anterior superior iliac

 spine, enabled most subjects to tolerate a higher load.

           Table 5 indicates that application point 4 was at a mean height

      41*5 inches from ground level.         Since the mean of the mayiTmn tolerable

force at this point is 106 lbf, and that for 42 inches it is 107 lbf, this

shows a remarkable confirmation.            These results therefore indicate that

the present barrier height of 42 inches from ground level is to be preferred.

         The forces taken by the twelve female subjects were so consistently

low that one cannot dismiss them on mere psychological grounds.               However it

would be unrealistic to design crush barriers from these figures alone.               In

a mixed crowd it is likely that the more slight female form would be protected

from the maximum crowd force by the likelihood of there being a male either

side of her at the barrier.

1.2      Steel Tube Crush Barrier - Subjects active

         Table 4 shows the results obtained for male subjscts only when the

subjects were allowed to:

         (i) Adjust their own position for mayi wim comfort

         (ii) To actively push on the barrier to ease the force on the trunk.

         The results indicate that the mean maxirmm tolerable force is increased

by 12% when the subject adjusts his own position, and by           67% when   he is allowed
to push.
 2.     Wooden Plank Crush B a rrie r

        The mean values of the maximum tolerable force as defined by

 subjective load level C (Tables 4 & 8) have been tabulated with the

 previous results for the steel tube and are as follows:

 (i) MALE
                                          Barrier:
                                                              Percentage
                               Steel tube     Wooden Plank       Gain

 Application Point 2             88 Ibf          114 lbf         32%
 42" from ground level          107 Ibf         140 lbf          35%

 (ii) FEMALE


Application Point 2              30 lbf          40 lbf          33%




       It may be noted that there is a remarkable correlation between

the percentage gains in the three cases.        Clearly the gain of a third

indicates a significant rise in the average tolerance level*
DISCUSSION

       The highest loads were tolerated when the subject was allowed to

push on the barrier.     The actual values ranged from 98 - 233 lbf with

a mean force of 179 lbf.    In using these figures as design criteria

the questions arise:

(i)    Should the value chosen be the lowest, ensuring that no one in

the crowd is likely to be subjected to severe discomfort?

(ii)   Should some intermediate figure be chosen such that a proportion

of the population is subjected to a degree of discomfort which they would

judge to be intolerable.

       Should it be the highest, based on the surmise that if one man can

tolerate a given load it is unlikely to cause injury to any other person,
irrespective of what pain or discomfort he might experience?

       This latter argument could be extended by reasoning that, since

the man who tolerated 233 lbf was clearly not likely to be near the

threshold of injury, therefore the design force could be raised to

300 lbf.     However, it must be appreciated that this is mere speculation.

It may well be true, but until subjects are available who are prepared

and willing to be subjected to this force, irrespective of the consequences,

the point cannot be proved.

       The choice of an actual value for design purposes will be influenced

by the conditions for which the crowd control systems are being designed.

If it is felt that the maximum crowd force will only be exerted under rare

and extreme conditions, then it may well be acceptable to choose a vslue

which is considered to be near the threshold of injury.    If however one is

designing for crowd conditions which are expected to occur regularly and

frequently during an event, then it would seem unreasonable to choose a

value above the maximum value of 233 lbf or even the mean value of 179 lbf

and the minimum value of 98 lbf might well be preferred.

       The report by Mr. L. R, Creasey (January 1948) suggests that the

force/foot width of barrier for each row of the crowd when   " the crowd

exerts an additional pressure in its effort to see items of special interest

ahead" is:


                       12 x 4 = 16 lbf
                            5

      Multiplying by the factors for a mixed crowd

of a man (l£) gives:


                       Force ■ 16 x | x Ijf ■ 21 lbf


This is the strain force produced by each person in the crowd.    Clearly

a crowd of 8 persons would produce a force of 1C8 lbf on the back of an
                                 24



individual pinned against the barrier - or nearly the same force ee the

mean of the maximum tolerable force obtained in these tests (viz 179 Ibf).

Consequently the depth of the crowd can be 9 persons or 10 feet.      If the

highest maximum tolerable force of 233 lbf is used instead of 179 Ibf this

will pexmit the depth of the crowd to be raised to



                   1 + 4 ^ x y or 15 feet



        These calculations assume that only the strain force and not the

heave force is being developed by the crowd.    However, the heave force

in any crowd would tend to be a transient phenomenon and as such might

be considered to be a dynamic rather than a static force.    Bone itself

exhibits increased strength at the high strain rates associated with

dynamic loading, and if the transient forces are applied through a bony

structure this may well provide the additional safety factor required to

allow for the transient heave force.   In the subjects tested the average

height of the strong bony pelvis is 41.•5 inches, which is sensibly at the

same height as the normal crush barrier.

        In order to ensure that this possible advantage is experienced by

a significant cross section of the population the barrier should have

sufficient depth to make contact with the pelvises of most individuals

in a crowd.   In the subjects tested it was found that a barrier of 4

inches depth, extending from 40 inches to 44 inches above ground level

would have met this requirement for 27 out of the 3° subjects tested.

        The test results also indicated that a four inch deep plank

increases the average tolerance to static load by approximately one third.

Hence the use of a deep top rail would have a distinct advantage as far as

the more static crowd lean force is concerned, and in addition may well help

to reduce the risk of injury which may be caused by the more transient

heave force of the crowd.
        The results obtained testing female subjects have been ignored

in the foregoing analysis because the values appear to provide design

criteria which would be nearly impossible to comply with in practice.

Whether this is a valid reason for ignoring the results is open to

discussion and the answer would depend on many factors other than those

considered in this report.
FUTTTRB UT7ESTIGATIQHS

1.      The use of live subjects obviously limits the load which may be

applied, possibly to well below the value which would cause injury -

particulaxy when loading at the level of the pelvis.      An indication of

the load necessary to cause injury might possibly be obtained by the use

of fresh cedavers.      However, although this may be quite feasible where

the rib cage is involved it might well raise serious ethical problems

where the pelvis is to be fractured.

2*      All the previous results relating to crowd forces were obtained on

level ground.      The effect a slope would have upon the results remains to

be investigated.     Since it is to be expected that the crowd forces would

be larger, it is difficult to conceive how such values may be used to

achieve a better ergonomic design of the barrier, although they would

certainly be useful in designing the supporting structure.
APFEKDIX I
W eight                00        H eig h t.   ..19%       in (H )           . 1000 = 36.6



                    Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                             Height from              Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application           Ground Level
      Point                     (in)                                            B     C
                                                               A

          1                     58                        40               100       170

          2                     52                        42                60       150

          3                     49                        50                80       120

          4                    40                         60               130       150

                                42
                         (subject standing
                              upright)                    60       ;        90       140
                                                                   •


    Undefined                  42
                       (subject adjusting                              -
                          own position)                                              160


                               42                                      -
                        (subject pushing)                                            220




                     Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                             Height from              Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                            Ground Level
     Point
                                (in)                       A                B        C

          2                    52                         38               86        137
    Undefined                    42                   .   50               90        170
Weight       V!4....lbf (W)        H e ig h t------ 6.8. .........i n ( H )        | 2 . 1000 = 29.0



                    Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                               Height from                    Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                              Ground Level
     Point
                                  (in)                               A                    B      C

         1                        54                             15                  25         48

         2                        49                             20                  44         68

         3                        45                             10                  22         42

         4                        40                             25                  39         67

                                42
                         (subject standing
                              upright)                           30      ;           60         90
                                                                         •


   Undefined
                                42
                        (subject adjusting                                    -

                           own position)                                                       100


                                42
                                                                              •-
                         (subject pushing)                                                    160




                      Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                               Height from                   Subjective load leva Is (lbf,>
Load Application
                              Ground Level
     Point
                                  (in)                            A                   B         C

         2                       49                             34                   56        SB
   Undefined                      42                         ' 40                    70       115
                                                                                          M
Subject No....?....                 Age...f?....                                  Sex


Weight       fi5?. ...lbf (W)        Height....®?.... in (H)              “ 2 . 1000 =    34.4

                        »

                     Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                 Height frcm        Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application                Ground Level
     Point                                                                                C
                                    (in)                  A                ■ B

         1                         53                16                    27            45

         2                         47.5              25                    49            69

         3                         41.5   '          29                    45            71

         4                         39                35                    59            90

                                    42
                             (subject standing
                                                     21       ;            46            74
                                  upright)
                                                              •
   Undefined                        42
                            (subject adjusting                        -
                                                                                         78
                               own position)


                                   42
                            (subject pushing)                     0                     150




                       Test with Wooden Plank Ch " deep)


                                 Height from        Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                                Ground Level
     Point                          (in)               A                     B           C

         2                         47.5              38                    66            107

   Undefined                        42              .40                    70            130
                                            31


Subject No . . A .....                 Age..??....                                    Sex....


Weight       .1.8.9... .lbf (W)        Height...   7.1.*?... .in     (H)       | 2 .1000 = 36.9



                       Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                   Height from            Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application                  Ground Level
     Point                            (in)                                                  C
                                                                 A              - B

         1                           56                     47                  49        156

         2                           50                     38                  62        108

         3                           45                     45                  52        106

         4                           41                     47                  72        141

                                    42
                             (subject standing              32                  78        166
                                  upright)
                                                                     •



   Undefined                        42
                            (subject adjusting                             -              173
                               own position)


                                    42                                   -
                             (subject pushing)                                            224




                         Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                   Height from            Subjective lead levels (lbf)
Load Application
                                  Ground Level
     Point
                                      (in)                    A                   B        C

         2                           50                    49                   67        169
   Undefined                          42                   54                   76        214
W eight       .1.3.5. . . . l b f (W)          H e i g h t . . . ? ? ........... in (K)       ~ 2 . 1000 = 32



                          Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                         Height from                     Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                                        Ground Level
     Point
                                            (in)                                 A             - B          C

          1                                50.5                            16                  28         52
          2                                48                              20                  40         60
          3                                42                              22                  36         56
          4                                38.5                            24                  54         76

                                         42
                                  (subject standing                                           34          61
                                                                           16
                                       upright)
                                                                                     •


   Undefined
                                        42
                                (subject adjusting                                        -

                                   own position)                                                          61


                                         42
                                                                                         -
                                  (subject pushing)                                                      134




                            Test with Wooden Plank (4*1 deep)


Load Application                     Height from                        Subjective load levels (lbf)
                                    Ground Level
     Point
                                        (in)                                 A                  B         r»

          2                               48                              26                  62         102
   Undefined                               42                             25                  48          65
                      a                                        22      "                              c
Subject N o . . . . .............               Afie ....................


Height             '“ ...lbf W                  Height..?....... in CH)                      | 2 .i000 = 29.4



                              Test with Steel Tube (2fl Inner Diameter)




                                         Height from                        Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                       Ground Level
      Point                                 (in)                                 A                B             C

            1                             56.5                              24               34           92

            2                             49                                24               50           64

            3                             44.5                              22               34           58

            4                             40.5                              22               34           63

                                              42
                                       (subject standing
                                                                            36               57           83
                                            upright)
                                                                                     •



      Undefined                               42
                                      (subject adjusting                                 -

                                         own position)                                                    88


                                              42                                         -
                                       (subject pushing)                                                  138




                                    Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                          Height from                       Subjective Iced levels (lbf)
 Load Application                        Ground Level
      Point                                  (in)                                A                E             C

             2                             49                               34               52            78

                                                42                          25               43            06
      Undefined
                                        34


Subject No.........             Age.


Height...... lf?..lbf (W)       Height....T1.... in (H)             — 2 . 1000 = 29.7



                    Test with Steel Tube (2fl Inner Diameter)




                             Height from       Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application           Ground Level
      Point                     (ip)               A                   B         C

        1                       57.5              10                   20         30

        2                       52                20                   34         61

        3                       46.5              20                   38         62

        4                        42.5             32                   50         97

                                42
                         (subject standing                                        92
                                                  36 ;                 64
                              upright)
                                                        •



    Undefined                   42
                        (subject adjusting                  -
                                                                                 106
                           own position)


                                42                          -
                         (subject pushing)                                       154




                      Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                             Height from        Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application           Ground Level                        —


      Poirt                     (in)               A                    B         C

        2                        52                28                  58         96

    Undefined                    42                36                  90        170
I                                               35


I '   Subject No___ ?.....               A&e--- ----                        Sex....


|     Weight.... ,1.3.3....lbf (H)       Height....7.
                                                    1.....in (H)       . 1000 = 26.3



1                          Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)


I
                                      Height from       Subjective lead levels (lbf)
I      Load Application
            Point
                                     Ground Level
                                         (in)              A            B        C


I              1                         56.5             38           90       173'

               2                         50.5             35           50        96

I              3                         45               26           46        70

               4                         41               32           50        80
I
                                        42
                                 (subject standing
I                                     upright)            45   .
                                                               •
                                                                       72       108



!•         Undefined                    42
                                (subject adjusting                 -
                                                                                127
                                   own position)
I
                                        42                         -
                                 (subject pushing)                              150
I
                              Test with Wooden Plank (4‘* deep)


                                      Height from       Subjective load levels (ibf)
       Load Application              Ground Level
            Point                        (in)                           E        r*
                                                           A                     w»



                2                        50.5             20           58        113

           Undefined                      42              30           60        111
                      Q                             ,     27                               Cay       M
Subject N o . . . . ........................             Age........                       frex..........


Weight              HI...lbf (W)                   Height....II         in (H)         . 1000 - 26.9



                                Test with Steel Tube (2M Inner Diarceter)




                                                Height from            Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                              Ground Level
      Point                                        (in)                   A            B             C

             1                                     60                   10            30           87

             2                                    55.5                  21            39           80

             3                                    49.5                  33            65          125

             4                                    45.5                  30            60          121

                                                42
                                         (subject standing              20            41           80
                                              upright)
                                                                              •



      Undefined                                42
                                       (subject adjusting                         -
                                                                                                  160
                                          own position)


                                                42
                                         (subject pushing)                                        205




                                   Test with Wooden Plank (ti" deep)


                                                Height from            Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                              Ground Level
      Point                                        (in)                                             C
                                                                          A            E

             2                                    55.5                  20            5G           100

      Undefined                                     42                 ' 37           70           125
              1°
Subvert Wo.........             *    22‘  *
                                Age........                          Sex
                                                                     =>ex ......


Height......(K)       Height....!?............ in(H)          ^ . 1000 = 31.7



                   Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                            Height from        Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application           Ground Level
     Point                     (in)                              P         C
                                                  A

       1                       57.5              10             24        50

       2                       52.5              16             36        54

       3                       47                22             38        62

       4                       43                26             44        62

                                42
                         (subject standing
                              upright)           28   ;         61        92
                                                      •



   Undefined                    42
                        (subject adjusting                -
                           own position)                                  94


                                42                        -
                         (subject pushing)                               138




                      Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                            Height from        Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application           Ground Level
     Point                     (in)                                       <•*
                                                  A              B

       2                       52.5              28             48        68

   Undefined                    42               34             56       121
Subject No.. }}.....                Age.??......                        S e x .


Height       }?}... .lbf (V)        Height....6.
                                               7..... in (H)        • 1020 =   35*8



                     Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                Height from        Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application               Ground Level
     Point                                                                     C
                                   (in)                A            B

         1                         53.5              14            36          127

         2                         49.5              13            36          102

         3                         45                26            48           96

         4                         40.5              28            56          104

                                 42
                          (subject standing
                               upright)              37            69          109
                                                           •



   Undefined                     42
                         (subject adjusting                    -
                            own position)                                      109


                                 42                            -
                          (subject pushing)                                    150




                       Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                Height from        Subjective load levels (Ibf)
Load Application
                               Ground Level
     Point                         (in)               A             B          C

         2                        49.5               26            54          112
   Undefined                       42                                          137
                                                     39            87
H eig h t       I 8.9. . . . . l b f (W)        H e ig h t ....7.6. .......... i n ( H )       | 2 . 1 0 0 0 = 32.8



                             Test with Steel Tube (2” Inner Diameter)




                                            Height from                    Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Lead Application
                                           Ground Level
      Point
                                               (in)                              A                 B           C

            1                                    60                              25                40             69
            2                                    54.5                            36                54             86
            3                                    49                             38                 48             56
            4                                    43                             52                 76             96

                                            42
                                     (subject standing
                                          upright)                              44                 72             106
                                                                                      •



     Undefined
                                            42
                                    (subject adjusting                                     -
                                       own position)                                                              106


                                            42                                             -
                                     (subject pushing)                                                          176




                                Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                            Height from                   Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                                           VarOUnG Jj6V6X
     Point
                                                (in)                           A                  B           C

            2                                   54 .5                          28                 56           96
    Undefined                                   42                             58                 72          168
Subjert No... ??.........                Age..?!....*..                       Sex.....


Height       .^....lbf 0 0        Height..®?...... in(H)              | 2 . 1000 =   32.7



                    Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                              Height froni         Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application             Ground Level
     Point                       (in)                                                C
                                                          A               E

         1                        55                   37                46          86

         2                        49                   48                66          135

         3                        44.5                 37                58          ]K<

         4                        40                   40                5G          12G

                                42
                         (subject standing
                                                       40 ;              60          140
                              upright)
                                                              •



   Undefined                    42
                        (subject adjusting                        -
                           own position)                                             140


                                42
                         (subject pushing)                                           196




                      Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                            Height from            Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                         . Ground Level
     Point                     (in)                    A                 B           C

         2                        49                   40                70          160

   Undefined                      42               •   54                75          140
W e i g h t . . . . . . 1 ? ? . . . l b f (W)        H eight... T 9     in (H )    | 2 . 1000 = 32.7



                                  Test'with Steel Tube (211 Inner Diameter)




                                                 Height from          Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                               Ground Level
      Point                                         (in)                   A             B      C

              1                                    57.5                22            38         128

              2                                    51.5                22            44         J.08

              3                                    46.5                30            58         95

              4                                    42                  30            56         92

                                                  42
                                           (subject standing
                                                upright)                             -          -
                                                                               •




       Undefined                                 42
                                         (subject adjusting                                    -
                                            own position)


                                                  42
                                           (subject pushing)                                   -




                                     Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                                 Height from          Subjective load levels flbf)
 Load Application                               Ground Level
      Point                                                                                     C
                                                    (in)                   A             D

              2                                    51.5                32            50         173
       Undefined                                    42                 —             —         -
W eight       ? ? ? . . . . l b f (W)        H e i g h t . . . . T?.*?... i n (H)       | 2 .1 0 0 0 = 26.8



                           Test with Steel Tube (2n Inner Diameter)




                                         Height from                Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application                        Ground Level
     Point
                                            (in)                           A                  E         C

          1                                 55                         35                 66           96

          2                                 49.5                       28                 60           82

          3                                 45                         28                 48           58

          4                                 43                         38                 60           95

                                          42
                                   (subject standing
                                        upright)                                          -            -
                                                                               •



    Undefined                            42
                                 (subject adjusting                                 -
                                    own position)                                                     -


                                         42                                         -
                                  (subject pushing)                                                   -




                             Test with Wooden Plank (4" dee?)


                                         Height from                Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                                        Ground Level
     Point
                                            (in)                           A               B           C

          2                                49.5                        34                62           106
   Undefined                                42                        ••
Subject No... }?.....                Age.. .
                                           2.
                                            3.....                                  Sex..V.

                                                                        W
Weight       .1.6.1   lbf (W)       Height...7-.2...... in (H)         jL . 1000 = 31.2
                                                                        H2


                      Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                 Height from         Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application                Ground Level
     Point
                                    (in)                   A                    B               C

         1                          58.5               43                   72                  134

         2                          53                 46                   74              101

         3                          48.5               29                   55              85

         4                          43                 36                   69              126

                                  42
                           (subject standing
                                upright)                                    -               -

                                                               •



   Undefined                      42
                          (subject adjusting                       -
                             own position)                                              -


                                  42                               -
                           (subject pushing)                                            -




                        Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                 Height from         Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                                Ground Level
     Point                          (in)                   A                B               C

         2                         53                  24               48              134
   Undefined                        42               . -                -               -
Subject No. ..11.   ***           Age•*      *••••                                Sex.• *V*•••


Weight---           lbf (K)       Height....??.... in (H)                     . 1000 = 31.2



                    Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                               Height from           Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application              Ground Level
     Point                        (in)                                - B                     C
                                                          A

        1                         55                   20                 44                  57

        2                         49                   20                 46                  66

        3                         44.5                26                  44                  64

        4                         39                  27                  48                  70

                                  42
                           (subject standing
                                                                          -               -
                                upright)
                                                              •



   Undefined                      42
                          (subject adjusting                      -

                             own position)


                                 42
                          (subject pushing)                                               -




                      Test with Wooden Plank (4” deep)


                               Height from           Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application              Ground Level
     Point                        (in)                    A                   B               C

        2                        49                   26              42              91
   Undefined                       42                •-               -               -
                                                     45


    I   Subject No.
                        18                  Age.     34                                       Sex.   M




    I   Weight....           .lbf (W)       Height...7.
                                                      4.*.5    in (H)           | 2 . 1000 = 31.5



I                             Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)


I
                                         Height from          Subjective load levels (lbf)                     j
I        Load Application
              Point
                                        Ground Level
                                            (in)                    A                     B              C


I               1                                               —                 -                  -



                2                                               -                 -                  -



I               3                           49                  34                68                 99

                4                           43                  27                49                 92
I
                                           42
                                    (subject standing
I                                        upright)               49      ;
                                                                        •
                                                                                  76                 170


            Undefined                      42
                                   (subject adjusting                       -                        170
                                      own position)
I
                                           42                               -
                                    (subject pushing)
Ii                                                                                                   220



I
t
                                 Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)

i                                        Height from          Subjective load levels (lbf)
         Load Application               Ground Level                  1
              Fo? .it
I                                           (in)                 A          B        C

                2                           -                       -                 -                  -




N
1
            Undefined                           42              42                    77                 126
                                                                                                                   i

    1


*
I
I
f
                 10                                    32                                       Sex.         M
Subject No.....................                 Age.


                                                            70
Weight           A5.4.... lbf      (W)          Height.           .in (H)          | 2 . 1000 = 31.4



                            Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                          Height from            Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                        Ground Level
      Point                                  (in)                                           B                C
                                                                       A

           1

           2                                                                            _



           3                                    47                    24                41              92

           4                                    40.5                  26                52              136

                                            42
                                     (subject standing
                                          upright)                    18   ;            36              64
                                                                           •



     Undefined                              42
                                    (subject adjusting                         -

                                       own position)                                                   83


                                            42                                 -
                                     (subject pushing)                                                 98




                                  Test with Wooden Plank (4” deep)


                                          Height from            Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                                         Ground Level
     Point                                   (in)                     A                     B           C

           2                                -                     -                 -                  ...



     Undefined                                  42                28                34                 121
Subject N o . . . 3 9 ...........             Age.   25    -                                 S e x .. ..H


Weight                ... .lbf (K)            Height... .7.3.         in (H)       | 2 . 1000 = 40.7



                              Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                          Height from           Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                        Ground Level
      Point                                  (in)                                        B              C
                                                                       A

            1                                                     _                 —               -



            2                                                     _                 —              -



            3                               49                    36                44              70
            u                               43                    26                38             76

                                              42
                                       (subject standing
                                            upright)              24       :        29             54
                                                                           •



     Undefined                                42
                                      (subject adjusting                       -

                                         own position)                                             74


                                              42
                                       (subject pushing)                                          126




                                    Test with Wooden Plank (4M deep)


                                          Height from           Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                                         Ground Level
     Point                                   (in)                     A                 B              C

            2                                                    _                  —              -




     Undefined                                42                • 23                48             94
                                           48


            21
Subject No.........                 Age.   26 _   ‘                          S e x .. .M.


Weight....}??      lbf 0 0          Height..!?:5.... in (H)        | 2 . 1000 = 38



                    Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                              Height from             Subjective load levels (ibf)
Load Application             Ground Level
     Point                       (in)                                    B              C
                                                           A

       1                                               -             -              -

       2                        —                      -             -              -




       3                        46                     44            106            155

       4                        43                     42            88             122

                                42
                         (subject standing
                                                       32            54             86
                              upright)
                                                               •




   Undefined                    42
                        (subject adjusting
                           own position)                                            96


                                42
                         (subject pushing)                                          148




                      Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                              Height from             Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application             Ground Level
     Point                       (in)                                                   C
                                                           A             B

       2                        -                      -             -              -




   Undefined                        42                 40            62             136
Subject   N o . .   ..22....               Age...?1....                              Sex..   A1..

Weight              J??...lbf (W)          Height....!?.... in (H)               . 1000 = 28.9



                          Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                     Height from          Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application                    Ground Level
     Point                                                      «
                                        (in)                    A                B           C

          1                            -                   -                -            -


          2                            -                   -                -            -


          o
          W
                                       45.5                18               46           80

          4                            42                  26               46           76

                                       42
                                (subject standing
                                     upright)              26               46           76
                                                                    •


   Undefined                           42
                               (subject adjusting                       -
                                                                                         76
                                  own position)


                                      42
                               (subject pushing)                                         150




                            Test with Wooden Plank (4” deep)


                                     Height from          Subjective loed levels (lbf)
Load Application
                                    brouna Levex
     Point                              (in)                   A                £

          2                            -                   -                -            -



   Undefined                               42              22               44           64
                                                          50


Subject N o ..? ? .............              A g e . . . 5?..........                               S e x .. . .M.


Weight...*!?               lbf (W)           Height...in                           (K)          . 1000 = 37.2



                            Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                      Height from                       Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                    Ground Level
      Point
                                         (in)                                  A                B              C

           1                                                                                               -



           2                             —                                —                 -              -



           3                             43.5                             58                76             126

           4                             38                               53                73             118

                                          42
                                   (subject standing
                                        upright)                          46       ;        66             112
                                                                                   •



     Undefined                            42
                                  (subject adjusting                                   -
                                     own position)                                                         119


                                         42
                                                                                       ■-
                                  (subject pushing)                                                        220




                              Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                      Height from                       Subjective load levels (Ibf)
Load Application
                                     around juevex
     Point
                                         (in)                                 A                 B          r

           2                             _

    Undefined                                42                         . 40                60            101
Subject N o . . ? f .                    A g e ... ? ? '. .. " .                            S e x ...«


•t•       161
Weight.......           l b f (W)        H e i g h t . ..? ? ............in (H)   j 2 . 1000 = 34.9



                         Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                     Height from                   Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                   Ground Level
      Point                             (in)                                            B          C
                                                                        A

           1                            —,                                          —             —

           2                            —,                                          —             —

           3                            44                           38             58            88

          4                             39                           40             66            106

                                      42
                               (subject standing
                                                                     46     ;       64            96
                                    upright)
                                                                            •

     Undefined                        42
                              (subject adjusting
                                 own position)                                                    96


                                      42
                               (subject pushing)                                                  144




                           Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                     Height from                   Subjective J.oad levels (Ibf)
 Load Application
                                    Ground Level
      Point                             (in)                           A                B         C

           2                                                                                      —

     Undefined                           42                        ■ 52             69            132
              1 74                               RQ K                     W
Weight         .......lbf (W)           Height...?...--- in (H)           ~ 2 . 1000 =       37.1



                       Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                 Height from            Subjective load levels (lbf)
Lead Application                Ground Level
     Point
                                    (in)                      A                   B          C

         i                          -                     —                   —          —


         n
         4-                         -                     -                   —          —



         3                          44                    40                  56         88
         4                          40                   40                   69         110

                                  42
                           (subject standing
                                upright)                 30       ;           48         81
                                                                  •



   Undefined                      42
                          (subject adjusting                          -

                             own position)                                               97


                                  42                                  -
                           (subject pushing)                                             214




                        Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                 Height fxom            Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                                Ground Level
     Point
                                    (in)                      A                   £      C

         2

   Undefined                            42               40                66            118
              26                             23                                          Sex.
Subject No.                         Age.

                                                  71                         W
                                    Height              in (H)               ~ 2 . 1000 =       32
Weight              lbf (W)                                                  ri


                     Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                Height from            Subjective load levels (Ibf)
 Load Application              Ground Level
      Point                        (in)                          A             ■ B              C

                                                         -                     -                -
         1                         —



         2                         —                     -                     -                -



                                                         20                     46              70
         3                         47

                                                         28                     68              98
         4                         41

                                 42
                          (subject standing              34          ;          44              90
                               upright)
                                                                     •



    Undefined                    42
                         (subject adjusting                                                     90
                            own position)


                                     42                                  ~
                              (subject pushing)                                                 216




                       Test with Wooden Plank (4M deep)


                                 Height from           Subjective load levels (!bi)
  Load Application              Ground Level
       Point                        (in)                         A                   B              C

         2                                                   -                   -                  -

     Undefined                         42               - 36                     84                 154
W e ig h t...} ? ?   lb fW          H e i g h t . ..? ? ............in (H)        | 2 . 1000 =   30.6



                     Test with Steel Tube (2” Inner Diameter)



                                                                             ■■       —                 .
                                Height from                   Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application              Ground Level
      Point                        (in)                              A             ■ B           C

            -fc.                                                 -                  -            -

            2                                                    -                  -            -

            3                      44.5                          40                 60           148

            4                      40                            28                  56          143

                                    42
                             (subject standing                                       50          130
                                  upright)                       32      ;
                                                                         •



      Undefined                      42
                             (subject adjusting                              -
                                own position)                                                    140


                                     42                                      -
                              (subject pushing)                                                  160




                        Test with Wooden Plank (4” deep)


                                 Height from                   Subjective load levels (Ibf)
  Load Application              Ground Level
       Point                        (in)                             A                    B       C

              2                                                                      -            -

       Undefined                      42                       . 42                  68           173
Subject No..?§.....                 Age... .23 ....                                    Sex...H ..


Weight             lbf (W)          Height...13            in(H)         ^2 . 1000 = 34.8



                   Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                              Height from             Subjective load levels (Ibf)
Load Application
                             Ground Level
     Point
                                 (in)                        A                     B            C

         2                                                                                  m

         2                                                                    ..

         3                       47                     38                    70            102
         4                       45                     60                    90            120

                                42
                         (subject standing
                              upright)                  38       .            66           94
                                                                 •


   Undefined
                                42
                        (subject adjusting                           -

                           own position)                                                   116


                                42
                         (subject pushing)                                                 233




                      Test with Wooden Plank (4” deep)


                              Height from             Subjective load levels (Ibi)
Load Application
                             Ground Level
     Point
                                 (in)                      A                       B        C

         2                      -                      -                  -                --



   Undefined                        42                . 42                80               120
Subject No..??                        A g e .. . .?^


Weight....!?!      lbf (W)            Height....!?.... in (H)           ~ 2 . 1000 = 31.5



                   Test with Steel Tubs (2” Inner Diameter)




                              Height from              Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application             Ground Level
     Point                       (in)                                         B      C
                                                            A

       1                          _                                       _         _

       2                                                m                 _

       3                          47                    40                60        80

       4                          43                    40                60        88
                              '
                               42
                        (subject standing
                             upright)                   30      :         70        120
                                                                •



   Undefined                   42
                       (subject adjusting                           -

                          own position)                                             120


                               42
                        (subject pushing)                                           180




                     Test with Wooden Plank (4” deep)


                              Height from              Subjective load levels (Ibf)
Load Application
                             Ground Level
     Point                                                                          n
                                 (in)                       A                 B

       2                          —                     -                -          -

   Undefined                          42                44               60         100
                   l b f (;••’)           H e ig h t...® 9. : 5. . . . . i n       (H)       ~ 2 . 1000 = 35.2



                    Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                   Height from                       Subjective load levels (lbf)
Lead Application                  Ground Level
     Point                            (in)                                     A                  B          C

       1                                                                 -                    -          -

       2                              _                                  -                    -          -



       3                              45                                 25                   42         70

       4                              41                                 29                   46         72

                                    42
                             (subject standing
                                  upright)                               32        ;          50         120
                                                                                   •



   Undefined                       42
                           (subject adjusting                                            -
                              own position)                                                              130


                                   42                                                    -
                            (subject pushing)                                                            200




                       Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                   Height from                       Subjective load levels (Ibf)
Load Application
                                  Ground Level
     Poiiit
                                      (in)                                   A                    B          C

      2                               -                                 -                     -          -




  Undefined                               42                         • 35                     60         112
■                                                    50


I   Subject No.     31                     Age, 33                                      Sex. M

                                                                               W
I   Weight..A ® 5        lbf (W)           Height...7.5.*.5..... in (H)        ^ . 1000 =       32.5



I                        Test witli Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)


I
                                    height fron.             Subjective load lavels (lbf)
I   Load Application
         Point
                                   Ground Level
                                       (in)                        A                B           C

            1                          —                       _                —           -



            2                          —                       _                -           -



            3                         50.5                     30               50          98

            4                         46                       30               70          140

                                     42
                              (subject standing
                                   upright)                    50      ‘        80          180
                                                                       •



        Undefined                    42
                             (subject adjusting                            -

                                own position)                                               180


                                     42                                    -
                              (subject pushing)                                             240




                           Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                    Height from              Subjective load levels (lbr)
    Load Application
                                   Ground Level
         Point                         (in)                                                     c
                                                                   A                B

            2                          -                       -                -           -



        Undefined                          42               ■ 44                88          200
Subject No.. .3.2 .....                 Age.. .2.2.....                             Sex..K ..


Weight       \8.2.... .lbf <W)          Height... .7.4.        in (H)           . 1000 = 33.2



                      Test with Steel Tube (2" Ir.ner Diameter)




                                  Height from             Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application                 Ground Level
     Point                           (in)                                                    C
                                                                A               B

         1                          -                      -                -           -




         2                          -                      -                -           -




         3                          49                     22               40          74

         4                          43                     35               60          130

                                   42
                            (subject standing
                                 upright)                  26               52          125
                                                                    •



   Undefined                       42
                           (subject adjusting                           -
                              own position)                                             145


                                   42
                            (subject pushing)                                           215




                        Test with Wooden Plank (4?l deep)


                                  Height from             Subjective load levels (Ibf)
Load Application
                                 Ground Level
     Point                           (in)                                                   r>
                                                               A                B           v»



         2                          -                      -                -           -

   Undefined                            42                 36               56          190
   ,          33                           Acre       22        '*                                        S e X ...V .
Subject No.....................            "Se ....................


Weight... -1.
            6.0.           lbf (W)         Height.... 7?... .in (H)                         ~ 2 . 1000 = 30.9



                             Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                       Height from                    Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                     Ground Level
      Point                               (in)                                  A                     B               C

                                                                        -                     -                   -
            1                              -



                                                                        -                     -                   -
            2                              -




            3                              47.5                         40                    70                  100

            4                             44                            40                    72                  120


                                           42
                                    (subject standing
                                         upright)                       50          :         92                  120
                                                                                    •




      Undefined                             42
                                    (subject adjusting                                  -
                                       own position)                                                              120


                                            42                                          -
                                     (subject pushing)                                                                172




                                  Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                        Height from                   Subjective load levels (lbf)
  Load Application                     Ground Level
       Point                               (in)                                 A                     B               C

             2                                                              —                     -                   -




      Undefined                                42                           42                    107                 175
                                                       61

                                                                                                          M
Subject No          -----            A g e ...21. ..........                                      Sex------


Weight               l b f (W)           H e ig h t .. . . ™    in (H )             | 2 . 1000 = 35,



                       Test with Steel Tube (2” Inner Diarcater)




                                  Height from                  Subjective load levels (Ibf)
 Load Application                Ground Level
      Point                          (in)                               A            ■ B                       C

         1                                                      -                     -                    -

                                                                                      -                    -
         2                           _                          -




         3                           45                         30                    56                   110

         4                           42                         40                    72                   100

                                      42
                               (subject standing
                                    upright)                     40         -         72                   100
                                                                            •




    Undefined                         42
                              (subject adjusting                                -
                                                                                                               130
                                 own position)


                                      42                                        -
                               (subject pushing)                                                               190




                            Test with Wooden Plank (4” deep)


                                  Height from                  Subjective load levels (Ibr)
 Load Application                Ground Level
      Point                          (in)                               A                     B                C

         2                                                          _                     -                    -



                                                                    56                    88                   167
    Undefined                            42




                                                                                                       *
                                                        62


Subject N o...3.5.............                 Age. .                                                        S e x ..V ..........


Weight         -
               1.
                5?        lbf (W)              Height...          in(H)                . 1000 =       30.5



                           Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                       Height from           Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                     Ground Level
      Point                               (in)                                         B               C
                                                                   A

           1                                  —                                    _                  _

           2                                                                       _                  ..


           3                                  46                  34               46                 76

           4                                  41                  32               62                 92

                                           4?
                                    (subject standing
                                         upright)                 36   ;           60             80
                                                                       •


     Undefined                             42
                                   (subject adjusting                      -

                                      own position)                                                   110


                                           42                              -
                                    (subject pushing)                                                 170




                                 Test with Wooden Plank (4'1 deep)


                                       Height from           Subjective load levsls (lbf)
 Load Application                     Ground Level
      Point                               (in)                     A                   E              C

           2                              -                   -                -                  -




     Undefined                                42             - 50              84.                150
Subject No. .3.6. .............                   Age. . .2.2. ........                                    Sex------


Weight... A3
           .3.             lbf (W)                Height..,6.6.                in (H)                  . 1000 = 30.5



                            Test with Steel Tube (2” Inner Diameter)




                                       Height from                        Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                     Ground Level
      Point                               (in)                                     A                   B                 C

            1                                                              -                   -                 -




                                                                                               -                 -
            2                             _                                -




            3                             42                               30                  50                90

            4                             39                               40                  80                110

                                            42
                                     (subject standing
                                          upright)                             30      ;       50                90
                                                                                       •




      Undefined                             42
                                    (subject adjusting                                     -
                                       own position)                                                                 110


                                            42                                             -
                                     (subject pushing)                                                               140




                                  Test with Wooden Plank (4U deep)


                                        Height from                       Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Lead Application                      Ground Level
      Point                                                                                            B                 C
                                           (in)                                    A
                                                                               -                   -                 -
            2                                 -



                                                  42                           44                  74                140
      Undefined
                                                64


a   Subjert Ko..®A     ...               Age...2?....*.                                  Sex.F...


i   Weight... A1
               .9.     lbf (W>        Height...6.5...... in (H)                      . 1000 = 28.2



i                      Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                  Height from                 Subjective load levels (lbf)
I   Load Application
         Point
                                 Ground Level
                                     (in)                           A                E               C

I           1                        50                           10                20               30
            2                        46                           12                24               32
I           3                        43                        12                   22               32
           u
I                                    39.5                      14               30               44

                                     42

I                             (subject standing
                                   upright)
                                                                        •
                                                                                -                -




       Undefined
                                     42
                             (subject adjusting                             -

                                own position)                                                -




                                    42                                      -
                             (subject pushing)                                               -




                         Test with Wooden Plank (4M deep)


                                  Height from             Subjective load levels (Ibf)
    Load Application
                                 Ground Level
         Poi:it
                                     (in)                         A                 B        C

           2                        46                         14               24           34
       Undefined                     42                   .   -                 -            -




I
                   lb f   (v?)       H e i g h t . . . . 6.6. .......... in (H)       . 1000 = 28.9



                    Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                  Height from                    Subjective load levels (lbf)
Lead Application                 Ground Level
     Point                           (in)                                             B            C
                                                                         A

       JL                           53.5                             4            S            16

       2                            48                               8            14           23

       3                            44                               6            12           20

       4                            40                               10           36           40

                                   42
                            (subject standing                                     -            -

                                 upright)
                                                                             •



   Undefined                       42
                           (subject adjusting
                              own position)                                                    -




                                   42
                            (subject pushing)




                      Test with V?ooden Plank (4** deep)


                                  Height from                    Subjective load lev*sis (lbf)
Load Application
                                 Ground Level
     Poiiit                          (in)                                A            B            C

       2                            48                               8            16           28

   Undefined                         42                          .   -            -            -
Subject No. . .                      A g e . . ? '...................................................... S e x . . / . . .


Weight.... U 9 .    lb f    00       H e i g h t . . . . ? ? .......... in (H)           | 2 . 1000 = 27.8



                     Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                  Height from                      Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                Ground Level
      Point                          (in)                                  A                • B                       C

         1                          53                                 6                      14                  31

         2                          46.5                               10                     18                  30

         3                          43.5                               10                     18                  40

         4                           39.5                              18                     34                  54

                                     42
                              (subject standing                                               -                   -

                                   upright)
                                                                                •




    Undefined                        42
                             (subject adjusting                                      -

                                own position)                                                                     -




                                     42
                              (subject pushing)                                                                   -




                           Test with Wooden Plank (4” deep)


                                  Height from                       Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                Ground Level
      Point                          (in)                                  A                          B               C

          2                          45.5                               18                        24                  48

     Undefined                        42                            ■ -                           -                   -
                                                         67

Subject H o ..? ? ............            A g e ...? ? ..........                               Ser....T..


Weight....?.1?             lbf (W)        Height....??.... in (H)                     £ 2 . 1000 = 25.8



                            Test with Steel Tube (2** Inner Diameter)




                                      Height from                   Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                    Ground Level
      Point                              (in)                             A                 B             C

            1                             53                          IS                36            44

            2                             46.5                        27                32            53

            3                             43.5                        18                36            54

            4                             37.5                        36                42            56

                                           42
                                    (subject standing
                                                                                        -             -
                                         upright)
                                                                              •




      Undefined                            42
                                   (subject adjusting                             -
                                      own position)


                                           42                                     -
                                    (subject pushing)                                                 -




                                 Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                       Height from                  Subjective load levels (Ibf)
 Load Application                     Ground Level
      Point                               (in)                            A                 B             C

            2                             46.5                        28                32            48

      Undefined                            42                         -                 -             -
                                                            63

Subject N o .. ? } ............             A g e ..? .............                               Sex.........


Weight...}??               lbl (W)          Height...??..... in (H)                           . 1000 = 35.3



                             Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                        Height rrem                   Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                      Ground Level
      Point                                (in)                                               B               C
                                                                              A

            1                              53.5                           10              24              55
            r\
            4                              47                             8               20              42

            3                              43                             14              35              62

            4                              40                             16              34              63

                                            42
                                     (subject standing
                                                                                          -               -
                                          upright)
                                                                                  •



     Undefined                              42
                                    (subject adjusting                                -

                                       own position)                                                      -




                                            42                                        -
                                     (subject pushing)                                                    -




                                  Test with Wooden Plank (4** deep)


                                        Height from                   Subjective load levels (lbf)
 Load Application                      Ground Level
      Foint                                                                                                   C
                                           (in)                               A               B

            2                              47                             10              20              36

     Undefined                              42                        •   -               -               -
                                                          69

    Subject N o..??.                    A g e ...? ? ...*..                                       S e x ...? ..


    Weight... J??.     l b f (W)        H e ig h t..........? 6 . . . . i n       (H)   | 2 . 1000 =     32.1



                        Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                    Height from                      Subjective load levels (lbf)
    Load Aoplication               Ground Level
         Point
                                       (in)                                   A               B             C

            1                          54                               8                 14             26
            2                          47.5                             20                34             55
            3                          44.5                             23                40             58
            4                          40.5                             18                34             73

                                     42
                              (subject standing
                                   upright)                                               -             -
                                                                                   •



       Undefined                     42
                             (subject adjusting
                                own position)


                                     42
                              (subject pushing)                                                         -




                          Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                    Height from                     Subjective load levels (lbf)
    Load Application
                                   Ground Level
         Poii.t
                                       (in)                               A                  B           C

            2                         47.5                              10               30             44
       Undefined                       42                           • -                  -              -




R
                                            70

            43
Subject No..7?..........          Am . 21■ ___ -
                                       Age....'....*..                         Sex.
                                                                               Sex. A ,


Weight....}?}      lbf 0 0       Height...??..... in (H)             | 2 . 1000 = 30.2



                   Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                              Height from         Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load.Application             Ground Level
     Point                                                            • B               C
                                 (in)                    A

       1                         53                 4                  8             16
       r\
       X
                                 46.5               6                  10            22

       3                         43.5               4                  10            22

       4                         38                 10                 16            24

                                42
                         (subject standing
                                                                       -            -
                              upright)
                                                             •



   Undefined                    42
                        (subject adjusting                       -
                           own position)


                                42
                         (subject pushing)                                          -




                     Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                              Height from         Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
                             Ground Level
     Point                       (in)                   A                  B         V.

       2                         46.5               4                  10            26

   Undefined                     42               • -                  -            -
Subjact No..??..........               Age.. *.                              Sex.....


Weight       J??   lbf 0 0       Height--- ??.... in (K)           jji2 . 1000 =   32.5



                   Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                              Height from         Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application             Ground Level
     Point                       (in)                                    E             C
                                                       A

         1                       52                8                 18            30

         2                       45                8                 16            26

         3                      42.5               8                 16            30

         4                       39                 10               20            40

                                42
                         (subject standing                                         -
                                                                     -
                              upright)
                                                           •



   Undefined                    42
                        (subject adjusting                     -

                           own position)                                           -




                                42
                         (subject pushing)•                                        -




                      Test with Wooden Plank (4;t deep)


                              Height from         Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application             Ground Level
     Poi.it                      (in)                                                  C
                                                       A                 B

         2                      45                 8                 20            32

   Undefined                     42                -                 -             -
W eight...1.02.     l b f (W)        H e ig h t...6.3.............. in (H)         | 2 . 1000 =           25.7



                     Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Dianeter)




                                 Height from                 Subjective; load levels (Ibf)
 Load Application
                                Ground Level
      Point                         (in)                               A                  B               c

         1                          51                             8                     14               24
         2                          46                             8                     16               32
         3                          43                             8                     16               40
         4                          37                             8                 18                   62

                                  42
                           (subject standing
                                                                                     -                -
                                upright)
                                                                           •



    Undefined                     42
                          (subject adjusting                                   -
                             own position)


                                  42                                           -
                           (subject pushing)                                                          -




                       Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                 Height from                 Subjective load levels (Ibf)
Load Application
                                Ground Level
     Point
                                    (in)                           A                     B            C

         2                         46                          8                     it:          42

    Undefined                       42                         -                    -             -
Subject No.          .                     A g e ....? !..:.                                        S e x ... ? .


«    •    132
Weight......             lbf 0 0       Height...??:?___ in (H)                               . 1000 = 32.8



                         Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)




                                    Height from                    Subjective load levels (lbf)
    Load. Application
                                   Ground Level
          Point
                                       (in)                                 A                   B              C

             1                         52                               14                  20                34
             2                        44                                16                  22                43
             3                        43                                14                  24                48
             4                        39                                18                  36                58

                                     42
                              (subject standing
                                   upright)                                             -                  -
                                                                                •


         Undefined
                                     42
                             (subject adjusting                                     -
                                own position)


                                     42
                                                                                    -
                              (subject pushing)                                                           -




                           Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                   Height from                 Subjective load levels (lbf)
Load Application
     Point
                                      (in)                              A                   B
             2                        44                            20                  32                57
         Undefined                     42                      .    _                   -                 -
                                                          74


        Subject N o . . ? 7 .   ...            A ge..??............                               S e x ..? ...
    I
    t



                      134       lbf (W)        Height___ 95:?...in (H)                        . 1000 = 30.8
£       Weight
t


to                              Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)
I



I
j


                                           Height frc-m               Subjective load levels (Ibf)
        Load Application
                                          Ground Level
             Point
i                                             (in)                           A                B                C

                  1                           53.5                      20                                     32
1                                                                                            26
                  2                           48                                             32                42
                                                                        25
I                 3                           44.5                      20               30                    42
                  4                           40
I                                                                       30               38                    54

                                              42
                                       (suDject standing
I                                           upright)
                                                                                 •
                                                                                         -                 -




            Undefined
                                              42
                                      (subject adjusting                             -

                                         own position)
I
                                             42
                                                                                     -
                                      (subject pushing)
I                                                                                                          -




I                                 Test with Wooden Flank (4;t deep)

I       Load Application
                                           Height from                Subjective load levels (lbf)
                                          Ground Level
             Point
I                                             (in)                          A                B             C
                 2                           48                         30               38            46

I          Undefined                          42                      . -                -             -




I
I
I
I
        Subject N o . . t ? ........................              Age... ? ? . . .                           Sex-----
    ►

f       Weight..1??...... lbf (W)                          Height.... 6I....in (H)                 | 2 . 1000 = 28.9



C-                                      Test with Steel Tube (2" Inner Diameter)


I
                                                        Height from                  Subjective load levels (Ibf)
         Load Application                              Ground Level
              Foint                                        (in)                            A             B            C

                     1                                    54.5                        8              18           26

                     2                                    48.5                        10             18           2G

                     3                                    45.5                        4              10           18

                     4                                    40.5                        14             28           40

                                                        42
                                                 (subject standing
                                                      upright)

              Undefined                                42
                                               (subject adjusting                              -

                                                  own position)


                                                        42                                     -
                                                 (subject pushing)                                                -




                                           Test with Wooden Plank (4" deep)


                                                        Height from                  Subjective load levels (lb:)
         Load Application                              Ground Level
              Point                                        (in)                                          B            C
                                                                                           A

                     2                                     48.5                        12            26           r,3

              Undefined                                     42                       . -             -            -
