From: Linda Rushton                                         cc: Mr Owen
      APS/Mr Howarth
      Room 702
      Queen Anne’s Gate
      @ 273 4238

       9 March 1998


Peter Edmundson

FURTHER STATEMENT BY GEORGE HOWARTH ON HILLSBOROUGH

I attach a further draft statement that Mr Howarth has prepared over the
weekend on Hillsborough. This is in response to criticism he is receiving from
the local Liberal Democrats.

2.     I would be grateful if you could confirm that the factual content of this
statement is correct. For your ease, I have highlighted the relevant sections. It
would be helpful if you could e-mail me with your response and any
suggested amendments by midday tomorrow; Thank you for your co­
operation.                                cx£^f



                             L^/VCLCv   I^ A X S k tC L A




                              LINDA RUSHTON
                                                                  t



                                    H O U SE OF COMMONjS
                                         L O N D O N SW1A OAA     i




                                            Statement

           The recent attempts by the local Liberal Democrat* to play politics with
           the current situation over the Hillsborough disasterjis both irresponsible
           and regrettable.
                                                                !j
             - *                       .                         f
^        It is irresponsible because it is not based on any factual analysis of Lord
          Justice Stuart- Smith’s review of the evidence. Instead, they contrive to
    W    personalise the whole issue into an attack on me. i dthough I know that
          the Hillsborough families are not entirely happy wi h Lord Justice Stuart-
          Smith’s scrutiny of the evidence, it makes some important and, for the
          future, helpful points.                             [
                                                               I
         Crucially, it confirms Lord Taylor’s earlier conclusion that the main cause
         of the disaster was the loss of control by the police (both inside and outside
         the stadium. It was primarily this failure which, together with serious
         inadequacies on the part of the Club and others, wi the start of the horror
         which then unfolded.                                 )
                                                               !
         It is obvious from the statement issued by the Liberal Democrats that they
         had not even taken the trouble to read the Scrutiny, or they have wilfully
         misrepresented it.

            The Hillsborough families have many concerns, but I think it is fair to say
            that there are two issues which cause them the mosi anguish. The first is
           the feet that the police officer responsible for contn lling the event on the
           day, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, retired on i i-health grounds before         me3'
        f- h o could be subjected1tu tin/ disciplinary proceedin,        followed;               , C vw ci J


           because-of the felationohip between the discipliiiaiy rtries and any^poteflfaal
           criciinal action. lhat he was then-flflwflriwriy V.?yond prosecutk>flr. In turn;                    f
           this made it difficult to deal with less senior police dfficers. JackStraw
           and I are determined to change police disciplinary r ules teHensure that this
           is never allowed to itappe&-4gain. However, it is im possible under the                                 V
                                                                      'U -O -V '           U
                                                                                    , to
                                              UJllL                   ^            K>
                                   UUJ
     terms of the European Convention on Human Rights, to which this country
     is a signatory, to apply new rules retrospectively, j
                                                         !
     The second issue which the families are deeply upfet about is the use of
    the 3.15 pm cut-off point by the coroner. Stuart-Simth deals with this
    point in great detail, and concludes that it would bf neither desirable nor
    practical given the length of time which has now passed, to re-run the
    Inquest. Indeed, the families’ own Counsel, in his (submission to the
     Scrutiny, said much the same thing.                 J
                                                          <j
                                                           }
    What is needed for the future should, God forbid, 3uch a disaster happen
w   again, is a more appropriate way o f dealing with inquests, particularly
    where there has already been a Judicial Inquiry. A^ain, both Jack Straw

•   and I are determined to change these procedures, j
                                                           5i
    This is an emotional and difficult time for the Hillsborough families and for
    those of us who have tried and remain anxious to help them. Frankly, this
    attempt by the local Liberal Democrats to use this highly charged situation
    for narrow political advantage is of no help to anyone, and for that reason
    it is regrettable.                                     t



    George Howarth MP (Parliamentary linger Secretary, the
    Home Office)
The Hillsborough families have many concerns, but I think it is fair to say that there
are two issues which cause them the most anguish. The first is the fact that the police
officer responsible for controlling the event on the day, Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield, retired on ill health grounds before disciplinary proceedings against him
could be completed. In turn, this made it difficult to deal with less senior officers.
Jack Straw and I are determined to change police disciplinary procedures and the
Home Secretary will be announcing his plans shortly. He is also concerned that
forces should use their existing powers to verify sickness claims and, where
appropriate, to postpone a request to retire on ill health grounds until disciplinary
proceedings have been completed.
