                                                                                                    ©
              THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
              Room 1106
              50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
              Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Mr J Wardrope                                                 Your reference:
Consultant in A & E Medicine
Northern General Hospital                                     Our reference:
Herries Road
SHEFFIELD S5 7AU                                              Date:      I 0     September 1997




Thank you for your letter of 2 September enclosing one you have had from Dr Ed Walker.


It might be helpful if I explain the background to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of
evidence relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster. The Judge has been
appointed to carry out this task by the Home Secretary. His objective is to establish whether
there is any significant new evidence about the disaster which was not previously available to
Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities.
 If there is significant evidence, he will aim to see whether it would have affected the
outcome of any of the proceedings.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith hopes to report his findings to the Home Secretary by the turn of
the year. You may be interested to see his terms of reference, and I attach these.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will be seeing Dr Walker with regard to his factual evidence of
what he did and observed on 15 April 1989. For this purpose it should not be necessary for
Dr Walker to see the hospital records of the patients whom he attended at the Northern
General Hospital on that day.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would however be grateful if you could make available to him (that
is to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, not Dr Walker) the records of those patients whom Dr Walker
examined. We know that Dr Walker examined Lee NICOL and Philip HAMMOND, both of
whom died, and it seems that he also examined others. We do not know the names of these
other patients, but it would be helpful if you could if at all possible identify them and make
their records available to the Judge also.

G :\H ILLS BO R \M AIN \W A R D R O PE .086
You ask whether the scrutiny has appointed an independent medical expert. We have not
done that as yet, but we will of course do so if necessary.


Your letter did not include a copy of your reply to Dr Walker as you had I think intended, and
we would be interested to see that also. I am happy to discuss matters further by telephone
if you wish.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




 G:\HILLSBOR\M AIN\W ARDROPE.O 86
