ROBERT WALLACE CREASER




Chief Inspector




Communications & Computer Department, Headquarters




I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police at present attached to

the Communications and Computer Development Department, Police Headquarters,

Snig Hill, Sheffield.

I have been a Police Officer for twenty years and have considerable

experience of Policing football matches.     I have performed the duty at the

following five Football League grounds in South Yorkshire:

Sheffield Wednesday (Hillsborough)

Sheffield United (Bramall Lane)

Rotherham United (Millmoor)

Barnsley (Oakwell)

Doncaster Rovers (Belle Vue)

The bulk of this experience has been at Hillsborough, whe         _r ’      . .-    .

numerous football matches.     These have included Football

Semi-Finals.

Hillsborough is situated within the    'F ' (Sheffield North) Division of the

South Yorkshire Police.

The first time I performed duty at Hillsborough      for an F.A. Cup Semi-Final

was as a uniform patrol Sergeant in 1977-

In 198l I was posted to ’F 1 Division (Sheffield     North) as a uniform patrol

Inspector and I remained within the Division until the        end of 1987, during

that time I frequently performed football duties at Hillsborough.
                                       -   2   -




I have been on duty at the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough Stadium for the

F.A. Cup Semi-Final matches held in the last three years.

I have performed duty at most places within the ground, although the majority

of my experience has been at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

Shortly after Hillsborough was selected as the venue for the Semi-Final

between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. I was contacted by

telephone by Chief Superintendent Mole, the then Divisional Commander of 'F'

Division, who confirmed my availability and requested that I work at the

match.   He stated that it would be his intention for me to work at the

Leppings Lane end of the ground.    Eight days prior to the Semi-Final taking

place I received an Operation Order.       A comprehensive, yellow bound document

which contained details of how the event would be organised.       Over the next

few days I made a detailed study of this document and, in particular,      the

areas of the ground where I would be supervising officers.

On Saturday,   15 April 1989, I reported for duty at the ground at

approximately 9-30 a.m.    I was in possession of my Operation Order at this

time.

My areas of responsibility were for that part of the ground which was to be

occupied,   in the main, by Liverpool supporters and for the outside of the

ground at the Leppings Lane end.

The following Inspectors were allocated to my command with areas of

responsibility as indicated below:-

Inspector Woodward                  North Stand (upper and lower level).

Inspector Bullas                    West Stand

Inspector White                     Leppings Lane    Terrace andrear   enclosure

Inspectors Sykes and Purdy          Leppings Lane     turnstiles

Inspectors Delaney and              Reserves

 Beresford
I have previously personally performed duty at all the -above locations at the

rank of Inspector.    I have previously worked at football matches with all the

above officers with the exceptions of Inspector Purdy.

The pre-match police briefing was given in the North Stand (Kop end) and

commenced at approximately 10.00 a.m.    It was a comprehensive briefing and

there was input from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,   Inspector Sewell and




Immediately following the briefing,   I sought out all the above named

Inspectors and I persoanlly handed to them written (photocopy) details of

criminal intelligence which had been collated concerning people likely to

attend the match from both Liverpool and Nottingham.     I spoke to each of the

Inspectors and mentioned points which I considered to be of particular

importance as far as their own area of responsibility was concerned.        I knew

that Inspectors Sykes and White both had vast experience of policing at

Hillsborough and intimate knowledge of the duties they had been

allocated.

Following the briefing until approximately 2.00 p.m. no matters of particular

note took place.     I spent this time 'walking the ground' speaking to

Inspectors,   serial Sergeants and Constables.

Additionally,   I spoke to many of the Sheffield Wednesday F.C. stewards who I

know (by sight but not name).     I noticed that these men appeared to be

working at locations where I had previously seen them operate.     During the

course of the morning I saw, and heard part of a briefing given by Inspector

White to these stewards.     This briefing took place in the West Stand.

It was my information that the first turnstiles would be opened at 12 noon.

In fact a small number were opened prior to this and a few spectators entered

at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and went into the Leppings Lane

 terraces in the centre pens.
                                           -   k   -




As people started to enter the stadium I could see the usual mixture of

supporters.    They were in good spirits and obviously looking forward to what

had been forecast as an interesting game between the two teams.

Shortly after 2.15 p.m.    I visited Leppings Lane where I spoke to Inspector

Sykes.     There was a contingent of Liverpool supporters standing in Leppings

Lane on the opposite side 'of the road to the stadium.       We discussed the merit

of encouraging these people across the road to queue for entry to the

stadium.     Many of these were openly drinking from cans of beer and lager;

they were not at this time causing any trouble.        After dicussion we agreed

that such a course of action was not necessary as there was a reasonable

quantity of supporters already forming queues outside the turnstiles.

Furthermore,    it was considered that to move these people at this stage may

inflame the crowd.

As time progressed towards the scheduled kick off time it became ^D^p^rne""”"

apparent that a large number of Liverpool supporters were still outside the

ground in Leppings Lane and in the queues to the turnstiles.        I noticed at

this time that the proportion of supporters who had obviously been drinking

increased.     They were, however,   at this time only a minority and were not

causing any disruption.     Many of the fans who arrived were unsure of the

geographical layout of the turnstiles which gave admittance to the North

Stand, the Leppings Lane terraces and elevated section and the West Stand.

The signs above the turnstiles were not clear and many fans were confused, a

specific example of this was the alphabetic character displayed above the

turnstile and the alphabetic character shown on the ticket as the gangway to

be used for access to the West Stand were in apparent conflict.        It was

necessary for Police Officers to give constant assistance in this

respect.
                                           5




At approximately 2.30 p.m. I could see that difficulties were being

experienced in the build up to the turnstiles which were allocated to the

North Stand,   the West Stand and the Leppings Lane turnstiles - all these

three locations are fed from Leppings Lane.     From this point until after

3-00 p.m. I continued to monitor and supervise the Leppings Lane end of the

ground on the outside.

I was with Inspector Sykes when he caused the flow of traffic to stop in

Leppings Lane in order to facilitate more opportunity for the ever increasing

pedestrian traffic to make progress.

I have considerable experience of policing this particular area and I could

see that the build up of supporters was later than usually the case and there

appeared to be larger numbers.    The operation was frustrated more   so by the

presence of a considerable number of fans who had arrived in the vicinity of

the ground, but were not in possession of tickets entitling them entry to

what was an 'all ticket' match.    Furthermore, many Liverpool fans arrived at

the Leppings Lane end of the ground in possession of tickets which entitled

them admission to the Spion kop and attempted to seek approval to     enter at

the Leppings Lane end with friends     who had legitimate tickets for that

area.

The situation outside the turnstiles,    particularly those leading to the

Leppings Lane terraces, was such that by approximately 2.40 p.m. a situation

had arisen whereby there was a large crowd of supporters who were all pushing

towards the turnstiles, but the turnstiles could not accept them quickly

enough to permit entry to the ground.     The mood of this crowd was changing

from a good natured crowd to a frustrated crowd who could perhaps see that

they had little chance of gaining access prior to the start of the match.

The proportion of spectators who had been drinking inceased as time

progressed but they were outnumbered by people who did not exhibit any signs
                                          -   6   -




of drink.   Within this   crowd there were at least          two or three Police horses

who were attempting to    stop the pushing.           It has always been my experience

that horses are able to control such a situation, but it was obvious in this

instance that this was    not the case.

A Police Constable was    allocated to theoutside of each of the turnstiles for

the Leppings Lane terraces.    These officers were given the task of preventing

supporters entering the ground in possession of weapons, banners, alcohol

etc.   This searching action did not impede the rate of flow of spectators ‘

through the turnstiles.    Because of the intense pressure from the surging

crowd, it was necessary to withdraw those officers from that position; a

decision taken by Inspector Purdy, which I fully supported.

With a view to reducing the area covered by the Police horses, I instructed

officers to close the gates which are situated away from the turnstiles next

to the river - I did this because fans were using this gate to get around the

horses.

The crush within the crowd was such that people were suffering and there was

the possibility of severe injuries taking place.             I saw two or three bodies

of young persons passed over the heads of members of the crowd, these people

either had, or were close to fainting.

At approximately 2.45 p.m. I rejoined Inspector Sykes in Leppings Lane and we

adopted a strategy of forming a line of Police horses at the rear of the

crowd with a view to preventing the queues at the turnstiles becoming larger.

This took some time to arrange.     There were gaps between one Police horse and

the next one and I attempted to arrange for a Police Officer to 'plug' each

gap.   Many supporters approached this line and forced their way through,

despite firm advice not to do so.     I even saw a supporter crawl under the

belly of a horse in order to breach the line.
                                        -   7   -




I could see that some people were climbing over the top of the turnstiles in

order to gain admittance to the stadium and at one point I recall seeing

Inspector Bennett   ('F' Division) on top of the wall above the turnstiles

serving the Leppings Lane terraces.

Some minutes later I attempted to contact Police Control by radio but could

not do so-, there appeared to be a fault with my particular radio (a Pye PFX

personal hand held radio) in that it was receiving but I could not transmit.

I approached Police Constable Buxton who was at this time in a Police

Landrover.    This vehicle was parked in Leppings Lane and the officer was

giving instructions to the supporters by means of a public address system.

He was urging the spectators not to push forward.       I requested Police

Constable Buxton to suggest to the Control Room that consideration be given

to delaying the kick-off time of the match (his radio, a Motorola KT6QQE hand

held radio,   appeared to be functioning well).

At approximately this time I was able to see that the large      'concertina'

gates, known as 'A',   ’B ' and 'C', had been opened and that a large proportion

of the crowd surged forward through these gates.      These gates were only

opened for a short period of time and I could see officers/stewards at the

rear of the gates apparently struggling to close them, which they were

subsequently able to do.    It is my impression that gate 'C' remained open for

a longer period than the others.    As a result of this action the pressure on

the turnstiles reduced although supporters were still arriving at the ground.

This action clearly had the result of easing the tension outside the

turnstiles although the crowd there were still pushing forward.

A short time later, I would estimate just after 3-00 p.m., there was a

request for all officers to attend inside the ground to deal with an apparent

invasion of the surface playing area.       I did not hear the specific radio

transmission but I did hear officers around me saying words to the effect of
                                        -   8   -




'all officers inside - pitch invasion'.

I immediately attended inside the ground and went to the rear of the goal at

the Leppings Lane end of the stadium.       I could see that people were trapped

and that the gates from the centre pens were open and people were coming

through them.   There was considerable confusion.      Some supporters were

climbing over the fences,   they were assisted to do so by the Police Officers

and by other supporters.    I assisted in the general activity of lifting

injured and apparently dead people from the Leppings Lane terraces onto the

playing area.   I was present at this location prior to a 'private' ambulance

arriving.   I gave instructions to some officers in an attempt to co-ordinate

what was happening.    I can recall, in particular, instructing Police

Constable             ('F' Division) to act as the Communications Officer for

Superintendent Greenwood.

A short time later I attended at the gymnasium situated inside the stadium.

I was there concerned in the organisation of a temporary mortuary.       My

primary tasks were ensuring that each victim brought inside was examined by a

doctor to confirm death, and to allocate an individual Police Officer to each

victim to deal with the formalities which would follow.

I later acted as a logistical officer and was engaged in the liaison between

the Police, Social Workers, relatives and identification       teams.   I continued

with this work until retiring from duty at 5-00 a.m. the following morning.
