                                                             19 MAR 1991


hs.3.18/dis&law.peb

                                         cc   Mr Hammond
                                              Mr Turney
                                              Mrs Price
                                              Mr Brook
                                              Mr Soden
                                              Mr Spurgeon
                                              Mr Whalley


Miss G Harrison
E Division



DISASTERS AND THE LAW
Thank you for your note of 13 March enclosing a copy of the
letter dated 4 March from the Lord Chancellor's Department about
disaster inquiries. I am replying after consulting colleagues
in FEPD--and with Mr Whalley who was Secretary of the Taylor
inquiry.

We would not feel in this part of the Home Office that there
should be a presumption in favour of holding a statutory
technical inquiry under the Health and Safety at Work Act in the
case of disasters arising from fires (such as Bradford) or
sportsground management and crowd control (as at Hillsborough).
Our reason for taking this view is that these are two areas where
inspectors of the Health and Safety Executive do not necessarily
have expertise. HSE have no statutory responsibility in respect
of general fire safety matters; nor do they have any statutory
responsibility, or in consequence expertise, in relation to
safety at sportsgrounds.

There are powers available under section 33 of the Fire Services
Act 1947 for the Secretary of State to hold a public local
inquiry into the circumstances of or the steps taken to deal with
any particular outbreak of fire, and this could no doubt have
been used for the purpose of the inquiry into the Bradford fire.
In fact Mr Justice Popplewell's inquiry was a non-statutory
departmental inquiry with no powers to call witnesses.       This
presented no problems in practice even though at the early stages
of the inquiry some parts were held in public.

Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into the Hillsborough football
ground tragedy was also a non-statutory departmental inquiry.
I understand however from Mr Whalley, who was the Secretary to
the inquiry, that the option was left open of turning the inquiry
into a tribunal of inquiry under the Tribunals of Inquiry
(Evidence) Act 1921 if there was difficulty about securing
evidence from witnesses. In practice, this was unnecessary.
Mr Whalley has commented that while understanding LCD's concern
about resources, he does not see that Ministers can be persuaded
that an HSE investigation will compare in public response with
an inquiry by a High Court Judge or a QC. I am annexing his note
(Annex A) , because I think that his recent experience adds
considerable weight to his views.

I think you should also see comments from the Civil Emergencies
Adviser, David Brook (Annex B). They not only support the view
that a limited technical inquiry will not meet the real need, but
are relevant to the question of the relationship between the
inquest and the investigation.

I think that you should make clear to the Lord Chancellor's
Department that we do not share their conclusion that there
should be a presumption in favour of a technical inquiry in the
case of major disasters. Otherwise I do not think that we can
reasonably object to the tenor of the LCD paper since paragraph
13 of the paper clearly leaves the final choice of type of
inquiry to the appropriate Minister.

I have only one comment of detail on the text, and that is very
minor. It seems to me that paragraph 12 does not properly form
part of the section on non-statutory public inquiries and that
it should in consequence either have its own sub-heading or
follow the heading which at present precedes paragraph 13.




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         G2 Division


18 March 1991


Encs
E.R.
                                       cc   Mr   Turney
                                            Mr   Spurgeon
                                            Mr   Soden
                                            Mr   Brook

         iv/j
   Mr   lton

   DISASTERS AND THE LAW

   Thank you for copying to me your note of 14 March to Mr Turney
   with its attachments.

   2. I support the line in your draft. Your point about the lack
   of formal authority by which the HSE could have investigated the
   Hillsborough Disaster is telling.

   3. I read the background papers, and in particular the note of
   the meeting on 13 December 1990, with considerable interest.
   While I can understand the pain which the Lord Chancellor's
   Department must feel about the expense, both in terms of judge
   power and finance, of non-statutory inquiries, I frankly do not
   see how Ministers can be persuaded that an HSE investigation will
   compare in public response with an inquiry by a High Court Judge
   or a QC. The pressure for Ministers to act quickly, publicly,
   and with due regard to the gravity of events, is overwhelming.
   They would, in my view, take considerable persuading that an
   inquiry by the HSE would look as good in public relations terms.
   That is not to denigrate the HSE, but simply to note that what
   Ministers want at the critical moment is to show that they are
   bringing in an individual of standing, not a department with
   which the general public are largely unfamiliar. In any case,
   in a situation as complicated as Hillsborough, I do not see how
   the HSE could have been expected to investigate matters of police
   planning, the conduct of the Football Association, the actions
   of the fire and ambulance services, the competence of the local
   authority and so on.        Certainly, the emergency services
   themselves would I suspect not have tolerated judgement being
   passed on them by the HSE alone.

   4.   The points, discussed under Advantages and Disadvantages,
   about the relative length of time which each kind of inquiry
   might take, how well it is controlled, and whether the Chairman
   has the necessary expertise, seem to me largely to depend upon
   the calibre of the person chosen.      The traditional view of
   choosing a lawyer is that lawyers can be expected to get at the
   heart of any issue, however technical, since they are doing that
   all the time. Some, of course, are more competent than others.
   Much would depend upon how each inquiry chairman used his
   assessors. We were fortunate during Hillsborough in that Lord
   Justice Taylor readily turned to his assessors for advice, kept
   in very close touch with them throughout, and involved them
   fully.

   5.   Finally, it was perhaps fortuitous that the investigation
   division of the Health and Safety Inspectorate were located in
   Sheffield, but they proved invaluable in carrying out the
E.R.
   technical work which the Hillsborough Inquiry commissioned. This
   was done formally under the direction of one of the assessors,
   Professor Maunder, but I was surprised how easy it was to build
   up and establish informal working links between the Deputy
   Director of the laboratory at Sheffield, the West Midlands
   Police, Counsel for the Inquiry, and our own Secretariat.      It
   meant that we could combine the advantages of the technical
   expertise available to HSE with the senior level judicial
   chairmanship which the gravity of the disaster seemed to require.




                                                      R M WHALLEY

   Establishment Division 2
   14 March 1991
                                                                  £>



      'V/j
Mr Boston
G2 Division


DISASTERS AND THE LAW


Thank you for your note of 14 March and for the opportunity to
comment on this subject.

The clear message I have received during my first 15 months in
office is that the public in general - and victims of disasters
in particular - seek one inquiry which addresses all aspects of
a disaster. Such an inquiry should, it has been put to me,
subsume the functions of HM Coroner and include any technical
aspects (MAIB, AAIB etc).

In particular, it has been strongly represented to me that
anomalies such as a Coroner's inquiry inhibited by a criminal
investigation (for example in the case of the Marchioness),
causes great distress to victims and/or their friends and
relatives.

This is clearly a subject fraught with difficulty but in
discussions with victims of disasters and their legal
representatives, it has been strongly represented to me that we
need to simplify and standardise existing arrangements for
inquiries following major disasters. It seems to me that the
proposed guidance may not achieve this.
                   »

I ask that you draw on any of the above as you see fit as an
addition to your own draft note dated 14 March.




                                        D C 6.BROOK
                                        14 March 1991
