                                         cc Mr   Clayton
                                            Mr   Bolton
                                            Mr   Mould
                                            Mr   Waghorn
                                            Ms   Jago.^


Mr Brown
G2 Division

TAYLOR:   RECOMMENDATION 4

Mr Clayton copied to me your note to him of 31 August and his
reply of 13 September. As I have responsibility for advising on
police matters, it may be helpful if I endorse Mr Clayton's
comments.

      I agree in particular that police forces ought to be
extremely cautious about entering into anything which might
constitute an enforceable contract for the supply of police
services. As the Court of Appeal indicated in R v Metropolitan
Police Commissioner ex parte Blackburn [1968] 1 All ER 763, while
a chief officer of police may in some circumstances be subject
to the control of the courts, he is answerable only to the law
and not to the Secretary of State, his police authority or any
other person. It follows that a contractual undertaking to carry
out his functions in particular ways could run counter to these
fundamental principles. Mr Clayton has mentioned paragraph 9 of
the draft agreement. It seems to me that this and paragraph 10
could   interfere with    the Chief    Constable's    independent
responsibility in operational matters.

      Mr Clayton mentions section 48 of the Police Act 1964. This
applies to a Chief Constable only to the extent that subsection
 (4) gives a police authority a discretion to pay damages or costs
awarded against an individual member of their police force,
including of course the Chief Constable in proceedings for tort.
As Mr Clayton has indicated, a Chief Constable could reasonably
expect his police authority to indemnify him under that
provision.    (It may be observed that section 48 makes provision
for proceedings in tort against police officers but clearly does
not contemplate any contractual liability.)




                                                  MISS P A EDWARDS
Legal Adviser's Branch                           15 September 1989
