                 TYNESIDE SENIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRE
Chief Inspector G. F. Noel                                            Newburn Police Station,
Th e Officer in C h a rg e                                            Newburn Road,
                                                                      Newburn,
                                                                      Newcastle upon Tyne,
                   GFN/CH/             Our Ref.:                      NE15 8PQ.

Your Ref.:                                                            Telephone:
                                                                      Tyneside (091)2323451
                                                                        26th February 1990


             Mrs. M .; Sad.
             Cl Division
             Home Office
             Queen Anne's Gate
             LONDON
             SW1H 9AT


             Dear Madam,

             Attendance Centres - Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium
             Disaster

             I refer to your letter dated 7th February 1990 relating to the
             above subject and asking for comment on the proposals contained
             in the final published report in respect of the use of Attendance
             Centres in enforcing exclusion orders.

             The report recognises the practical difficulties in implementing
             extended Attendance Centre Orders.

             The greatest difficulty would be the mix of offenders i.e. those
             currently serving Attendance Centre Orders and the 'new' type of
             offender envisaged by the report who is likely to be older and a
             'more hardened hooligan'.

             The calibre of staff would have to be carefully assessed and two
             hour sessions only each Saturday in the football season with Orders
             lasting for either 36 hours (half a season) or 72 hours (a full season)
             would appear to me to be not unreasonable.

             I feel there would have to be total segregation of the two types of
             offender attending the Attendance Centre. There would need to be
             separate registration which need not pose a problem if the sessions
             were only a maximum of two hours.

             There would in all probability need to be careful thought given to
             the second hour of the session with the first hour consisting of
             physical education. There would be a need to keep the offenders
             actively engaged on an activity like First Aid. I do not think a
             craft session would be suitable for this type of offender.

             I accept the limitations on segregation posed by the premises occupied
             by the various Attendance Centres. If segregation is not possible I
             would suggest separate premises.



                                                                            CONT
 W h en teleph o n in g p le a s e a s k for                   Ext.
V'


                                     2




     There may be problems posed in the administration of what amounts
     to two Attendance Centres providing facilities for two different
     types of offender. This could be overcome by appointing a separate
     deputy to deal solely with the offenders sent under the provisions
     of an exclusion order.

     The viability of such a scheme would depend on the numbers sent by
     the Court but the responsibilities of such a deputy should be reflected
     in his salary. The alternative would be to have separate Attendance
     Centres for the new type of offender.




     (jKF. NOEL)
