WEMBLEY
STADIUM LIMITED
EMPIRE WAY, WEMBLEY HA9 ODW
FAX NO.S: TH E STADIUM 01-900 1055 WEMBLEY ARENA 01-900 0975 CONFERENCE CENTRE 01-903 3234 PERSONAL FAX NO:

  AC/MS

  Adrian Titcombe
  Football Association Ltd
  16 Lancaster Gate
  London
  W2 3LW

   15th November 1989

  Dear Adrian,

  As promised on the telephone yesterday I am enclosing
  Wembley's case for exemption from the membership scheme
  which should be self explanatory.

  I must say that I am surprised and disappointed that once
  again Wembley is excluded from critical discussions concerning
  W em bley.

  Furthermore, if the F.A. is to represent Wembley's view I
  would have thought it important to meet with us so that we can
  discuss this crucial issue at length rather than during a short
  telephone conversation.

  I trust these points will be made to other members of the FMA,
  the FA and, indeed, the Minister.

  I look forward to hearing your observations.

  Yours sincerely




  Alan Coppin
  Managing Director




TEL: 01-902 8833 (Admin.)
TEL: 01-900 1234 (Box Office)
TELEX: 8811735
W em bley Stad ium Lim ited (Registered in E n g la n d No. 223957) Registered Office: T h e W em bley S ta d iu m HA9 ODW
FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME
CASE FOR WEMBLEYS EXEMPTION

1   INTRODUCTION

    Wembley Stadium should be exempt from the Football
    Membership Scheme for the reasons set out in 2, below.

    It is clear that the Government recognises the unique
    position of Wembley as the National Football Stadium and
    expects special arrangements to apply to Wembley.

    This was made clear by Lord Heskett when speaking for
    the Government in the House of Lords:-

    HANSARD (vol 506 No 63, Col 29).

    "I make no apology for the fact that we are looking at the
    possibility of providing special arrangements in the
    scheme for Wembley different from those that will be
    operated at club level".

    "We accept that special arrangements could be made to
    enable foreign visitors who are not members of the
    scheme to attend matches and that will be a feature of
    the scheme".

    "I have agreed that we need special arrangements for
    Wembley and I accept of course that we cannot require
    foreign spectators to join the national membership
    scheme".

    "On licensing, we accept that the licensing authority... will
    need to take account of the special considerations which
    apply to Wembley".
SUMMARY OF REASONS FOR EXEMPTION

Wembley has an excellent record of crowd control and
crowd behaviour.

Wembley has no club membership or indeed regular
atten d e rs.

Wembley is uniquely affected as the national stadium by
the staging of International matches. The Government
recognises that controlling access of visiting fans by their
passport is unworkable which in effect means the
membership scheme is unworkable for Internationals.

Wembley stages a wide range of non-football events, such
as Women’s Hockey, American Football, Rugby League
matches and Pop Concerts. The membership scheme
hardware would be inappropriate for these uses.

Wembley stages football events - Cup Finals and
Internationals which are different in scale, nature and
timing to the regular league programme. Such events are
typically held in a carnival atmosphere completely
different to that created at a normal league club.

Wembley accordingly, is organised in a different way to
other football stadia. For example on a major event day
we employ over 2,000 staff and will have over 350 police
on duty in the stadium. Wembley is experienced in the
proper control of massive crowds.

In order to deal with the large numbers of spectators for
football events in the stadium, Wembley has developed
Europe's largest computerised telephone booking
operation.
Increasingly bookings are made on the telephone (eg
England v Poland) and it would be very difficult to
control memberships by taking bookings in this way.

In 1990 Wembley will be the country's first ALL seater
stadium enabling easier control over ticket allocation and
identification.

Wembley has tested computerised turnstiles in its indoor
Arena operation (12,000 seat capacity) and finds that
considerable delay are experienced - so much so that
Wembley has reverted to manual entry. In our
experience which in these matters is considerable
application of the membership scheme at Wembley would
result in considerable delays, in admitting spectators
because of the size of the Wembley attendance (80,000)
and the pattern of arrivals for some key matches (eg late
arrivals for evening matches such as England v Italy).
This has serious safety implications.


CONCLUSION

Wembley conclude for the reasons set out in 1 + 2 above
that it should be fully exempted from the membership
scheme.
IRISH'
