HILLSBOROUGH

The folder includes the latest version of your statement
for the House and a speaking note for your meeting
with families which you will want to look at.

There is also a press notice and a suggested article for
the Echo/Mirror Ed thinks the tone is very good and
you may want to reflect more of this in the statement.

We have not got Business Managers’ agreement for a
debate so I think it would be best for Ed/Paddy to plant
a question which you could then reply to. This could
be along the lines of:

Q - 1 am grateful for the Hon Gentleman’s words(?)
but I would be grateful for more time for the House to
debate this issue

A I warmly welcome my Hon friend’s suggestion - it is
not a matter for me but I would be happy to take a full
part in any further debate.

In addition you should be aware that there was another
World in Action programme last night which raised 6
further questions. Paul Pugh has done some brief
speaking notes which you will want to look at before
speaking to the families.
?Content with the speaking note to the families

?Content with the oral statement - 1 have sent copies to
No 10, Peter Mandelson and David Blunkett

?Content with the article     O

?Content with the pn                IooV   ycu - c_> Lx
                            C-L c            •Gw£ju-| H* J
?Content with the briefing                        ^

?Happy for us to plant a question


You should also be aware that the families are holding
a large press conference after the statement


Clare 17/2
18 February 1998                                                0171 273 4610

      HOME SECRETARY PUBLISHES HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

Home Secretary Jack Straw today published the report of the Hillsborough
Scrutiny carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

The report concludes that there is no basis for reconsidering previous
criminal, disciplinary, public inquiry or inquest decisions regarding the
disaster.

Mr Straw announced the findings, and the Government’s acceptance of them,
in an oral statement to Parliament today.

He also had a meeting with the Hillsborough families to explain his response
and give them copies of the Scrutiny report.

The main conclusions of the report are that:

       • the conclusions of the Taylor report are still valid and there is
         therefore no basis for a further public inquiry;

       • there is no basis for a renewed application to quash the verdict of
         the inquest;

       • nor is there any material which Director of Public Prosecutions or the
         disciplinary authorities which might cause them to reconsider the
         decisions they have already taken; and

       • none of the evidence which the Scrutiny was asked to consider
         added anything significant to the evidence which was available to
         Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.

Emphasising his feelings for the plight of the families, Mr Straw said:

      “No-one could have anything but most profound sympathy with all the
      families and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely
      begin to comprehend what they have suffered, and I know that my
      announcement today will leave them deeply angry and disappointed.

       “I fully understand why those who lost loved ones should feel betrayed
       by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and
       for the state of the ground on that day. I hope and believe that the
       changes which resulted from the Taylor Inquiry should mean that such a
       disaster will never be repeated.”

Mr Straw said that the Scrutiny was the latest in a series of lengthy and
detailed examinations of evidence in this case, and that the main reason for
the disaster - the failure of police control - had been identified by Lord Taylor
in his report.

He added that Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s report was thorough and
comprehensive. He said:

       “Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail all the evidence
       which has been put to him. He has looked equally rigorously at all the
       information presented to him, whether that information came from
       individuals or official bodies.

       “I, the Attorney General and the DPP have considered his report very
       carefully and we have decided to accept its conclusions.”

        “With any major disaster, it is inevitable that over the course of time
       some new information may become available which was not known at
       the relevant time.

       “There were many thousands of people present at Hillsborough on that
       awful day and millions more watched it on their television screens.
       There will always be some new shred of information which might be
       gleaned.

       “But that does not always mean that the previous outcomes would
       have been any different. We must be satisfied that any re-opening of
       previous proceedings would be merited, and that any new information
       is not simply new, but also material to those proceedings.

Adding that the report highlighted the shortcomings of the police disciplinary
system, Mr Straw said:

       “There is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough
       families. As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report,

              “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has
              personally been held to account either in a criminal court,
              disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent of losing their jo b ”.

       “What happened after Hillsborough is a prime example of why we
       have to improve the current police discipline arrangements, and I will
       be responding fully to the recent recommendations of the Home Affairs
       Select Committee shortly.”
            Mr Straw also agreed with the Scrutiny’s finding that there should rarely be
            the need for an inquest following a judicial inquiry into major disaster. He said:

                   “Lord Justice Stuart-Smith highlights in his report the exceptionally
                   difficult task which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest.

                   “I am clear that Hillsborough proved that the system in its present form
                   is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this kind.

                   “If no inquest had been necessary, the Taylor inquiry, which all have
                   accepted as an excellent report, would then have remained
                   unchallenged as the last word on the causes of the disaster.”

            Mr Straw concluded:

                   “I recognise that it will be difficult and painful for the families of those
                   who died to accept the conclusions of this report. I am only too aware
                   of their feelings of grief and betrayal. But the implementation of Lord
1UJ              'TSTylor’s recommendations brought about a sea change in the way
Q)u lX>            football matches are run and policed. This, together with the proposed
f j e fir          changes to the inquest and police discipline system, should mean that
                   no other families will have to go through the same terrible experiences
                   ever again.”

            NOTES TO EDITORS

            1. The Home Secretary announced the Scrutiny on 30 June 1997.

            2. It was carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. His terms of reference
            were:


                  To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
                  Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

                   (a)    to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

                   (b)    to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for
                          the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
                          responsibilities; or

                   (c)   to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
                         disciplinary matters; and in relation to (a) to advise whether any
                         evidence not previously available is of such significance as to
                         justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
                          Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
                         (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously
             considered by them which may be relevant to their respective
             duties;

             and to advise whether there is any other action which should be
             taken in the public interest.

3. A summary of the report is attached. Media copies of the Home Secretary’s
statement and the Scutiny report are available from Home Office Press Office
on 0171 273 4610. Non media copies of the report can be obtained from
HMSO, ISBN no....................., price...
17 / 0 2 /9 8         1 2 :1 9
                                                                                                     N O .0 7 1   002




                RESTRICTED            POLICY
                One of the first major decisions I made as Home Secretary was to order a new
                look at the Hillsborough tragedy. It was not an easy decision to make.

                I know the pain from that terrible day will never disappear for the families and
                friends of the 96 people who died. I knew there was a danger of unfulfilled
                expectations.

                And 1accepted that the Hillsborough disaster had already been the focus of
                exhaustive investigation. Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry had been both detailed and
                thorough. His report led to the overhaul and modernisation of football grounds in
                this country. The inquests into the deaths involved 80 days of public hearings.
                And the Police Complaints Authority investigation took more than 5,000
                statements.

                But I was also aware of the strong feelings of the families of those who died at
                Hillsborough that the full truth about the disaster had still not been uncovered.
                They felt vital facts had been overlooked or kept hidden. And they particularly
                wanted video and medical evidence which has recently come to light to be
                considered.

                It was because of this that I announced last June that a senior judge would
                independently scrutinise all the new evidence. His task was to see whether it was
                of such significance to justify a new public inquiry - and whether it might form the
                basis for criminal prosecution or fresh police disciplinary action.

                Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has carefully studied all the evidence put in front of him
                - from wherever it came. And his judgement is that there is no basis for a further
                public inquiry. Nor does he believe the new material would lead to either the
                Director of Public Prosecutions or the disciplinary authorities reconsidering their
                past decisions

                I recognise that this is not what the families hoped for or wanted. I understand
                there will be a deep feeling of disappointment and anger on Merseyside. I know
                the families feel betrayed by those responsible for policing Hillsborough and for
                the state of the ground

                 Many of us attend football matches regularly - often with our children. But it is
                impossible for us even to imagine the pain suffered by those who lost their
                children or husbands in such horrifying circumstances.

                But as Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said, his job was to examine the facts and come
                to an objective judgement. That is what I, the Attorney-General, and the Director
                of Public Prosecutions also had to do. We have read his report and agree with
                his conclusions.
           1 2 : 19
                                                                                             NO.071   503




    That does not mean that there are not lessons we must learn from Hillsborough.
    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith makes clear he understands the dismay felt by the
    families that not a single individual has been held to account for the disaster
    either in a court of law, through disciplinary hearings or has even lost their job.
    This is despite the findings of the Taylor report that the main reason for the
    disaster was the failure of police control.

    I share Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's concern. Events after Hillsborough helped
    expose serious shortcomings in the police disciplinary system. I intend to close
    the loopholes which have brought this procedure into disrepute fit can’t be right
    that police officers can avoid disciplinary tribunals by retiring early on a
    comfortable pension.)

    I also share his view over the need to limit the the legal requirement to hold
    inquests after a public inquiry has already taken place. This increases the
    anguish for the families of the victims. It can also cause confusion.

    The coroner had an exceptionally difficult task in examining the Hillsborough
    disaster after the inquiry by the late Lord Justice Taylor. If there had been no
    requirement for a full inquest, the Taylor report would have remained
    unchallenged as the last word on the tragedy.

    South Yorkshire police have accepted their main responsibility for the disaster.
    Millions of pounds have been paid out in compensation by them, Sheffield
    Wednesday and the local authority. Those whose actions contributed to the
    tragedy will have to live with their conscience. But all this means nothing
    when set against the loss of a child, husband or loved one.

    The greatest monument to the 96 people who died at Hillsborough is that such a
    tragedy ©an never be repeated in this country. There are no fences at football
^   grounds. Our main stadiums are now all-seater. And despite demands from
    some supporters for a return to terracing, I will continue to oppose such a move.

    I accept this will be of little comfort for those who lost loved ones at Hillsborough.
    The entire country is united in sympathy with them. But we cannot take away the
    pain. So I know it will be difficult for the families to accept this report. I
    understand that.

    But I hope they will recognise that this was the honest attempt to examine all the
    new evidence that I promised. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report is is both
    independent and thorough.

    I believe that there has to be a point where we end speculation about re-opening
    inquiries or proceedings. I believe this report gives us that opportunity.
    ENDS
