Patron:      The Rt Hon D. Howell MP
President
Chairman:             Cllr
                          A.W. Gooch JP
                           A.M. Kershaw
                                                           The National Federation
Deputy Chairman:
General Secretary:
                        Mrs M. Hartland
                            M.H. Gamten
                                                           of Football Supporters’Clubs
Hon. Treasurer:             K.C. Chaplin
Senior Life Vice-President:
                            J.H. Lambert
Life Vice-Presidents:        R.G. Abbott
L.M. Doel              Mrs J.L. Hancock         Please reply to :-             8 % k e Close,
J. Patience                      R. Sonin
Vice-Presidents:                                                               Isleworth,
J. Daborn                      J.A. Hunt
                                                                               Middlesex    1W7 5PE
                                                                               4th July 1989
R.M. Whalley, Esq.,
Secretary,
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,
London SW1H 9AT

Dear Mr. Whalley,
                     Further to my letter of 21st April and your further invitation to the Federation's
Chairman, Tony Kershaw, I now enclose The National Federation of Football Supporters' Clubs formal
written submission to your Inquiry.


                     For ease of assimilation, the submission has been kept as brief as possible without
omission.     Sane arguments outlined and ideas trailed have not been detailed. We hope however that ve
may have the opportunity to discuss exhaustively those which are considered to be important and relevant.



                                                      Yours sincerely




                                                        (I.D.Todd)
                                            Travel and Crowd Control Officer
22ft (l^
          THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS1 CLUBS

  A Submission to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

STATUS OF N.F.F.S.C.

The National Federation of Football Supporters1 Clubs has been in existence
for 63 years and until recently was the only national organisation through
which football enthusiasts could have their views represented. The Federation
was a full member of the Working Party set up by the Minister for Sport in the
last Labour Government, has long been accepted by the Football Association and
Football League who have each been prepared regularly to meet Federation
Officers to discuss matters of mutual interest and concern, and both submitted
written proposals to and appeared before the Popplewell Inquiry.

As its name suggests, the Federation is based upon a number (currently 140) of
individually constituted clubs each dedicated to the support of a specific
League or Non-League football team in Great Britain. It is our view that this
is the best method by which supporters, through meetings within their own
club, can reflect their opinions to take into account local factors and
attitudes.   Membership of a supporters' club can also provide behavioural
supervision and encourage harmonious social contact between fans. Commonality
of view about local problems and concerns about non-local matters is
represented through club delegates attending regular Divisional Meetings,
National Council Meetings at which each Division is represented and an Annual
Conference which all member clubs may attend.   In the recent past, the high
level of activity in important football issues has prompted the calling of a
number of additional mini-conferences.    Federation believes it is therefore
well in touch with the views, both consistent and conflicting, of some 150,000
supporters.   Regrettably, the influence it is able to exert and experience it
can make available to others is sometimes curtailed by its lack of proper
funding and the entirely voluntary and part-time status of its officers, who
all have responsibilities also to their own supporters' clubs.

Without flinching from acting as agent for the sometimes passionate concerns
and frustrations of supporters, the Federation does not consider itself
primarily an activist organisation and has always aimed to conduct its
business with other authorities in a responsible and       constructive way.It
seeks to understand the sometimes conflicting pressures upon and desires of
those with whom it deals and aims to improve the status and treatment of
football supporters by collaboration rather than confrontation and         by
providing an important channel of two-way communication between the game's
customers and its administrators. Its approach is embodied in its motto which
is "To Help and not to Hinder".


RELATIONSHIP WITH FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS' ASSOCIATION

It is recognised that the Federation structure outlined above leaves a
considerable number of supporters unrepresented.    Some choose not to join a
supporters' club, sane teams do not have independent supporters' clubs
(through the autocratic manner in which the football club itself runs its own
version of a supporters' club which is often merely a travel club, through
refusal by the football club to recognise one which is independently run, or
through lack of sufficiently active personnel willing to run one) and some
enthusiasts support football generally rather than a single team.          The
Federation has twice considered widening its remit to allow individual
membership for those supporters so disenfranchised but on both occasions the
proposal was narrowly defeated at its Annual Conference.
N.F.F.S.C. Submission to Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry - Page 2

      The relatively recently formed Football Supporters' Association fills this
      void, as well as offering an opportunity to people strongly to express
      personal views without any corporate responsibility.        Because of their
      respective structures, variations in aim and attitude, and relative sizes, the
      Federation accepts the existence of the F.S.A. but currently sees no
      opportunity    for   a formal link between or amalgamation of        the   two
      organisations.    It has, however, welcomed the establishment of a positive
      working relationship with the F.S.A. on matters of common interest and, for
      example,   co-operated closely with it in petitioning M.P.s about          the
      Government's proposed identity card scheme.

      In relation to Hillsborough, the Federation recognises that the foundation of
      the F.S.A. has close links with Liverpool Football Club and that several of
      its officers had first hand experience of the tragedy.       It commends the
      immense amount of work carried out since then by that organisation both in
      Liverpool and at the hearing of verbal evidence to the Inquiry and fully
      accepts that whilst Liverpool Supporters' Club is affiliated to Federation and
      one of its members was a victim of the tragedy, the F.S.A. was better equipped
      to deal direct with individual evidence.     Liverpool Supporters' Club has
      therefore, with our agreement, co-operated closely with F.S.A. and the
      Federation will not be offering specific evidence on the events of 15th April.

 3.   BASIS OF SUBMISSION

      The manner in which football clubs, police officers, ground stewards,
      ambulance personnel and others withwhan they come into contact plan to
      receive and subsequently handle supporters has for sane time been a matter of
      concern among clubs in the N.F.F.S.C. Some of our comments are therefore
      based upon a general picture which has developed over a period rather than
      upon specific incidents for which chapter and verse could now be provided.

      It is fortuitous that, from the commencement of last season, member clubs were
      invited to provide factual information about their treatment at away games in
      the form of a questionnaire, a copy of which is attached at Appendix A.   This
      sought to identify the extent and source of the wide range of problems
      previously identified so that, where a clear pattern emerged, Federation was
      better equipped to raise the problems highlighted with the appropriate
      authorities.   256 reports were received, covering 82 Football League and 2
      Scottish grounds. In addition, copy correspondence between supporters' clubs
      and the authorities about specific incidents has been collated. An analysis of
      these forms provides a basis of other comments made.   The Federation would be
      prepared to make available to the Inquiry for further scrutiny any of this
      submitted material if so requested.

      The final source of comment is a free-ranging discussion held at the      1989
      Annual Conference on 10th June and an additional meeting on 1st July.

 4.   PROBLEMS HIGHLIGHTED BY HILLSBOROUGH

      Without in any way pre-empting the Inquiry's findings about the specific
      incident, Press coverage of the proceedings has identified a number of
      contributory factors to the eventual disaster which, in the Federation's
      experience, are far from unique.    Indeed, there are a significant number of
      parallels with incidents at the York City versus Sunderland league match on
      26th March 1988.    On that occasion, an all-ticket match with insufficient
      capacity for visiting supporters, significant congestion outside the ground
      caused an exit gate to be opened, ticketless fans were admitted, dangerous
      overcrowding resulted inside, and eventually fans spilled onto the pitch.   It
      may be pertinent to the Inquiry to study the report of the F.A.'s Disciplinary
      Committee, which was chaired by a Sheffield Wednesday director, to identify
      whether any lessons learned from that incident subsequently formed the basis
      for improvements at York or elsewhere.
    N.F.F.S.C. Submission to Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry - Page 3


        The following headings drawn frcxn media reportage of Hillsborough are, in the
        Federation's experience, matters which the Inquiry ought to consider in a
        wider context:

                        a)   Apportionment of accommodation
                        b)   All-ticket matches
                        c)   Perimeter fencing
                        d)   Alcohol
                        e)   First Aid-Arrangements
                        f)   Public address announcements
                        g)   Kick-off times

         4 a) Apportionment of Accommodation
                0

             There has been considerable comment about the proportion of space
             allocated at Hillsborough to the two teams and its contradiction
             with the relative size of their support.    Evidence was submitted
             which suggests that geographical location and traffic management had

%            greater significance in the decision making process than the
             relative demand for tickets.    It is the experience of Federation
             that too few clubs have a built-in flexibility to their segregation
             arrangements.   Whilst clubs can hardly be blamed for giving their
             better accommodation to their own supporters, there is no excuse for
             that   provided for visiting fans to be sub-standard         or   of
             unnegotiable size.   In a simple case of putting hone supporters at
             one end of the ground and away supporters at the other, it should
             not be too difficult for the "buffer zone" between the fans to be in
             a number of different locations dependent upon the size of the
             visiting custom.     At Hillsborough,    without affecting traffic
             management, a buffer zone within one side of the ground could have
             been used as the means of varying the ticket allocation in favour of
             the better supported club.

              It is also clear that at Hillsborough, once through any one of a
              number of turnstiles, fans had a choice of area within which they
              could stand.    Again, such problems are not uncommon.      Even at
              cash-admission games, when large crowds are expected this could
              easily be controlled, without expensive structural alterations, by
              coloured vouchers handed out at the turnstiles.   As part of safety
              inspections, a maximum capacity is determined for each segregated
              section of terracing.   This sets the number of vouchers available
              for that section and stewards at the access points would only admit
              spectators having the appropriately coloured voucher, issued in the
              correct proportions.    Such a system is not dissimilar to that
              operated within Wembley Stadium and could have been invaluable at
              Hillsborough, where the major problem was the distribution of the
              crowd within the Leppings Lane stand rather than too high a total
              capacity.
    N.F.F.S.C. Submission to Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry - Page 4


         4 b) All-Ticket Games

             The N.F.F.S.C. has long since formally registered its concern about
             the problems caused by granting access to non-ticket holders at all
             ticket games.    The financial penalty to the hone club of sticking
             rigidly to a policy of not selling tickets on the day of a game and
             frequent decisions by police to ask for fans to be admitted rather
             than wander around the environs of a ground have led to such
             confidence among fans that they will obtain access that they often
             travel regardless of ticket possession.      It also promotes bad
             behaviour in the sense that non-ticket holders causing a disturbance
             are more likely to be granted access by police than those who are
             peaceful.   Strict appliance of the rules, with football clubs being
             disciplined in same way for their transgressions, and police forces
             finding a solution less palatable to the ticketless fan, may in the
             short term cause problems outside grounds but we would submit that
             firm observance of a "No ticket, no admission" policy would quite
             quickly result in non-ticketholders not travelling.

%            Such a clampdown would of course be less effective if ticket touts
             continued to operate.   Irrespective of total ticket allocations for
             Hillsborough, there would undoubtedly have been fans of both sides
             who were unable to obtain tickets and neutral fans simply wishing to
             see the game who would have turned up expecting to be able to obtain
             a ticket from a tout.   We would strongly support legislation which
             made it an offence to sell a ticket for any event or performance at
             above its face value.   Only in this way will the problems caused by
             ticket touts effectively be controlled.

             We also believe that supporters' organisations could have a more
             positive role than at present in ensuring that tickets for all
             ticket games are allocated to those most deserving of them.     They
             are in a much better position than a football club to determine who
             are the regular cone hail, cone fine supporters and who are the
             supporters who ride on the bandwagon of success.     One affiliated
             club recently took large blocks of tickets throughout the season
             until the penultimate away game when the football club allocated it
             only six for a vital match.     Such an avaricious and insensitive
             attitude   causes   great antagonism    and   reduces   co-ordinated
             supervision over those travelling.

         4 c) Perimeter Fencing

              Over the years football clubs have employed a variety of methods to
              prevent encroachment upon the pitch. In the recent past, the
              principal aid has been metal perimeter fencing which has been widely
              introduced to prevent the pitch invasions which were becoming all
              too common and which, at such matches as Luton v. Millwall, had
              serious disorder consequences.   Supporters have never liked fences
              for at least three reasons:

                i) they obstruct, some of them quite significantly, a clear view
                of events on the pitch.    Because of this, spectators tend to
                crowd the rear section of an enclosure (to see over the top of
                the fence), thus reducing its effective capacity,

                ii) they create an atmosphere, alien to human beings,   of being
                caged up to prevent access to the prey,

                iii) in an emergency, they restrict significantly an easy means
                of escape onto the pitch.
N.F.F.S.C. Submission to Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry - Page 5


         The Federation has not, in the short term, opposed outright the
         introduction of fences.      It has appreciated the problem of the
         authorities wishing to maintain law and order and has reluctantly
         accepted that this was a preferred alternative to a complete ban on
         away supporters.    It has, however, been concerned at the style of
         some fences, at the inconsistency, between clubs, of the proportion
         of the ground fenced (e.g. whether seating areas were also included)
         and at the arrangements (e.g. number, width, staffing) for emergency
         access through them.      It is not aware of any instance where the
         safety inspection which preceded the decision about a type of fence,
         the section of perimeter to be fenced, or the stewarding and
         emergency escape arrangements has included a representative of the
         customers wh<D will have to stand or sit behind the obstruction.  It
         strongly believes that a supporters' club representative should in
         future be involved in all such discussions.    Even though executive
         power finally rests with the local authority which issues the safety
         certificate, participation of this nature could do a lot to convince
         fans that alternatives have been discussed and to explain the
         reasons why the chosen options were favoured.

         A further example of exclusion from consideration is the recent
         excursion to France to view the operation of the collapsible type of
         fence in use there.   Many organisations were represented, but they
         did not include the F.S.A. or N.F.F.S.C.

         Whilst the Hillsborough disaster underlines the safety problems both
         caused by,    and made more difficult to resolve by,          fences,
         Federation    reluctantly accepts that they cannot be        removed,
         universally, overnight. The Inquiry should note, however, that no
         fences exist at Arsenal or West Ham and that there have been few
         problems as a result.    There is clearly a cultural situation which
         provides a mental rather than physical protection against pitch
         invasion.   We believe that a phased withdrawal should be possible,
         slowly building up such a culture among fans elsewhere. They should
         be left in no doubt that they were on trust not to spoil the party
         for others and that fences would immediately berestored if they
         became necessary.    Sane football clubs have, in practice, achieved
         this by partial removal of fences in front of sections of the ground
         which were subject to their voluntary membership scheme.          This
         arrangement has effectively became self-policing as transgressors
         would immediately lose their membership and have to return to fenced
         areas of the ground.    Sadly, not all local authorities have had the
         courage to allow fence removal in such circumstances.     We believe
         the mood is right for such a change now.

         In giving evidence to the Popplewell Inquiry, we wholeheartedly
         supported the concept that,      except in an emergency or with
         permission, encroachment upon the field of play at any sporting
         event should became illegal and that remains our view.   It would be
         of significant assistance in aiding the total removal of fences,
         which remains our long term aim.     If some alternative is still
         considered necessary, then we would favour stewarded "moats".
    N.F.F.S.C. Submission to Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry - Page 6


         4 d) Alcohol

             The Federation does not seek to deny that sane supporters habitually
             arrive at a football ground having consumed unnecessarily large
             quantities of alcohol or that this has a subsequent detrimental
             effect on their behaviour.   The Inquiry will undoubtedly assess the
             extent to which this habit was a contributory factor to the disaster
             at Hillsborough. We do not in any way wish to condone irresponsible
             or irrational behaviour caused by drinking. Indeed, even before the
             Control of Alcohol (Sporting Events) Act, almost all clubs in
             Federation already operated a voluntary ban on alcohol on official
             coaches.   We do however wish to defend the current entitlement of
             those members we represent who consider a moderate drink to be a
             perfectly reasonable fringe activity to the main purpose of visiting
             a match.

             We believe it would, in any case, be impractical to ban completely
             alcohol consumption by those attending football matches.       Where

*            there's a will, there's a way!        One of the effects of the
             legislation banning the sale of alcohol within grounds has been to
             displace drinking to nearby hostelries; the relaxation of licensing
             hours will surely worsen further a situation in which large groups
             of people now arrive as closely as they can to kick-off time.   Even
             if they are quite responsibly behaved such a surge can alone be a
             problem. It has been suggested in some quarters that alcohol should
             therefore again be made available within grounds.   Federation would
             only support such a move if some realistic control was exercised on
             the amount available to any individual.   This might be possible by
             the sale of redeemable tokens at the turnstile.   It would not be in
             the interest of non-drinkers to buy tokens unnecessarily for
             "black-market" purposes.

         4 e) First-Aid Arrangements

             In general,    football supporters have immense regard for the
             facilities provided to football clubs by the voluntary efforts of
             the first-aid organisations.    Indeed, we are aware of instances in
             which supporters' clubs have funded improvements to the emergency
             medical facilities at football grounds. Such benevolence, however,
             itself identifies that there is an inadequacy of the provision made
             by the football club itself to handle even minor illnesses or
             accidents, let alone a tragedy of the scale of Hillsborough.      We
             believe that, as part of the safety certification and in proportion
             to the capacity of a ground, a nationally consistent minimum level
             of equipment and staffing should be specified and that arrangements
             should be detailed for independent monitoring that a club is
             carrying out these obligations.

              Human behaviour is difficult to control by legislation but it is
              often indirectly influenced by the general ambience of those
              involved and this is easier to control.        Federation is still
              awaiting the response to a complaint made by an affiliated club
              about an incident in which a visiting fan was told by a uniformed
              first-aider that treatment could not be offered because when
              resources were scarce, home fans had priority! Such an attitude is
              so unacceptable and so rare that it may have been meant in jest
              rather than be factual but it is reported to the Inquiry as evidence
              that a significant improvement in facilities is probably necessary,
              throughout the country.
N.F.F.S.C. Submission to Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry - Page 7


     4 f) Public Address Announcements

         There was clearly inadequate use of the public address system at
         Hillsborough as a means of disaster control and of           passing
         information to those not involved.     We realise that there is a
         balance to be drawn between preventing panic and assisting with the
         implementation of contingency plans.   Since there is evidence that
         events at Hillsborough have already prompted clubs to review those
         plans, we would simply urge the Inquiry to recommend that as much
         information to ground occupants as possible is given by prompt and
         frequent announcements.

         Such announcements are however of reduced value if the system itself
         is inadequate and the inaudibility of many installations          is
         frequently drawn to Federation's notice.    It is appreciated that
         system testing is difficult when a large and noisy crowd is not
         present but the fact is that in many grounds announcements - even
         the team changes for which most people are quiet - can scarcely be
         heard in sane areas.    It is therefore suggested that comprehensive
         audibility testing in all areas of a ground, including those under a
         stand and in toilets, in normal crowd conditions, should form part
         of the regular safety inspection.

     4 g) Kick-off Times

         The Inquiry will have considered the debate concerning whether the
         kick-off time at Hillsborough should have been delayed and whether
         the arrangements for taking such a decision and implementing it were
         adequate.   It is Federation's view that safety considerations must
         be paramount and that it should became a regulation that a referee
         may not signal the teams to take the pitch without first receiving
         the permission of the senior police officer on duty.

         The implications of such a policy bear closer examination, however,
         for a delay in the commencement of a match must not became so
         frequent that it becomes anticipated and results in large numbers of
         fans arriving deliberately late.   On the other hand, TV companies,
         who already have an increasing and unwelcome influence on fixture
         planning and scheduled kick-off times, must not be allowed to
         pressurise the referee to start a game promptly for the sake of
         their transmission arrangements.   Nor must the home club be allowed
         to use congestion outside the ground as a means of delaying kick-off
         and in doing so gaining an advantage of knowing the result of a
         rival club's game whilst their own is in progress.          The most
         independent arbiter in these circumstances, who can compare the
         congestion from one week to the next, is the senior police officer,
         who will also be in the privileged position of knowing about
         motorway or other traffic delays.   For example, at the Barnsley v.
         Stoke midweek evening F.A. Cup Replay this year 20 or so coaches
         were delayed en route with the result that, 15 minutes after
         kick-off, congestion outside the visitors turnstiles caused the
         police to open the exit gates and admit without payment those
         waiting.   This produced a surge to the terraces which in this case,
         fortunately, caused little problem. Surely a case for deferring the
         kick-off? But did the referee know? Similar complaints about large
         numbers of fans missing up to 30 mins. play were drawn to our
         attention by Blackburn Rovers in relation to their visits to Leeds
         on Boxing Day and to Crystal Palace for the play-offs game.
N.F.F.S.C. Submission to Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry - Page 8


          On the wider issue of scheduled starts, there has been an increasing
          tendency for these to be changed to suit local policing deployment
          but without due consideration of the problem changed times will
          cause to regular followers. The Federation believes those reviewing
          a particular game for the purpose of considering a change in start
          time should include a supporters' representative and should seek in
          advance the views of the official supporters' club of the visiting
          team.   There is nothing confidential in the arguments and, whilst
          the outcome may not change, it is likely to be much more palatable
          and better conveyed to those most affected.

 5.   POLICING

      Whilst this subject might initially be considered to be outside the remit of
      the Inquiry, it is our view that if it is relevant to the mood of a crowd then
      it is also relevant to that crowd's safety.         One of the most common
      frustrations of supporters drawn to our attention over a significant period
      has been the inconsistency of policing "tactics" between one ground and
      another, between one ground one season and the same ground the next, and
      between hone fans and away fans. We recognise that within any framework which
      might exist, whether it be the law of the land, sane code of practice or
      merely a local arrangement between police and football club, there must be
      some discretion allowed to the senior police officer in charge to deal with
      individual circumstances on the day in question.    But we also believe that
      fans are entitled to know with sane certainty how they are likely to be
      treated and for this to be reasonably consistent throughout the country, what
      are their minimum legal rights and how they can resolve at the time, rather
      than in protracted post hoc correspondence, problems which arise.

      Properly organised supporters' clubs are in an ideal situation to assist the
      police in their work and will accept and help to steward guidelines which may
      be provided. The Federation has an "Official Coach" windscreen sticker system
      intended    to  identify the vehicle's contents as       responsibly   behaved
      individuals.   Not all police forces have accepted this as an aid to their
      arrangements and those which have welcomed it have clearly failed to
      communicate its existence to their operational staff.    Surely it cannot be
      right for a coachful of supporters, having made previous arrangements with a
      motorway service station to step for a meal, to be instructed by police to
      leave unfinished food on the table and depart immediately?   Surely it cannot
      be right on a rainy day for home fans to be allowed to take umbrellas into the
      ground but for away fans to be refused this facility because they could be
      used as offensive weapons?   Surely, it cannot be right for police officers to
      inform fans that they will not be allowed to sing their entirely inoffensive
      club song on the terraces because this could be deemed provocative?       Such
      annoyances undoubtedly influence the mood of supporters when they arrive at a
      ground and subsequently within it. They could be ameliorated, if not removed,
      if there were in existence some national guideline agreed between the police
      and supporters' organisations setting out the minimum entitlements and
      obligations of travelling fans.    To their credit, some police forces issue
      useful notes in advance to visiting supporters but these tend to be restricted
      to travel and parking arrangements and details of the space allocated within
      the ground.    A much broader based guideline, developed jointly and monitored
      by some form of continuing co-operative review mechanism, might hopefully lead
      to   a more helpful,     sure and harmonious relationship rather than        a
      confrontational us-and-them one.
N.F.F.S.C. Submission to Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry - Page 9


 6.   MEMBERSHIP CARDS

      The Federation has been heavily involved in petitioning and encouraging other
      forms of opposition to the Government's Football Spectators Bill.       It is
      therefore important that the Inquiry understands the background to that
      opposition.

      It would be invidious of the Federation to declare opposition to membership
      schemes per se. Many supporters' clubs already have their own membership card
      in the form of a photograph-bearing identity card, which        conveys such
      entitlements as travel facilities, ability to purchase match tickets, access
      to a social club etc.   In general, supporters also have co-operated with the
      introduction by football clubs of a voluntary membership scheme in line with
      the joint Football League/F.A. undertaking to the Government. Such schemes
      have, however, two crucial features - they are voluntary and they are largely
      self-policing.   They exist and can be utilised where prudent. At other times
      they can be ignored without losing their credibility.

      It is also important to emphasise that Federation abhors violent incidents or
      any form of unruly behaviour whether or not they are associated with football
      matches and will give its support to any practical measures which are not too
      restrictive of personal freedom but which may reduce further those incidents
      which besmirch the game's reputation.    Whilst against its long-term aim, it
      has not opposed segregation or selective bans on travelling fans (but not the
      Luton scheme which prevents well-behaved fans from supporting the visiting
      team), it has fully supported the use of CCTV in and around grounds and it has
      co-operated in the provision of stewarding as a means of group control. There
      is ample evidence that these steps have produced significant improvements. It
      remains entirely unconvinced, however, that the Government proposals will
      prevent   the proportionately few problems which remain, most of which now
      occur outside grounds. Instead, it could cause a whole new range of problems.
      Most importantly, a Football Spectators Act, as currently drafted, would not
      have prevented the Hillsborough disaster and we invite the Inquiry to confirm
      this. Those steps whichmight have done so do not at present form part of the
      legislation and it is       not clear how they can be incorporated with full
      Parliamentary debate.    Whilst not accepting a comprehensive alternative is
      necessary, our favoured option would be an away fans scheme.

 7.   ALL-SEATER STADIA

      It is difficult to oppose all-seater stadia on arguments concerned with
      safety.   The reduction in capacity and the designated space per spectator can
      only reduce the chances of pushing and crushing.    At the same time, it must be
      recognised that a significant proportion of supporters prefer to stand or
      cannot afford the extra cost of a seat.      There is evidence that some fans,
      when provided with seats, will stand anyway, to the annoyance of many around
      them.

      Federation accepts that the long-term aim,in line with           the   general
      improvement to facilities within grounds which is essential, must be the
      provision of many more seats than at present.    It does not accept, however,
      that standing enclosures need be unsafe and, for as long as they are required
      by a reasonable number of customers, believes that          the fan whoprefers     to
      stand should be accommodated. A cultural change to the manner in which people
      expect to watch football must take place before all-seater stadia will be
      popular and such changes do not happen quickly. We do not support a rigid and
      progressive expansion of seated areas by a pre-defined deadline.      We will
      accept a gradual expansion but believe the pace should be in accordance with
      local demand so that the opportunity for attendance at a football match
      remains within the scope of all social strata.
N.F.F.S.C. Submission to Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry - Page 10


 8.   FUTURE ROLE OF SUPPORTERS' ORGANISATIONS

      One benefit of the proposed legislation on membership and of the Hillsborough
      tragedy has been the willingness, in some cases for the first time, for the
      views of supporters to be heard, both at local and national level.    We trust
      that the Inquiry will acknowledge the vast quantity of constructive comment
      and practical experience available at this level and the fact that much of it
      has previously been ignored.

      It therefore becomes essential that we do not return to an attitude of either
      arrogance or complacency to the views of the game's customers.         Despite
      comment in both Houses of Parliament that there would be distinct benefit in
      supporters' being represented on the proposed Football Membership Authority,
      there has been no indication that this would be welcomed by either the
      Football League or F.A.    Had there been so, the supporters' organisations
      would surely have been involved in development of the proposal which will be
      submitted to the Secretary of State. Since Hillsborough, football clubs have
      been willing to discuss safety measures with their supporters.   But will such
      convocation be repeated and on whose initiative?     Safety is to a degree a
      spin-off of the general demeanour of spectators, which is itself a function of
      the conditions in which they are accommodated.     These, without themselves
      being inherently unsafe, are often deplorable.

      In the light of these comments, we invite the Inquiry to recommend the formal
      inclusion of customer representatives on all planning, review, monitoring and
      administrative bodies or committees which it may recommend, together with the
      establishment, where an independent supporters' club does not exist, of some
      form of consultative forum with each club's fans.

 9.   SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

      i)     reference to the York City v. Sunderland F.A. Disciplinary Inquiry,

      ii)    apportion accommodation according to support,

      iii)   control access to terracing sections,

      iv)    ensure all-ticket games are without exception all-ticket,

      v)     make encroachment on field of play illegal,

      vi)    agreed minimal standards for first-aid equipment,

      vii)   realistic audibility testing of public address equipment,

      viii) police to authorise match commencement,

      ix)    national guideline on football match policing,

      x)     involvement of supporters' representatives on safety inspections,        and
             all other review bodies, monitoring mechanisms etc.




                                                                  [eflW
                                                               (I.D. Todd)
 4th July 1989                                       Travel & Crowd Control Officer
                                                               N.F.F.S.C.
                                                                                      APPENDIX A
                        NATIONAL FEDERATION OF FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS* CLUBS

                                        Awav Travel Survey


Name of Reporting Club                                  Report completed by

Name of Club Visited                                                 Date

TICKET ARRANGEMENTS

 1. Was advance ticket purchase compulsory?

 2. Were tickets restricted to those enrolled in club membership scheme?

 3.   Were sufficient tickets available?        Seats                Standing


TRAVEL ARRANGEMENTS

 4. How did you travel? (i.e. Train/Coach/Minibus) .......................

      Did you receive advance advice of destination police requirements? ...........

 6. Were destination police aware of travel arrangements? .................

 7. Were advance arrangements made with management of refreshment stops? ........

 8. Did police meet coaches at outskirts of town and escort to ground? ...........

 9. Were coach parking arrangements (a) under police supervision throughout match?

                         (b) large enough?                      (c) close enough?

10. If travelling by raiI     ,  were you met by police at destination station and escorted to

      and from ground? ..................................

11. Did police prevent access to any area/s near ground (e.g. players' entrance/souvenir

      shop)?

      Were your members able to use home team supporters’ club premises?              ...............

      If yesf were advance arrangements made? ...............

13. Did        police   escort    coaches    away   from   ground?   If   so,   for    what   distance?




TERRACE ACCOMMODATION FOR VISITING FANS

14. Were enough turnstiles open? .....................

15. Was a sufficiently large section of ground made a v a i l a b l e ?         .

16. Was the view of the pitch acceptable? .....................

      Was the terracing covered? ..........................

17. Were prices the same as for home fans? .................

18. Were reduced prices available for Juniors and/or Senior Citizens?

                                                                                              (P.T.O.)
TERRACE ACCOMMODATION FOR VISITING FANS (Cont.)

19. Was terrace area separated from pitch by fence? ...........

       If yes, were emergency exits onto pitch properly stewarded? ............

20. Was terrace area stewarded as well as policed?                      .........

21. Were the stewards:         Efficient? .........          Friendly? .............

22. Were the police:           Efficient? .........          Friendly? .............

23.    Was the toilet accommodation: Large           Enough (Male)? ......

                                            Large    Enough (Female)?       .........

      Of adequate standard (Male)? .........            Of adequate standard (Female)?

24. Were refreshments avaiIa b Ie?                    ....

25. If available, give prices of: T e a .........              C o f f e e ........   O x o ......

                                            Pie/Pasty .......                                        #
SEATING ACCOMMODATION FOR VISITING FANS

26. Were seats segregated from home fans section?                 ...........

       Were sufficent available? .............

27. Was the view of the pitch acceptable?                    ........

28. Was any part of seating obscured from pitch by fencing? ..............

       If yes, were emergency exits onto pitch properly stewarded?                    ...........

29. Were prices the same as for home fans? ....... .....

30. Were reduced prices available for Juniors and/or Senior Citizens? .....

31.    Was the toilet accommodation: Large           Enough (Male)? ......

                                            Large    Enough (Female)?       .........

      Of adequate standard (Male)? .........            Of adequate standard (Female)?

32. Were refreshments a v a i l a b l e ?           ......

33. If available, give prices of:           Tea .......        Coffee ........ Oxo ......

                                            Pie/Pasty .......

34. Please add any other comments you feel would be helpful




      ON COMPLETION PLEASE SEND TO NATIONAL          FEDERATION TRAVEL & CROWD CONTROL OFFICER:

                      Ian Todd, 8 Wyke Close, Isleworth, Middlesex TW7 5PE
