                                               cc:   Ms Snow
                                                     Mrs Chapman
                                                     Mr Yates
                    2 OCT ?3<                        Mr Hammond
                                                     Mr Burns
                                                     JiMete   CS<T
                                                     Mr Angel
                                                     Mr Boys Smith
                                                     Mr Clayton
                                                     Mr Cogbill
                                                     Miss A Edwards
                                                     Mr Fulton
                                                     Mr Goddard
                                                     Miss Goose
                                                     Mr Grant
                                                     Mr Nagler
                                                     Mr Sandiford
                                                     Mr Mborey
                                                     Mr Simmonds



 MR STORR

 H COMMITTEE             OFFENCES■

 I have seen a copy of Mr Goddard's submission to you of
 II October with a draft paper for circulation to H Committee
 on the Taylor offences.

 2*    T°      intents and purposes the door is firmly closed on
 any new Bills finding a place in the legislative pr o g r a m m e f o r
^1-990/91 . Thi?_ need ndt, .however, deter us from seeking to
 have legislative proposals •ijn. a state, of readiness.in case a
 suitabl%^fegxslative slot should arise;during, 1990/91 . I
 think we Would advance our case if we highlighted more the
         rei‘
        the situation early d                                 le Bill
might be introduced                                                     we
might' secure

suggest paragraph 6 of the draft H paper is reworked to read
along the following lines:

      "In the absence of an earlier opportunity, my wish is to
      secure a firm place in the programme for legislation for
      all four offences in 1991/92.  As I made clear in my
      letter of 20 August I think it would be difficult to
      leave legislation longer than that; even on that
      timescale the Government could well be criticised for
      moving too slowly on these issues.  Bringing the offences
      onto the Statute Book as soon as possible would enable
      the Government to continue to take credit for acting
      firmly against the unacceptable behaviour of football
      hooligans and in particular for responding positively to


                                                      /the Taylor
     the Taylor report.  We must also bear in mind the
     possibility of a serious incident or disorder taking
     place which would undoubtedly heighten calls for early
     Government action.  For these reasons I seek policy
     approval and authority to use Parliamentary Counsel now
     in order that we could be ready, if an opportunity arose
     during the 1990/91 session, to introduce a small Bill at
     short notice rather than wait until 1991/92.  We could
     review the situation early in 1991 to see whether such an
     opportunity is likely to arise.  If we decide either not
     to legislate or to delay action beyond the 1991/92
     session we will be vulnerable to the criticism which we
     can expect from our own supporters, the Opposition
     parties and the football authorities".




                                          B E KINNEY
                                          Parliamentary Clerk




Private Office
12 October 1990
