                                 Charles Clarke MP

                                                                       H ome O ffice
                                                                      QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                                      LONDON SW1H 9AT

MINISTER OF STATE

 Clarence Swindell                              /
 Chairman
 South Yorkshire Police Authority
 PO Box 37, Regent Street         //a^ '
 BARNSLEY                        / ~     /
 South Yorkshire                      ^                      s       \ .
 S 70 2PQ                                  */            ~


Dc*<d firin g                              ^                     ■

                                                                     J?    J ^            rs


  I am writing to follow up my recent meeting with you, the Chief Constable,
  and others to discuss Hillsborough costs. I found the meeting very useful. It
  gave me a clear insight into the continuing implications of the tragic
  Hillsborough disaster for the force and the authority.

  I have had some Q u ic k enquiries made on the question of expediting any
  appeal on the taxation issue. 1 understand from the Inland Revenue that
  there is no right of appeal to the Tax Commissioners against the
  "pre-transaction" ruling which has been made in this case. An appeal can
  only be made after the defence costs are made to the officers and the
  payments are assessed for tax. Once that stage were reached I would be
  happy to try again to expedite any appeals process, without any guarantee
  of success, of course.

   On the specific issue of the Home Office providing financial assistance to the
   Authority in support of the tw o former officers' defence costs, I have
   carefully considered all the points you made. In this case the Authority has
   taken a decision to meet the officers' legal costs to date. I fully understand
   your reasons for reaching such a decision. Having done so, my view is that
   it should be for the Authority to find the money. I do not believe that it is
   reasonable for the Authority on the one hand to agree to continue to pay the
   defence costs and then to look to the Home Office to contribute some
   funding. You may want to consider whether the Police Superintendents'
   Association could contribute.

   I have looked separately at your request for support in respect of the
   personal injury claims from victims. Given the circumstances I would be


   8S40CC
prepared to consider further whether we may be able to offer some limited
form of financial assistance. I have asked my officials to obtain further
information from the Authority's Treasurer on the breakdown of these costs
to enable me to reach a decision.

I am sending a copy of this letter to the Chief Constable.




 8S40CC
