From:         R J Clifford
              ABCU
              Room 970 QAG
              273 3560
                                                                    fV
              24 November 1997




RETENTION OF INQUEST DOCUMENTS AND EXHIBITS

We spoke about law and practice in the context of the Hillsborough enquiry.

2.      Under the Coroners Rules 1984, a distinction is made between documents and
exhibits. Documents (other than exhibits), whether or not submitted at the inquest, must
be retained for at least 15 years, unless the coroner decides that they may be delivered
to a person the coroner believes to be the proper person to have possession. (Copies of
documents put in evidence may be made available to interested persons for a fee, or
may be inspected.) Exhibits have to be retained until they are no longer needed for any
other legal proceedings, and may then be delivered to persons who appear entitled to
possession, destroyed, or otherwise disposed of.

3.      Under the Public Records Act 1958, all coroners’ records must be retained for 15
years and then destroyed, unless the coroner decides they should be kept for permanent
preservation because of their special interest or on a random basis. The procedures
envisage that records to be preserved are to be delivered to the relevant local authority
for deposit in the local record repositories designated for the purpose. If a coroner
wishes to dispose of them in some other way, the approval of the Lord Chancellor is
required.

4.      A copy of the relevant Rules is attached, together with an extract from Jervis
setting out the general position, and copies of HO Circulars 250/1967 and 62/1971
(which slightly modifies the former). The time limit for the inspection of the records
seems to have been varied since the HO circulars and now stands at 75 years in cases of
reported deaths, unless the coroner determines otherwise in any particular case.




                                                 R J CLIFF
                                    T he C o r o n er s R ules        1984                     A2-64

        entitled, if he so wishes, to be excused from jury service if he is among the persons
        for the time being listed in Part III of Schedule 1 to the Juries Act 1974 but, except as
        provided by that P art o f that Schedule in the case o f members o f the forces, a
        person shall not by this Rule be exempt from his obligation to attend if summoned
        unless he is excused from attending under paragraph (2).
            (2) If any person so summoned shows to the satisfaction o f the appropriate
        officer or o f the coroner that there is good reason why he should be excused from
         attending in pursuance o f the summons, the appropriate officer o r the coroner may
         excuse him from so attending and shall do so if the reason shown is that the person
         is entitled under paragraph (1) to excusal.

        Discharge o f sum m ons in case o f doubt as to capacity to act
        effectively as a juror
            52. Where it appears to the appropriate officer, in the case o f a person attending
                                                                                                       A2-60
         in pursuance o f a summons under section 3 o f the Act of1887, that on account of
         physical disability or insufficient understanding o f English there is doubt as to his
         capacity to act effectively as a juror, the person may be brought before thecoroner^
         who shall determine whether or not he should act as a juror and, if not, sha
          discharge the summons.

          Saving for inquests held by the coroner o f the Q ueen’s household
            53. N othing in this Part o f these Rules shall have effect in relation to any inquest     A2-61
tie
          held by the coroner o f the Queen’s household.
sts
of                                                  P art   VIII

the                        R e c o r d s , D o c u m e n t s , E x h ib it s a n d F o r m s
wo
          Register o f deaths
)r a                                                                                                   A2-62
             54. A coroner shall keep an indexed register o f all deaths reported to him or to
           his deputy or assistant deputy, which shall contain the particulars specified in
[her
           Schedule 3.
1be
           Retention and delivery or disposal o f exhibits
              55. Every exhibit at an inquest shall, unless a court otherwise directs, be retained      A2-63
           by the coroner until he is satisfied that the exhibit is not likely to be o r j l l n o
           longer be required for the purposes o f any other legal proceedings, n                  *
ions
           if a request for its delivery has been made by a person appearing to the coroner to be
  the
           entitled to the possession thereof, be delivered to that person, or, if no such request
           has been made, be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the coroner thinks fit.

            Retention and delivery o f docum ents
11 be                                                                                                   A2-64
              56. Any document (other than an exhibit at an inquest) in the possession o f a
            coroner in connection with an inquest or post-m ortem examination shall, unless a
            court otherwise directs, be retained by the coroner for at least 15 years.



             26 Ibid.

                                                            485
          A2-64                        A p p e n d ix   2: S   t a t u t o r y In s tru m e n ts

             P ro v id ed th a t th e co ro n er m ay d eliv er any su ch d o c u m e n t to any p e rso n w h o in
          th e o p in io n o f th e co ro n er is'a p ro p e r p erso n to h av e p ossession o f it.


              Inspection o f, or supply o f copies o f, docum ents etc.
A               57 — (11 A co ro n er shall, o n ap p licatio n an d o n p a y m e n t o f th e p rescrib ed fee (if
              anyl s»pply?o “ y                         who, in A c opinion o f .he c o . o n e , » a p.opjriy
              in terested p erso n a cop y o f any re p o rt o f a p o s t-m o rte m e x a m in atio n (including
              o ne m ade u n d e r section 21 o f th e A ct o f 192627) o r special e x am in atio n , o r o f any
              n o tes o f evidence, o r o f an y d o c u m e n t p u t in ev idence at an in q u est.
                   2? A co ro n e r m ay , o n ap plicatio n an d w ith o u t charge, p e rm it an y p erso n w ho
              in th e o p in io n ^ f ^ e c o r o n e r , is a p ro p e rly in tereste d p erso n to in sp ect such report,
              n o tes o f ev iden ce, o r d o cu m e n t.


              D eputy or assistant deputy to sign docum ents in ow n nam e
      «           58 w h e re a d e p u ty o r assistan t d e p u ty co ro n er actin g fo r, o r as, th e coron a:
               sig« a T ^ y . h . 1 1 sign it in h i own nan* * deputy o , asastant ip u *
               co ro n er, as th e case m ay be.

               Transfer o f docum ents etc. to next-appointed coroner
                   59 W here a co ro n er vacates h is office b y d ea th o r o th e rw ise, all d o c u m e n ts
A2-67
                ex h ib its reg isters an d o th e r th in g s in th e c u sto d y o f th e co ro n e r in co n n ectio n w ith
                in q u e sts o r p o st-m o rte m ex am in atio n s shall b e tran sferre d to th e co ro n er next
                ap p o in ted to th a t office.


                Forms
    » 0 ,C>         60 T he fo rm s set o u t in Schedule 4, w ith such m o d ificatio n s as circum stances


                 applicable.



                                                                  Sch ed u le 1

                                                               R E V O C A T IO N S


    A2-69                                                                                              References
                                         Rules revoked
                                                                                                    5.1. 1953/205
                  The Coroners Rules 1953                                                           5.1. 1956/1691
                  The Coroners Rules 1956
                                                                                                    5.1. 1974/2128
                  The Coroners (Amendment) Rules 1974
                                                                                                    5.1. 1977/1881
                  The Coroners (Amendment) Rules 1977
                  The Coroners (Amendment) Rules 1980                                               5.1. 1980/557
                                                                                                    5.1. 1980/668
                  The Coroners (Amendment) (Savings) Rules 1980
                                                                                                    5.1. 1983/1539
                  The Coroners (Amendment) Rules 1983
                     G e n e r a l A d m in is t r a t iv e M a t t e r s          18-43

examination m ust be retained by the coroner for at least 15 years.27 This
will include notes o f evidence taken by the coroner, post-m ortem
examination or special examination reports, all documents put in evidence
at an inquest, and reports o f preliminary enquiries which have led to an
inquest or to a post-m ortem examination. It will not include any
documents on any death reported to the coroner which is dealt with by the
“Pink Form A” procedure. However, the coroner may, instead o f keeping
a document for the prescribed period, deliver it to a person who seems to
him to be a proper person to have possession o f it.28If he does not exercise
this power, then except in special circumstances he should supply copies o f
the document to its owner or other person kept out o f possession on
request.29 This is particularly im portant in the case o f documents in
evidence at the inquest which belong to persons not otherwise connected
 with the deceased or which otherwise have a need for the return o f their
 document.
Other items
Further, it may be said that in general the coroner should return all                          18-42
personal possessions belonging to deceased persons, subject only to
special considerations arising out o f suicide cases. It should be noted that in
the case o f exhibits the coroner should only hand the exhibit to the person
who appears to him entitled to its possession, while in the case o f other
documents he has a wider discretion and may hand the document to any
person who seems a proper person to have possession o f it. As with
exhibits, if any question arises as to the ownership o f any article, that must
be decided in proceedings elsewhere, and is not affected by the decision o f
the coroner to hand the article back to any particular person. Where the
 coroner hands over documents, in certain cases he may think it desirable to
 retain a copy.
 Coroners’ records
 The records o f coroners’ courts (including photographs and tape                              18-43
 recordings) are public records for the purposes o f the Public Records Act
 1958, and are in the custody o f coroners until removed to a place of
 permanent deposit.30It was agreed in 1967 that all records later in date than
 1875 should be destroyed after 15 years, except for the indexed registers of
 deaths and papers relating to treasure trove or matters o f special historical
 interest, which (along with records from earlier than 1875) should be
 permanently preserved.31 It is for coroners themselves to decide which


 27 Coroners Rules 1984, r. 56.
 28 Ibid.
 29Arias v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner (1984) 128 S.J. 784; The Times, August 1, 1984,
    C.A. (documents lawfully seized by police under search warrant).
 30Home Office Circular N o. 250 o f 1967, A pp., paras. 1-2.
 31 Ibid., para. 3.
        18-43                      M a t t e r s a f t e r t h e I n q u ir y

        records post-1875 are o f such interest to justify preservation, though in
        cases o f doubt the advice o f the Keeper o f Public Records should be
        sought.32
18-44     Where a coroner has insufficient accommodation for storing documents
        which must be retained in pursuance o f the Coroners Rules, the older
        documents should be handed over to the county archives, although the
        coroner will still be responsible for deciding whether they should be
        destroyed after 15 years, or preserved.33 Documents which appear to
        require preservation should be separated, and may be handed over direct
        to the local record repository for coroners’ records appointed by the Lord
        Chancellor under the 1958 Act. Those coroners’ records o f a later date than
        1874 and not o f historical or other special interest should be destroyed after
        15 years, unless the coroner wishes to dispose of them in some other way,
        when application should be made to the Keeper o f Public Records.34
18-45     Documents to be preserved should be transferred to the appointed
        repository as soon as possible after the expiry o f the 15-year retainer period
        (assuming that they have not already been deposited there through lack of
        storage space) and in any event before they are 30 years old, unless the
        approval of the Lord Chancellor (through the Keeper o f Public Records) is
        obtained for longer retention.35O f course, such records may be borrowed
        back if required by the coroner.36 Access to coroners’ records deposited
        under the Public Records Act 1958 will not be given to the public until 75
         years have elapsed (in the case o f records relating to reported deaths) or 30
         years (in the case o f other records), unless the coroner o f the court from
         which the records came gives special permission in writing for such
         access.37
           Where a coroner vacates his office, by death or otherwise, all
         documents, exhibits, registers and other things in the custody of the
         coroner in connection with inquests or post-m ortem examinations must
         be transferred to the coroner next appointed to that office.38
        Reimbursement o f fees and expenses

18-46   Every coroner must, within four months after paying or making any fees,
        allowances or disbursements in accordance with the Coroners Act 1988,
        cause a full and true account o f all fees, allowances or disbursements so
        paid or made by him under that Act to be laid before the relevant council.*


        32 Ibid., The Keeper’s address is The Public Record Office, Chancery Lane, London WC2.
        33 Ibid., para. 4.
        34 Ibid., para. 5.
        35 Ibid., para. 6.
        36 Ibid., para. 8.
        37 Ibid., para. 9, as substituted by Home Office Circular N o. 62 o f 1971 and amended by Lord
           Chancellor’s O rder No. 68 (April 16, 1984).
        38 Coroners Rules 1984, r. 59.
        39 Coroners Act 1988, s.27(l).
    i$X&4                                        HOME OFFI CE
                                    Romney House, Marsham Street, L o n d o n S.W .i
                                          Telephone: 01-799 3488, ext.
                                                    Telex: 24986
Our reference:
Your reference:


                                                                     12 March 1971




         Dear Sir

         HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 62/1971
         PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958

         Please refer to the Home Office Circular No 25 0/19 67 of 21 December 1967 about
         the preservation of coroners' records.

         I am now writing to tell you that, under the terms of an Order recently made
         by the Lord Chancellor, coroners' records relating to reported deaths vill no
         longer be available for inspection 30 years after completion but vill be
         closed to the public for 100 years, subject to suitable access at the discretion
         of the person having custody of them. Accordingly, I vould be grateful if you
         would amend the memorandum ozx the custody of coroners' records vhich was sent
         with Home Office Circular No 250 /19 67 so as to replace paragraph 9 with the
         following -

          "9*     Subject to suitable access at the discretion of the person having custody
                  of them, coroners' records relating to reported deaths are not available
                  for public inspection until they have been in existence for 100 years.
                  Access to other records held by coroners (eg relating to inquests on
                  treasure trove) is governed by the general provision that public records
                  shall normally be made available for inspection when 30 years old. If a
                  coroner considers that special arrangements should be made in respect of
                  any of his records, he should, after consultation with the Home Office,
                  request the Keeper of the Public Records to seek the Lord Chancellor's
                  approval. A coroner may also give special written authority to any
                  person to inspect the records of his court at any time*"

                                                                      Yours faithfully

                                                                            .f t -40 dot




          The Coroner


          CRN/67 80/3/2
                                                             H O ME O F F I C E
                                                            Whitehall, L o n d o n S.W .i
                                                        Telegrams: Monebis London S.W .I
                                                        Telephone: wm tehall 8100, ext. 153
Please address any reply to
THE UNDER SECRETARY
OF STATE
and
w w quote:
    tpnjte*
Your reference:
                                                                          21st December 1967




                       Sir,
                                        Hone Office Circular No. 250/1967
                                             Public Records Act 1958

                            I am directed "by the Secretary of State to refer to the Lord
                       Chancellor's Office letter of 3rd April 1959 to local authorities,
                       a copy of which was sent to you with Home Office Circular
                       No. 57/1959, about the provisions of the Public Records Act 1958•
                       You were then informed that further guidance would be issued about
                       the records of coroners' courts which should be preserved under
                       the Aot.
 ■vj?’
                             The provisions of the Act in no way affect Rules 36 to 41,
                       relating to records, documents and exhibits, of the Coroners
                       Rules 1953 and the guidance about those rules in paragraphs 19
                       and 22 of the Home Office consolidated circular No. 60/1955
                       continues to apply* In the case of exhibits which have neither
                       been returned to the person appearing to be entitled to the possession
                       thereof nor destroyed, and in the case of documents other than
                       exhibits when the period of 15 years prescribed by Rule 38 of the
                       Coroners Rules has elapsed, the provisions of the Act now apply.
                       The effect of these provisions is set out in the appendix to this
                        circular which supersedes paragraphs 20 and 21 of the Home Office
                       Circular No. 66/1955*
                                                    I am, Sir
                                                        Your obedient Servant,




                         The Coroner
                                   Coroners Records


       Paragraphs in substitution for paragraphs 20 and 21 of Home Office
  Circular No. 68/1955 and to follow paragraph 22 of that circular.

  1.   The records of Coroners' Courts are declared by the Public Records Act, 1958
  to be public records for the purpose of the Act, which provides for the disposal
  of records which have been passed out of current use. The definition of "public
  records" covers not only written records but also records conveying information
  by any other means whatsoever, thus including such forms of record as photographs,
  microfilms and tape-recordings.

  2.   By a determination of the Lord Chancellor under the Act, Coroners have
  custody of the records of their Courts, unless and until these have been trans­
  ferred to a place of permanent deposit. Coroners are responsible for the
  selection of records which ought to be permanently preserved and for arrangements
  for their safe-keeping until they are transferred to a place of permanent deposit.

 3.   The Act requires that the duty of arranging for the selection of public
 records which are to be preserved, and for their safe-keeping,        be performed
 under the guidance of the Keeper of Public Records. It has beenagreed with
 him - and after obtaining the opinion of the Committee on Legal Records, appointed

•by the Lord Chancellor in 1963 under the chairmanship of Lord Denning (Cmnd.3 0 84 )
 .that Coroners' records should be preserved or destroyed as follows:-

            (i)   Coroners' indexed registers of the deaths      y i o o u   vo
                  reported to them                               permanently
           (ii)   Papers relating to treasure trove or           preserve
                  matters of speeial historical interest,       .permanently
                  and all papers earlier in date than
                  1875

          (iii)   Other papers                                   destroy after
                                                                 15 years.

  It will be for individual Coroners to decide which of their papers not earlier
  in date than 1875 should be kept permanently. Examples of those which would be
  worth preserving are - any relating to prominent figures in which the historian
  or biographer may be interested; any which present some unusual featuresj any
  having some intrinsic scientific interest; any illustrating in a significant way
  contemporary Coroners' practice; any in cases involving death from a novel hazard,
v/hich may illustrate changes in social life or industrial development. A random
  sample of other papers, not so selected, should also be periodically extracted
  for permanent preservation. In case of doubt the advice of the Keeper of Public
  Records, Public Record Office, Chancery Lane, London, W.C.2., should be sougit.

 k.   Where a Coroner has insufficient accommodation for storing documents
 (whether exhibits which have neither been returned to the person entitled to the
 possession thereof nor destroyed, or any other document or record which must in
 pursuance of Rule 38 of the Coroners' Rules be retained for a period of 15 years),
 he should hand them over to the Clerk of the Peace of the County or the Town Clerk
 of the Borcugh. The Coroner will still retain the primary responsibility for
 deciding which of his records so handed over ought to be preserved permanently
 and whioh can eventually be destroyed. It will be for the receiving authority
 to put these decisions into effect in due course. Records which have already,
 at the time of such transfer, been designated for permanent retention, should be
 kept separate from the others; and they may, if the Coroner so desires, be
 transmitted direct to the local record repository designated as the place of
 deposit for Coroners' records of the area in question (see paragraph 7 below).

 n.   All documents, records etc., which Coroners do not consider to be of
 permanent publio interest should be disposed of punctually on the expixy of the
 fifteen year period prescribed by the Rules. Normally, they will be destroyed;
if a Coroner wishes to dispose of them in some other way, the Lord Chancellor'.3
approval is required and application should be made to the Keeper of Public
Records. Papers sent away for destruction should be marked as "confidential
waste".

6.   Becords selected far permanent preservation should be transferred to the
place appointed to receive them as soon as possible after the expiry of the
period of fifteen years for which they must be retained by the Coroner or by an
authority acting on his behalf, and in any case before the end of the total
period of thirty years permitted by the Public Records Act for their retention
in the department or office of Origin. If a Coroner considers that he needs to
retain documents in his custody for longer than thirty years, he should apply,
through the Keeper of Public Records, for the approval of the Lord Chancellor
for this course.

7.   The Act envisages that Coroners* records irill be deposited for preservation
in a place appointed by the Lord Chanoellor (and not in the Public Record Office),
and that this will normally be within the administrative county or county borough
covering the area where the coroner has jurisdiction. The Lord Chancellor has
already designated a number of local record repositories as the places of deposit
of Coroners' records in specific areas. Coroners with records selected for
preservation and available for transfer, should, if aware that their Court is
within one of these areas, request the officer in charge of the appointed
repository to receive them. Otherwise they should notify the Keeper of Public
Records and ask for information as to the appropriate place, or if necessary
ask for the Lord Chancellor's instructions.

8.   Coroners' records preserved in a place of deposit appointed by the Lord
Chancellor may be borrowed back when required.

9.   General access to Coroners' records by the public is at present governed
by the provision that public records shall normally be made available for
inspection when fifty years old, but as from 1st January 1968 (when recent
legislation amending the relevant section comes into force) they are to be
available when thirty years old. If a ooroner considers that special arrangements
should be made in respect of any of his records, he should, after consultation
with the Home Office, request the Keeper of the Public Records to seek the
Lord Chancellor's approval. A Coroner may also give special written authority
to any person to inspect the records of his Court at any time.
