           TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

Introduction

1.   In the review of the technical aspects of safety, the
Technical Working Party considered the content and the
presentation of the Green Guide in detail.  The principal
conclusions of the review and the consequent recommendations are
contained in the Working Party Report to the Inquiry, but in view
of the amount of material gathered in the course of the work
detailed suggestions for the revision of the Green Guide are
assembled in this separate document as a contribution to any
revised edition.

2.   The Final Report refers to the relationship between the
Green Guide and the Safety Certificate and to the view that the
local authority should follow the Green Guide criteria in
assessing the mandatory requirements for a particular ground.
Variation from the figures then included in the Safety
Certificate would only be permitted by formal revision.

3.   Paragraph 3 of the Report of the Technical Working Party
already records that:

     "3.  It considers that a revised issue of the Green Guide
     should form the basis on which a designated ground or stand
     is certified by the certifying authority, and recommends
     that any departures from the guidance or Technical
     provisions that may arise from local circumstances should be
     fully defined and should be subject to approval in writing
     by the certifying authority".

4.   The Technical Working Party believes that a revised edition
of the Green Guide should incorporate these recommendations
prominently in the introduction.  A high degree of definition in
the guidance offered will be required if ambiguity is to be
avoided.

Non-technical Aspects

5.   Non-technical aspects of the Green Guide lay outside the
Technical Working Party's terms of reference, but they interact
closely with the physical characteristics of grounds.
Responsibilities for the improvement of structures and
communications at grounds, and for the conduct of inspections and
tests, including those accepted from the Technical Working
Party's Report, should be made clear in the Green Guide.
Particular attention should be drawn to the management and
training of those carrying out the work, to the monitoring of
procedures, and to the recording of results.

6.   Reference to the required degree of competence of those
responsible for carrying out the technical work should be
included in the Green Guide.  An example from the Pressure
Systems code of Practice is:
      "3.1.     The 'competent person' (whether a body or an
      individual) should have such practical and theoretical
      knowledge and actual experience of the type of system which
      is to be examined as will enable defects or weaknesses,
      which it is the purpose of the examination to discover, to
      be detected and their importance in relation to the
      integrity and safety of the system to be assessed."

A reference to "the recommending of corrective measures" might be
added to appropriate specifications.

7.   For the following notes, reference should be made to the
index of Technical Working Party's papers and to the Technical
Working Party Report.

CHAPTER 3 - GENERAL FABRIC AND STRUCTURAL MATTERS

8.   The chapter should aim to include (i ) a broad introduction
to the requirements for structures, but without numerical detail,
(ii) reference to later chapters of the Green Guide where details
are to be found, and (iii) reference to other documents such as
the SCICON report and the ISE reports.

9.   Consideration should be given to a separate chapter on
lighting, electrical supplies and computer-based equipment.

CHAPTER 4 - INSPECTIONS AND TESTS

10.  A major re-write should be undertaken along the lines of the
Technical Working Party Report paragraph 40.  If it is decided to
separate details of the structural testing of crush barriers, for
example, or the effectiveness of communication systems, from the
text of the chapter, clear references should be given.

11.  It is important to outline the purposes of inspections and
tests and it is vital to emphasise that accurate and certified
records of all such procedures must be kept.

12.  A complete tabulation of the minimum requirements of
inspection and test, including frequencies, should be provided.

13.   See also Technical Working Party Recommendation 16.

CHAPTER 5 - INGRESS

14.  If separate chapters on ingress and egress are retained they
should be well co-ordinated with each other.  They should also be
well co-ordinated with the chapters on stairways and ramps and on
means of escape from fire.

15.  Prominence should be given to the importance of each ground
having a fully documented networked plan delineating all aspects
of ingress and egress not only within the ground but also at its
approaches.  For both ingress and egress, the plan should take
account of the distribution of entrances and exit routes so as to
encourage even packing and dispersed departures.
16.  The principal conclusions and recommendations on ingress are
given in paragraph 33 and Recommendation 12 of the Technical
Working Party Report. They incorporate the proposals contained
in Mr Bush's paper of 30 October 1989.

CHAPTER 6 - EGRESS

17.  The principal conclusions are recorded in minutes 10-17 of
WP89(M)3, derived from discussion on 7 November 1989 of Mr Bush's
paper on egress.  Detailed proposals for improvements in the
arrangement and the clarity of the text are made in these
documents, including co-ordination of material with other
chapters, as also noted above.   It is recommended that particular
attention should be given to the paragraphs on funnelling and
reservoir areas, to which Recommendation 13 of the Technical
Working Party Report also refers.

CHAPTER 7 - STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS

18.  The Technical Working Party's conclusions are summarised in
paragraphs 19-27 of WP89(M)3 and in paragraphs 36-39 of the
Report.  Reference should also be made to Mr Bush's paper on
stairways and ramps circulated for discussion on 7 November 1989.

19.  Particular attention should be given to improving the
clarity of presentation in the text and to introducing more and
better illustrative diagrams.  Reference to the spacing of
handrails and their extensions at the top and bottom of stairways
should be revised (Recommendation 15 of the Technical Working
Party Report).

20.  The requirements for handrails, balustrades and barriers
serving different functions should be differentiated.  Barriers
are required at exits to/from ramps leading directly to the rear
°f terraces.  More explicit guidance should be given to those
handrails or other protective structures that separate a stairway
or ramp from a hazardous drop.  Handrails should be provided to
assist the channelling of flows through wide ramps.

CHAPTER 8 - TERRACES AND VIEWING SLOPES

21.  A more positive approach should be adopted to the marking of
gangways.  All gangways should be kept clear during events:
"discouragement" from standing in them is not enough (see
Professor Maunder's and Mr Stickley's notes on chapter 8).  The
front-to-back spacing of crush-barriers should be less on viewing
slopes than on terraces;  a ratio of two-thirds is recommended.

CHAPTER 9 - CRUSH BARRIERS AND HANDRAILS

22.  A complete rewrite of this chapter and Appendix C is
recommended.  In view of the deficiencies in inspection and
testing that were exposed in Phase I of the Inquiry, it is
imperative that guidance should be clear and unambiguous.
Reference should be made to the ISE report "Appraisal of Sports
Grounds" and to "Crush Barrier Strengths and Spacings", Home
Office, March 1973, both of which contain a wealth of useful
information.
23.  The conclusions of the Technical Working Party following
discussion of Dr Nicholson's paper on Chapter 4 and 5 are
summarised in paragraphs 13, 15-22 and 25-29 of WP89(M)2;
paragraphs 2(iv) and 3 of WP89(M)3;  and paragraphs 15-18 of the
Technical Working Party Report.  Note that each barrier should be
tested at intervals of not more than four years and less as
determined by inspection.

24.   A model format prepared by Dr Nicholson and Mr Dickson",
Inspection and Testing of Crush Barriers and Handrails", is
attached.  It emphasises the importance of visual inspections,
particularly where corrosion is visible or suspected, calls for
certified records of inspection and tests, and sets out the best
practice of structural testing.

CHAPTER 10 - ROOFED STANDS WITH SEATED ACCOMMODATION

25.   The principal recommendation is that guidance on temporary
structures should be transferred to a separate chapter (Technical
Working Party Report, Recommendation 11).  See also Mr Bush's
paper of 22nd November, 1989.

CHAPTER 11 - FIRE SAFETY

26.  Material in this chapter on evacuation should be co­
ordinated with chapter 6 on egress.   The networked plan of
entrances and exits recommended above for each ground should
include escape routes in emergencies.   Full account should be
taken of the relationships between normal and emergency
provisions in drawing up evacuation plan s.

27.    Attention should be drawn to the importance of clear lines
of authority in determining the requirements for fire safety, as
for other requirements for safety.    The Technical Working Party
considers that the certifying authority should be identified as
the responsible body (Technical Working Party Report paragraph
4 2 ).

28.   Reference should be made to the four general documents
identified in the index accompanying these notes.   (North
Yorkshire County Council paper, 1952 Fire Grading of Buildings,
ISE paper, Building Research Establishment Report by Professor
Can te r .

CHAPTER 12 - COMMUNICATIONS

29.   A substantial expansion of the chapter is recommended in
line with paragraphs 44 and 45 and Recommendation 17 of the
Technical Working Party Report.   See also Professor Maunder's
note of 28 October 1989 and Mr Stickley's note of 16 November
1989.

30.  Particular attention should be drawn to the provision,
capacities, effectiveness and testing of equipment in the Police
Control Room, in the Club Communications Centre and in the hands
of police and stewards inside and outside the ground.  Secure
means of communication between turnstiles and the Police Control
Room are essential to ensure that admittances to enclosures are
limited strictly to specified safe capacities.  This requirement
should be emphasised.  Guidance should be given on the
requirement of back-up systems, and on special means of
communicating via public address systems during emergencies.
References to CCTV should be strengthened.

CHAPTER 14 - CROWD CONTROL

31.  The Working Party considered that the balance between safety
and crowd control presented in this chapter is unsatisfactory.
Guidance on safety should be presented more positively.
Substantial redrafting is recommended, including co-ordination
with the succeeding chapter on Pitch Perimeter Fence/Wall.
Requirements of safety and crowd control at the approaches to
grounds, especially at turnstiles, should be incorporated.

32. WP89(M)4 paragraph 29 summarises discussions based on the
paper by Mr Bush and Mr Carter, of 22 November 1989.  It notes
two paragraphs of the Green Guide which gave particular concern.
The first is paragraph 206, which advocates internal sub­
divisions of terraces in the interests of crowd control.  Such
sub-divisions present serious dangers.  The paragraph should be
revised in the light of Hillsborough.  No sub-divisions should be
permitted without reliable means of counting the movement of
spectators.

33.  The second is paragraph 209, which states that "access to
the pitch must be made as difficult as possible in normal
circumstances", followed by qualifications that the police should
have access from the pitch to the terraces and, lastly, that the
pitch should be used in serious emergencies.   The emphasis is
clearly on crowd control, and it is recommended that the
paragraph be rewritten with a substantially changed emphasis in
favour of safety;  inter alia, not only should the current
reference to spikes and barbed wire be removed, but spikes and
barbed wire should be expressly prohibited.   (Technical Working
Party Recommendation 6).

34.  Clear, prominent and unambiguous signs marking turnstiles,
other entrances, exits and routes to identified enclosures and
stands form an important aspect of crowd control, and should be
treated comprehensively in the Green Guide.

CHAPTER 15 - PITCH PERIMETER FENCE/WALL

35.  Paragraphs 17-22 and Recommendations 5-7 of the Technical
Working Party Report set out the conclusions of the Technical
Working Party.  See also Dr Nicholson's paper discussed on 2
November 1989.

36.  Attention should be drawn in the Green Guide to the general
principles of separation outlined in paragraphs 17 and 18 of the
Report.  The Green Guide should also include recommendations on
the size, design and disposition of perimeter barriers.   It is
imperative that exit gates or gaps providing emergency access to
the pitch should be defined for each ground such that they allow
evacuation of an enclosure within a prescribed time, taking into
account the capacity and the dimensions of the enclosure.
37.        The strength criteria and test procedures for crush barriers
and      for perimeter fences should be distinguished one from the
o th e r .

CHAPTER 16 - ESTIMATION OF SAFE GROUND CAPACITY

38. A comprehensive rewrite is recommended.     A full summary of
the Technical Working Party's conclusions and recommendations is
given in its Report.   See also the papers by Professor Maunder
(31   October 1989) and by Mr Stickley (16 November 1989).

39.    Calculations of the    safe capacity of terraced enclosures and
viewing slopes depend on a large number of parameters.   The Green
Guide should identify all parameters clearly.  It should
recommend the procedure by means of which the capacity is to be
estimated.  The procedure should be set out in a form that can
readily be followed, preferably as a simple step-by-step
sequence.  Characteristic numerical examples should be provided,
and they should be accompanied by explanatory not es .

40.  In view of the move towards more seating accommodation,
urgent consideration should be given to recommended
configurations and allowable densities of seating.

CHAPTER 17 - RECOMMENDED FLOW RATES

41.  The chapter should be co-ordinated with chapters 5, 6 and 7.
It should be expanded to consider flow rates along complete
ingress and egress routes as well as through component parts.
Guidance should be included on flow rates relevant to chapter 11
dealing within emergency evacuation.

ANNEX C

Revision of this annex should be considered in the light of the
foregoing notes on chapters 4 and 9.  Se also WP89(M)4,
paragraphs 25-28.

ADDITIONS

1.   A separate chapter on provisions for disabled spectators
     should be included.

2.   A separate chapter on auxiliary power supplies, with special
     reference to auxiliary lighting, should replace paragraphs
     166-169 of the current Green Guide.  See also WP89(M)4,
     paragraph 16.

3.   A bibliography for further reference should be considered.
An example prepared by Mr Dickson is attached.
                  TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY

                             INDEX

Green Guide      Reference/Document

Chapter 1 -      WP89(M)1 para 5
Introduction
                 See also - Dr Nicholson's note of 1/12/1989
                 to Professor Maunder on 'competent' persons.

Chapter 2 -      WP89(M)1 para 5
Management
Responsibility   See also - i)       Dr Nicholson's note of
                                     1/12/1989
                             ii)     ISE Appraisal of Sports
                                     Grounds (5th draft).

Chapter 3 -      WP89(M)1 para 5
General Fabric
and Structural   See also - Scicon Report.
Matters

Chapter 4 -      WP89(M)1   para 7
Inspection and   WP89(M)2   paras 9-14
Tests            WP89(M)3   para 4
                 WP89(M)4   para 19

                 See also - i)       Dr Nicholson's paper
                                     circulated for WP meeting on
                                     2/11/1989
                             ii)     Mr Stickley's paper of
                                     21/11/1989
                            iii)     Scicon Report
                             iv)     References to crush barrier
                                     testing Chapter 9 and Annex C
                                     below.

Chapter 5 -      WP89(M)1   paras 5 and 7
Ingress          WP89(M)2   paras 29-33
                 WP89(M)3   paras 5-9
                 WP89(M)4   para 20

                 See also - i)       Scicon Report
                           ii)       ISE Appraisal of Sports
                                     Grounds
                            iii)     Building Regulations 1985,
                                     Approved Document K
                             iv)     Mr Bush's paper dated
                                     30/10/1989.
Chapter 6 -      WP89(M)1 para 7
Egress           WP89(M)3 paras 10-18
                 WP89(M)4 para 21

                 See also - i)   Scicon Report
                           ii)   Building Regulations 1985,
                                 Approved Document K
                          iii)   Mr Bush's paper circulated for
                                 WP meeting on 7/11/1989.

Chapter 7 -      WP89(M)1 para 7
Stairways and    WP89(M)3 paras 19-27
Ramps
                 See also - i)   Scicon Report
                           ii)   Building Regulations 1985,
                                 Approved Document K
                          iii)   Mr Bush's paper circulated for
                                 WP meeting on 7/11/1989
                           iv)   Mr Stickley's paper dated
                                 21/11/1989.

Chapter 8 -      WP89(M)1 para 7
Terraces and     WP89(M)3 para 29
Viewing Slopes   WP89(M)4 paras 24-26

                 See also - i)   Mr Carter's note of 23/11/1989
                                 on perimeter tracks
                           ii)   Mr Stickley's note of
                                 16/11/1989
                          iii)   References to crush barrier
                                 testing Chapter 9 and Annex C
                                 below.

Chapter 9 -      WP89(M)2 paras 13, 15-22, and 250=-29 on
Crush Barriers        Annex C
and Handrails    WP89(M)3 paras 2(iv), 3
                 WP89(M)4 paras 15-18

                 See also - i)   Dr Nicholson's paper
                                 circulated for WP meeting on
                                 2/11/1989
                           ii)   Dr Nicholson/Mr Dickson's
                                 first draft tabled on
                                 28/11/1989
                          iii)   Crush barrier strengths and
                                 spacings Home Office March
                                 1973
                           iv)   ISE Appraisal of Sports
                                 Grounds.

Chapter 10 -     WP89(M)4 para 28
Roofed Stands
with Seated      See also - i)   Mr Bush's paper dated
Accommodation                    22/11/1989
                           ii)   ISE Appraisal of Sports
                                 Grounds
Chapter 11 -      WP89(M)3 paras 3, 9, 10, 16
Fire Safety       WP89(M)4 paras 22, 27
                  WP89(M)5 para 3

                  See also - i)     Professor Maunder's note of
                                    27/10/1989
                              ii)   Mr Stickley's note of
                                    16/11/1989
                             iii)   North Yorkshire County Council
                                    paper dated 13/11/1989 on
                                    emergency power
                              iv)   1952 Fire Grading of Buildings
                                    document
                               v)   ISE Appraisal of Sports
                                    Grounds
                              vi)   Professor Canter - Studies of
                                    human behaviour in fire etc.

Chapter 12 -      WP89(M)4 para 33
Communications
                  See also - i)     Professor Maunder's note of
                                    3/7/1989 and 28/10/1989
                              ii)   Mr Stickley's paper of
                                    16/11/1989
                             iii)   ISE Appraisal of Sports
                                    Grounds.

Chapter 13 -                   i)   Mr Bush's initial submission
Stewarding                          to the Inquiry dated
                                    26/5/1989.

Chapter 14 -      WP89(M)4 para 29
Crowd Control
                  See also - i)     Mr Bush's paper dated
                                    22/11/1989

Chapter 15 -      WP89(M)2 paras 23-24
Pitch Perimeter   WP89(M)3 para 2(i )
Fence/Wall        WP89(M)4 para 3 3 (i)

                  See also - i)     Introductory paper WP(89)1
                                    para 5(v )
                              ii)   Dr Nicholson's paper
                                    circulated for WP meeting on
                                    2/11/1989.

Chapter 16 -      WP89(M)1   paras 1, 7
Estimation of     WP89(M)2   paras 16-17
Safe Ground       WP89(M)3   para 30
Capacity          WP89(M)4   paras 30-32

                             - i)   Introductory paper WP(89)1
                                    para 5(i )
                              ii)   Professor Maunder's paper of
                                    31/10/1989
                             iii)   Mr Stickley's paper of
                                    16/11/1989
                              iv)   Scicon Report.
Chapter 17 -
Recommended Flow
Rates

Annex A -
Glossary of
Terms

Annex B -          See   Chapter 13 above,
Stewarding

Annex C -          WP89(M)2 - paras 11-12, 15-22, 25-28
Testing of Crush   WP89(M)3 - paras 2(iv), 3, 4
Barriers and       WP89(M)4 - paras 15-18
Handrails
                   See also - i)     Introductory paper WP(89)1
                                    para 5(ii)
                              ii)   Tests on Live Subjects to
                                    Determine the Tolerable Forces
                                    that may be Exerted by Crowd
                                    Control Crush Barriers Evans &
                                    Hayden November 1971
                             iii)   ISE Appraisal of Sports
                                    Grounds
                              iv)   BS5950 Part 1:   1985 Section 7
                               v)   BS5950 Part 5:   1987 Section
                                    10
                              vi)   Dr Nicholson's paper
                                    circulated for meeting on
                                    2/11/1989
                            vii)    Dr Nicholson/Mr Dickson's
                                    First Draft tabled on
                                    28/11/1989.
                                                             WP90(M) 1

TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY

NOTE OF A MEETING HELD IN ROOM 656 THE HOME OFFICE QUEEN ANNE'S
GATE ON TUESDAY 23 JANUARY AT 1.00pm


Present:     Professor L Maunder (Chairman)
             Mr N Bush
             Mr W Carter
             Mr M Dickson
             Dr C Nicholson
             Mr J Sweet (Secretary)


                                                             Action

1.   Apologies for absence had been received from Mr
Stickley.


Hillsborough Inquiry - Final Report


2-   Professor Maunder confirmed that the Technical
Working Party Report had been accepted in full by Lord
Justice Taylor and would appear in his Final Report.
Although unable to give details of its contents, he
could confirm in confidence,    that that Report had
itself been completed and presented to the Home
Secretary.    The Government's response was awaited, but
all indications were that publication would take place
in the near future.     It was agreed that the Secretary
would distribute copies of the Final Report, once
available,   to members.                                     Sweet




Supplementary Notes


3.   Imminent publication of the Final Report made
completion and submission of the Working Party's own
supplementary notes all the more urgent, not least
because the Working Party would have no formal locus
once the Inquiry's task was complete.     Nor indeed would
the Inquiry secretariat be able to provide the
necessary support structure.    Given those and other
c




                                                               Action


    constraints,   it was therefore essential to reach early
    agreement on the form, if not the content, of any
    notes.


    4.   Professor Maunder invited comment from members.
    At one extreme it would be possible merely to submit
    the various file papers accrued to date together with a
    covering index linking them to the respective Chapters
    of the Green Guide, whilst at the other extreme a
    comprehensive catalogue of the work undertaken,    the
    detailed deliberations of the Working Party members and
    the rationale of their recommendations could be linked
    with a paragraph by paragraph assessment of the Guide
    and proposals for change.   The latter approach might
    risk the charge that the Working Party was exceeding
    its remit by seeking, de facto, to rewrite the Guide;
    the former might not ensure that the worthwhile core of
    expertise available in the file papers was drawn
    sufficiently to the attention of those who might in due
    course be tasked with any such redrafting.


    5.   The professional expertise embodied in the
    Technical Working Party had ensured in-depth critical
    examination of a wide range of issues.    Such
    concentration of expertise was unlikely to recur in the
    foreseeable future and members expressed some concern
    that detailed issues addressed by them would be
    overlooked by reliance solely on the Working Party
    Report.   In any event, comprehensive redrafting of the
    Green Guide was likely to be a lengthy process, and it
    was therefore important to present advice in a
    structured way to facilitate future reference to it.


    6.   After lengthy discussion,   it was agreed that
    Professor Maunder/Mr Sweet would draft                     Maunder/
    supplementary notes on a chapter by chapter basis          Sweet
    cross-referencing, where appropriate, with such
                                                              Action


documents as the Scicon Report, and the Institution of
Structural Engineers 5th draft.   Reference could also
be made to the index already prepared and circulated.
Dr Nicholson/Mr Dickson's paper on crush-barrier
testing was also to be incorporated;   Mr Dickson
pressed additionally for the inclusion of an expanded
section on flows.   It was also agreed that Mr Dickson        Dickson
would supply information for the complete bibliography.


7.    A draft would be circulated as early as possible
for comment then submission.   Working Party members
recognised that they would no longer be able to
continue as a formal body once the Inquiry had
disbanded, but nonetheless expressed the hope that
those who subsequently redrafted the Green Guide would
not feel inhibited about seeking advice from individual
m embers.


8.    More generally, there was value in making
available supplementary notes to assist in the
improvement of grounds in advance of any revised Green
Guide.   It was entirely possible that a number,    if not
all, of the Working Party's recommendations would be
accepted by the Government and acted upon immediately.
Remedial work at grounds did not have to await the
long-term reissue of the Guide.


9•    Dr Nicholson undertook to circulate a translation      Nicholson
of the QTIS (Italian) document as soon as it became
available.


10.   The Chairman expressed his gratitude,   to the
members and Secretary for their dedicated, professional
approach to the task entrusted to them.   The whole
experience had been a valuable and stimulating one.
  INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               The Rt H on Lord Ju stice Taylor
  STADIUM DISASTER
                                              50 Q u e e n Anne's Gate
                                              London SW1H 9AT
                                              01-2“3 2 5 ^ 7 3 6 0 2 /2 3 ^ 0


Mr L N Bush FRICS CEng                  Your Ref:       APSU/CBS-
 MIStructE FIAS                                         264/LNB/LS
City Building Surveyor
City of Liverpool                       Our Ref         FEP/89
5th Floor                                               35/48/102
Kingsway House
Hatton Garden
                                              Date -               'xfafz
LIVERPOOL L3 2AJ                         1 February 1990




Dear Mr Bush

HILLSBOROUGH PUBLIC INQUIRY - PART II
TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY

Thank you for your letter of 31 January and in particular for
your valuable comments on the various Working Party papers.   As
you mention in your postscript, all of the papers, including the
minutes of meetings and the contributions from individual
members, will be handed on, and we are stressing the importance
of reading all papers associated with the Working Party's
deliberations.

On a separate point, I have written to our Accounts Branch
authorising payment to you as set out in your letter. If there
are any problems, do not hesitate to give me a ring.

Finally, I am taking this opportunity to return the photographs
of the packing of the Kop enclosure at Anfield.   I shall be on
leave next week, but back in the office on Monday 19 February;
my new telephone number will be 01 273 3083.       I should be
delighted to see you whenever you are down in London.

Best wishes.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        JONATHAN SWEET
                                        Hillsborough Inquiry
                                         CITY                     OF                LIVERPOOL
             Local Authority
     BUILDING                                                     L. N. BUSH, F.R.I.C.S., C.Eng., M.I.Struct.E., F.I.A.S.,

     CONTROL                                                      CITY BUILDING S U R VEYO R ,
                                                                  5th Floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                  Liverpool L3 2AJ.

     Our ref:          A P S U /C B S -2 6 4 /L N B /L S          Telephone: 05 1 -2 2 7 3911      Ext:   3395
                                                                  Facsimile: 0 5 1 -2 2 5 3 8 86
     Your ref:                                                    Direct Line: 0 5 1 -2 2 5        3395



                                                                  Date:


    Jonathan C. Sweet, Esq.,
    Hillsborough Inquiry,
    50 Queen Anne's Gate,
    London,
    SW1H 9AT


    Dear Mr. Sweet,

    Hillsboroogh Inquiry - Part 2, Technical Working Party

    Further to our meeting of 23rd instant, I have re-read those papers submitted by
    Working Party members, including my own, and compared their contents with the
    minutes of the first four meetings. Consequently I believe/that reading those
    things together, an accurate picture is available to the Home Office of what was
    accepted by the group,to be passed on to the Working Party who are to revise the
     Green Guide". However, having regard to the Judge's recommendation for all
    seated stadia, which has been picked up very forcefully by the Government, I
    think it is important to pass on one very practical problem which arises in that
    connection. This was discussed briefly at our fourth meeting, and resulted in
    us saying in our Recommendation 12 that the theoretical capacity of a seated
    enclosure is the number of seats provided. The significance of the word
     theoretical" may not be appreciated by those who follow us to re—write the
    "Green Guide".

    When all football stadia are fully seated, spectators will learn the necessity
    to arrive at the ground in adequate time, and to take care that they occupy the
    seats which they are allocated by any ticket bought before the event, or at a
    ticket office on the day. Meanwhile, for a period of some years I think, there
    will be many spectators, particularly those visiting strange grounds, who
    normally stand on terraces at their own ground, who will cause the sort of
    problem and disruption which I have experienced at the Anfield Ground since
    visitors were totally seated, starting this season. These visitors, on two
    occasions to date, have failed to get into their allocated seats before kick-off
    time. They travel from some distance, and tend to want to take refreshment
    before going to the ground, or before going to their seat once they are inside
    the ground, and believe that because they hold a ticket with a seat row and
    number on, they can arrive quite late and will be able to occupy that seat
    quickly and easily. That assumption may be valid in a theatre where on any
    particular level there is probably less than 1,000 seats, but it is not valid
    where an enclosure may contain 5 or 6 thousand seats.




         When calling or telephoning please ask f o r .........

NBDABS
                                                 - 2 -


     The first time this happened at Liverpool was an afternoon league match. Many
     visitors holding tickets decided they did not like the seats allocated to them,
     and picked better ones to sit in. When the correct ticket holders arrived, that
     had a knock-on effect, because some of the visitors refused to move, and the
     later arrivals then sat in other seats, wrongly. The concentrated arrival of
     many hundreds of visitors in the last 15 minutes before kick-off totally
     overwhelmed the stewarding arrangements, and left many of the visitors standing
     in gangways at kick-off time. There was then little chance of getting them
     seated, because everybody in the enclosure had to stand up to see the match, and
     were no longer prepared to be shepherded about, but simply wanted to see the
     game.

     On that first occasion, the enclosure was never really tidied up, and the
     majority of the spectators stood for the whole of the match. They were not
     otherwise badly behaved,  and the Police held the problem in a low key so that it
     was simply a distraction  and nuisance to the other spectators elsewhere in the
     stadium, rather than a dangerous situation.

     The second occasion/a similar problem arose/was an evening match for a Cup tie
     replay. This exacerbated the late arrival of spectators and deterred the
     Police, who after the first incident had been given the authority to postpone
     any start until spectators were seated, from delaying the start. 25% of the
     visitors arrived in the last 15 minutes before the kick-off, and once again,
     gangways were fully packed with visitors, who tried to find their seats, or any
     empty seats, which was very difficult because the occupiers of seats stood up to
     get a sight of the pitch as before. The solution chosen on this occasion was to
     migrate those standing in the gangways to an adjacent home crowd seated area,
     which was conveniently vacant because there was a relatively low attendance at
     the match by home spectators.

         The lessons learned from   these two incidentsare :-

         1.   Maximum identification of seats in the ground in relation to tickets sold is
              desirable, including the colour-coding of tickets to match the different
              coloured blocks of seats in the enclosure, and similarly colour-coding the
              turnstile entrances.

         2.   To increase the number of Crowd Stewards provided to assist spectators find
              their correct seats, and move spectators who occupy the wrong seats,
              although there is a limit to that, in order to prevent the gangways being
              over-congested with stewards moving about.

         3.   To close refreshment bars in concourses under stands 15 to 30 minutes before
              kick-off (despite the needs of weary travellers) and give every other
              encouragement to spectators to get into their seats as soon as possible.

         4.   Not to sell all the seats available, but to reserve an appropriate number
              empty, so that if all else fails by kick-off time, those left crowding in
              gangways can be moved into those empty seats.

         The last measure particularly is not very palatable to Clubs, but is a
         compromise accepted to avoid the other alternative of not allocating seats by
         numbers, but allowing them to be occupied on a first-come-first-taken basis.
         This is a generally accepted method used for large seated arenas, and has been
         adopted by the Everton Club here on several occasions in the past.  It is often
         used for large circus tents and the like. However, because various numbers of


NBDABS
                                                   - 3 -




         people coining together tend to leave varying numbers of seats empty between
         them, the allowance of seats unsold, to ensure an orderly and timely settlement
         of spectators into seats, is generally as high as 10%. At present for the
         Anfield ground visitors' seated enclosures, I am holding a little less than 5%
         empty seats, which are capable of accommodating the standing population in
         gangways.   This is of course a temporary arrangement, and the Club are making
         all efforts to demonstrate their ability to get spectators into their correct
         seats before kick-off time, when the arrangements can be relaxed, or hopefully
         dispensed with altogether.

         In redrafting the "Green Guide" in the light of the demand for all seated
         stadia, this problem needs to be catered for. I accept that in due course when
         football spectators are used to all seated stadia, the problem may then not
         exist, or at least the theoretical capacities of seated areas may only need to
         be reduced by a small fraction.

         Finally, I would confirm that I have now received two cheques from the Home
         Office, which cover my expenses for the five meetings held in 1989, and for the
         photographs mentioned in my letter of 12th December last. This leaves expenses
         for our final meeting on 23rd instant due, and I thought it might be helpful to
         set these out in full for your kind attention.


                Car Mileage - Runcorn Station    £6.00
                Parking                          £1.00
                Standard Return London          £64.00
                Underground Fares                £1.20
                Tea on Train                     £1.53
                                                £73.73


         Yours sincerely,




         City Building Surveyor.


         P«S»   Since dictating the above yesterday afternoon, I have now received your
                fax, and this morning your letter and enclosures in the post dated 30th
                instant.                                                    '



                The minutes of our last meeting on 23rd instant are fine. The proposed
                supplementary notes will be helpful to our successor working party to
                highlight the salient points, and index them through the papers and
                minutes. However, the notes are brief, and I trust the Working Party will
                be supplied with, and encouraged to read in full, all the papers prepared
                by our members, together with the minutes of the meetings and the many
                papers which were supplied to us by you. From those, they should pick up
                the several British Standards Institution Codes or Specifications, to
                which we have referred or quoted as relevant.  Indeed, if time permits, it
                might be useful for you to prepare a separate list of those as an appendix
                to the index of references/documents.

                                                             Continued ....
NBDABS
                                               - 4 -




              I note probably a typographical error in paragraph 23 of the supplementary
              notes which refers to papers by Dr. Nicholson, on Chapters 4 and 5 instead
              of 4 and 9.

              Finally, I thank you for returning the negatives of the Everton and
              Liverpool safety corridor photographs.  I will ring you before my next
              trip to London, which will be about the middle of next month, to the D.O.E
              at Millbank Tower, when I will have time to call and collect the
              photographs of the packing of the Kop Enclosure at Anfield.




M D T\A D C
