From:   M J Moriarty                       cc   Ms Craig
        22 September 1989                       Mr Rex
                                                Miss Nicholson
                                                Mr Yates
                                                Mr Chilcot
                                                Mr Hammond
                                                Mr Turney o/r
                                                Mr Boys Smith
                                                HMCIC
                                                HMCIFS
                                                Mr Mower
                                                Mr Clayton
                                                Mr Goddard
                                                Mr Bolton o/r
                                                Mr Whalley ^
                                                Mr Mould
                                                Mr Lidington
                                                Mr Yeo


Miss Bannister



HILLSBOROUGH:    PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION

Mr Mould has followed up the points in your note of 20 September.
A draft letter for your signature to Mr Edey is attached.


2.   The answers to the questions in the first paragraph of your
note are as follows.   Regulations under section 6(2) of the 1975
Act would not give the Secretary of State the authority to oversee
safety certificates (paragraph l(i) of your note).     There is no
power under the 1975 Act for regulations made under it to change
the provisions of that Act.


3.   The Football Licensing Authority (FLA) will be a non-
departmental public body.     tThe Secretary of State for Environment
will appoint its members in consultation with the Home Secretary
in relation to appointments which have a bearing on safety
responsibilities under the 1975 Act.     The FLA will nevertheless be
a DOE rather than a Home Office body.
4.    I wondered whether, in view of Mr Edey's reaction to the
letter of 18 September, we should think again about volunteering
information about the powers contained in the 1975 Act to make a
statutory instrument under section 15A in relation to the contents
of safety certificates.    I think it is better to leave that aside.
Such terms and conditions would still have to be flexible enough
to be applied by each local authority to each individual ground.
The option of such a statutory order still remains and G2 have
already begun to consider the sort of thing which might go into
it.    Even so it would still not address Mr Edey's main point about
oversight of safety certificates by the Secretary of State.


5.    Early indications from G2's enquiries of local authorities on
the progress of implementation of the Interim Report are
encouraging in that the 28 urgent recommendations either have
already been carried out or are underway and well advanced.      Some
authorities have also carried out the other 15 recommendations.
Only one authority so far is revealed not to have applied the 15%
capacity reduction from a calculated figure of 54 persons per 10
square metres.    One or two others have not insisted upon a further
15% reduction where the capacity works out at well below that
density level.    For example, one authority has reduced the
authorised capacity of an area from 2,000 to 370 but felt a
further 15% cut was unnecessary.


6.    We noted that Mr Edey reverted to his intention to make
application for judicial review.    That is up to him:   you will
recall our lawyers' view that an application is not likely to be
granted or, if granted, to succeed.    If he is granted an
application and we are asked for a public comment, our line should
be that we acknowledge the action taken by him and maintain our
present position that there is no indication of deliberate, wide­
spread unwillingness to apply the Interim Report recommendations
to football grounds and implement them quickly;    but that we are
    keeping the position under review and have not ruled out the
    option of taking statutory powers should that be shown to be
    necessary.




                                      M J Moriarty


#
Draft letter for signature bv PS/S of S

Roy Edey Esq
Lower Flat
Field House North
West Street
Harrow
Middlesex NA1 3ER




When you telephoned last Wednesday, having received my letter of
18 September on the Home Secretary's behalf, I said that I would
write to you further on two specific points:    first on the
regulation powers under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the
1975 Act);   and secondly about the Football Licensing Authority
(FLA).


The Statutory power under section 6(2) of the 1975 Act to which
you referred does not enable the Secretary of State to make
regulations to oversee safety certificates.    As I explained in my
letter of 18 September, the issue of safety certificates is
entirely a matter for the local authority.


The status of the FLA will be that of an independent non-
departmental public body.   Appointments to the FLA will be made by
the Secretary of State for Environment, in consultation with the
Home Secretary in respect of those appointments which have a
bearing on the Authority's safety role.


In conclusion, I should like to assure you again about the Home
Secretary's concern over safety at football grounds, and the
importance that he attaches to a proper response by local
authorities and clubs to the recommendations contained in the
Interim Report.   That response will of course be followed up by
the Department, and in the light of it, and of the Final Report of
of the Taylor Inquiry, consideration will be given to the need for
any further action.
                                           cc.   Ms Craig
                                                 Ms Rex
                                                 Ms Nicholson
           QQl    .£ Vy<j^                       Mr Yates
                                                 Mr Chilcot
                                                 Mr Moriarty
                                                 Mr Turney
                                                 Mr Boys Smith
                                                 HMCIC
                                                 HMCIFS
                                                 Mr Mower
                                                 Mr Clayton
                                                 Mr Goddard
                                                 Mr Bolton, o/r
                                                 Mr WhalJrgy
                                                 Mr Lidington
                                                 Mr Yeo




Mr Mould


           HILLSBOROUGH:   PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION


    The Home Secretary saw your submissions of 15 September
and 14 September on the proposed letter to John Carlisle and
the reply to Mr Edey. He agreed to the issue of the letter
to Mr Edey, subject to the deletion of the fifth and eigth
paragraphs of the draft. He decided that to mention that
consideration was being given to any necessary enforcement of
the report's recommendations by means of a statutory
instrument would beg the question of why, if we knew that the
recommendations were not being implemented in some places, we
were not using this power.  I have circulated my letter to
Mr Edey separately.

2. In regard to the letter to Mr Carlisle, the Home Secretary
needs to know before it is sent which, if any, local
authorities '-     " ■         have not implemented the
asterisked recommendations, and why.   If there are a number of
local authorities           who have not implemented the
recommendations he would like advice on why it is not possible
to use the statutory power. The draft letter to Mr Carlisle
will need to be amended in the light of advice on this.   I
should be grateful if advice and a fresh draft could be with
us by 29 September jous   c(A/x-     .

3. The Home Secretary discussed publication of the letter to
Mr Carlisle with Mr Mower and Mr Lidington on 18 September.
Mr Mower advised that it would not be sensible to publish the


                                                 /letter as this
                            2   .



letter as this might simply stir up journalists to write
stories on local authorities and clubs not implementing the
recommendations.  He advised that the reply should simply be
used when necessary to explain what we were doing.  It was
noted that Mr Carlisle would need to be told that the letter
would no longer be published, but that he would be able to
use it as he saw fit.




Private Office                         MISS C J BANNISTER
19 September 1989                      Private Secretary
 'V
w
ST    4
OL
                                             cc.   Ms Craig
                                                   Ms Rex
                                                   Ms Nicholson
                                                   Mr Yates
                                                   Mr Chilcot oi/~
                                                   Mr Hammond
                                                   Mr Turney, o/r
                                                   Mr Boys Smith
                                                   HMCIC
                                                   HMCIFS
                                                   Mr Mower
                                                   Mr Clayton
                                                   Mr Goddard
                                                   Mr Bolton, o/r
                                                   Mg Whalley
                                                   Mr Mould
                                                   Mr Lidington
                                                   Mr Yeo




 Mr Moriartv


             HILLSBOROUGH:   PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION


 Mr Edey telephoned me this morning to say that he had received
 my letter of 18 September and did not find it a satisfactory
 response. He had two main queries:

      (i)   there was no mention of the statutory power open
            to the Home Secretary to enforce the Taylor
            Report's recommendations (he referred to section
            6 and in particular sub-section 2 of the 1975
            Act). He said that this gave the Home Secretary
            overall authority to ensure that the correct
            safety certificates were issued, that he had a
            clear duty to lay down regulations for safety at
            sports grounds and that because this had not
            been done, the situation at grounds was still
            dangerous, as illustrated by a recent Observer
            article about the Coventry v Everton game on
            19 August and an article in the Times which said
            that only 12% of grounds had a doctor present;

     (ii)   he wanted to know which Department, the Home
            Office or the Department of Environment, would
            be responsible for the football licensing
            authority insofar as it might supervise safety.



                                                   /2.
                                 2   .



    2. I promised that I would write to him as soon as possible
    with answers to these questions, but he said that he was
    considering         ft**- a writ of mandamus against the Home
    Secretary without Waiting for my further letter.    He also said
    that it was unsatisfactory that the Taylor Report had not yet
    been subjected to Parliamentary scrutiny as it had been
    delivered during the recess. He said that if anything went
    wrong, the Home Secretary would be in great trouble.

    3. The letter which I sent to Mr Edey deliberately omitted
    the passage about consideration being given to the enforcement
    of the Report's recommendations by means of a Statutory


•
    Instrument, for the reasons set out in the first paragraph of
    my note to Mr Mould of 19 September. Mr Mould has now set in
    hand a survey of local authorities to find out which, if any,
    have not implemented the asterisked recommendations of the
    Taylor Report, and if so why. The Home Secretary needs to
    have advice quickly on whether he should consider using his
    statutory powers, and this can only be on the basis of as
    accurate a picture as possible of progress of implementation
    of the Taylor Report by local authorities.

    4. I should be grateful for advice and a draft letter to send
    to Mr Edey as quickly as possible and for urgent advice on how
    we should handle any application by Mr Edey for a writ of
    mandamus, in consultation with Mr Hammond and Mr Mower.




    Private Office                           MISS C J BANNISTER
    20 September 1989                        Private Secretary
