                                                                        Mr & Mrs Roberts




Lord Justice Stewart-Smith
c/o The Secretary
Room 528
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT                                     Date      ' lo • 'I ’ >ci 'I


Dear Sir

Re: Inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster

We lost our son Graham at Hillsborough. Since that day we have found out very little
information regarding the circumstances of his death. Although we recognise that the
following account is not ‘new’ evidence, it does seek to highlight our very serious
concerns about the way the West Midlands Police gathered and presented evidence to the
Coroner and eventually to ourselves, about the death of our son.


First, we would like to briefly explain to you how we came to know of Graham’s death.
Despite making repeated calls to the police in Sheffield, and providing a detailed
description of our son, we were informed of his death by Graham’s fiancee]           at 6
o’clock on Sunday morning. We were actually on the phone to a sergeant in Sheffield
who was still trying to tell my wife and I that there was nobody there of Graham’s
description, when            :ame to our house to give us the dreadful news. Graham’s
future brother-in-law had identified Graham’s body at 1.40 on the Sunday morning.
Before leaving Sheffield, he had pleaded with officers to phone us before they got home.
This did not happen.

Mini-Inquests

1. We received a ‘filleted’ report from West Midlands Police about one week before the
Mini-Inquests opened. The following extracts illustrate the shocking nature of the
information with which we had to cope: The first extract taken from the report appears
as a summary of the evidence of PC Yates, who identified Graham as a person he
‘possibly’ dealt with:
    He found Mr Roberts approximately 15-20 feet from the entrance to the tunnel.
    [He] formed the opinion Mr Roberts was dead and left him where he had found
    him and returned into the tunnel to assist the injured.

A statement by a second officer, PC Best, who also believed that he dealt with Graham,
was summarised as follows:

    He helped carry Mr Roberts into Leppings Lane where he saw other bodies were
    laid o ut.... The officer believed Mr Roberts was breathing at this time and left
    him to assist others. When he returned to Mr Roberts he formed the opinion Mr
    Roberts was dead.


We prepared questions for our legal representative at the mini-inquests with a view to
investigating why one officer, and very possibly the first person to come across Graham,
believed he was dead, yet a second officer considered he was alive. However the format
of the Mini-Inquests[i.e. that no controversial questions should be put forward] meant
that these questions were never asked.

2. Three years after the Disaster, we managed to obtain the full statements gathered by
the West Midlands Police. However these statements raised more inconsistencies in the
evidence relating to the identification of Graham. For instance, in the statement made by
PC Yates, Graham was described as being of slim build with light coloured hair and
wearing a sleeveless tee-shirt. In another statement, made by PC Best, Graham was
described as being of large build, with fair hair and not wearing a shirt. On that day,
Graham wore a blue-check shirt.

3. The timings in the statements raised yet more doubts in our minds. Graham was last
seen by his friend within a few feet of the Pen 3 perimeter fence. Given that the game
was not stopped until 3.06 pm, it is doubtful that at “about 3.05” PC Yates came across
Graham, lying on the concourse areas about 15 to 20 feet from the entrance to the tunnel.

After coming to terms with the information contained in the ‘filleted’ statement that one
of the officers was of the opinion that our son was still alive, we now are doubtful as to
whether the statements related to Graham at all. We are thus left in a situation where we
feel we know nothing definite about the circumstances surrounding our son’s death.


We would ask that you consider these points - although not ‘new evidence’ as such, we
believe they cast serious doubts upon the whole process whereby evidence was gathered
and selectively used at the Inquests. We were deeply shocked by the obvious
inconsistencies contained within the statements and feel there is no opportunity left to us
to raise crucial questions. As a result we have lost all faith in the reliability of the
information (what little there is) regarding the circumstances of our son’s death. We
would urge that any new Inquiry would provide us with the opportunity to seek answers
to our unanswered questions and that events surrounding the ‘rescue operation’ after 3.15
pm on the day of the Disaster are re-examined.


Yours sincerely
                        -   A-




[We have copies of both the ‘filleted’ West Midlands Police Report, and statements
relating to PC Yates and PC Best].
           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 528
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 4347 Fax 2703


Mr & Mrs Roberts
                                                              Your reference:

                                                              Our reference:

                                                              Date:             7 August 1997




Thank you very much for your letter of 16 July to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

I hope that, since your letter, you have received one from Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
explaining the work he will be doing in relation to the Hillsborough Football Stadium
disaster. If you have not, please let me know and I will arrange for one to be sent to you.

We are grateful to you for the points you have made in your letter. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
will take them into account as he carries out his work.


                Z» i l v t V c l L _


                       *




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\ROBERTS.031
