    ooutn        torksnire      J t oec
                                                                                                                           CD
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O . Box 3 ?. Repent Street,
                                                    a !
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2 PQ                        ^                    ( <=• ^ '
Fix: Barnsley
W .J. WMUnmn, BA(Beon), CPFA. Clerk and T rm iu m r


                                                                  :C*-i                          S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
Our ref:     W JW /V S                                                                                            POLICE
                                                                                                            A U TH O R ITY
Your ref:


Date:      21 October 1999


This matter is being dealt with by:   Bill Wilkin lOfl                    Diwrt line:


Chris Michael                                                                                       Jf
Office of Charles Clarke MP
Room 772                                                        6 ^           ^
Home Office
Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON SW1H9AT

BY FAX AND POST
                                                                D c ^ o i               £ s i,
Dear Ms Michael

HILLSBOROUGH: FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS
BRIEFING PAPER FOR HOME SECR WARY

The Chairman of the Authority wish*« to thank the Minister for agreeing to meet representatives
of the Authority on 2 November,

In connection with the meeting, I enclose a briefing paper on the two issues which the Authority
wishes to discuss. I have prepared tjuite an extensive note on the matter of the Authority meeting
                      . . .  _        mmt          .1 *  *i» ____ * _S             . Aii<l U ‘ «"»,aslsoJS&!«aBP<SS9-s!!
the defence costs of the former officers, as this will provide the Minister w ith ' additional
background if at some future state, he is asked further questions in the house about the
situation. The papers should be re id in conjunction with the earlier letiers from myself and the
Chief Constable.

 The South Yorkshire delegation on :! November will comprise a maximu m of 5 people - Clarence
 Swindell (Chairman); Mike Hedges (Chief Constable); Ian Daines (Assistant Chief Constable);
 and myself. There may be a seconc member of the Authority who will join the delegation.

 Please contact me if you require anything further.

 Yours sincerely



 Bill Wilkinson
 Clerk and Treasurer

 Enc

 Copies to:              Councillor C Swindell (Chairman)     Mr D Rigg (District Auditor)
                         Mr M Hedges (Chief i Unstable)       Ms M Oades (Assistant Clerk)
io u t n   lorK sm re j t   etc                         ULI   29    3 - ^    r .




    SOUTH YORKSHIRE PQUC E AUTHORITY

    Hillsborough - financial Implication*

    Briefing paper for Homa Ovfice



    Introduction

    The Authority's submission is in tw o parts.


    Part 1 relates to costs incused as a result o f the Authority 's decision to fund
    the legal defence costs o? the tw o former officers facin.ig private criminal
    prosecutions arising out o f their actions on the day o f the disaster. The
    Authority is following up an issue raised earlier this year b y the Rt Hon David
    Bfunkett, who referred, in a letter to the Minister, to the financial im pact on
    South Yorkshire Council T l x payers, and whether Home Ofi■fice funding could
    be made available.     The papers provide a brief history o f Hillsborough; a
    summary o f the factors which led the Authority to make support available;
    the financial implications to date; and the basis for the Authority seeking
    financial support from other parties.


    Part 2 relates to liabilitius for damages to persons \Jyho were injured
    Although the background notes are less extensive, this is the Authority's
    principal concern, because o f the existing scale o f uninsbred liabilities, and
    the recent prospect o f even more cases coming to light.
60u m    rorksnire   Jt   oec                            ^ i.   t   J ^   • w-w1    . v*-*




   Part 1 : Defence costs of f >rmer officers

   1.1     Background

           Original decision Feb uary 1998

           This followed publication of the findings of Lord Just ice Stewart Smith’s
           scrutiny for the Hom< Secretary, which concluded tha there was no new
           evidence; in the light of that, DPP had taken no fuirther action. The
           immediate response of HFSG was to announce that th ey intended to take
           out private prosecutit ns, and on reporting this to menribers it was felt that
           there should be a cl ja r statement that the Authority would stand by its
           former officers. Members took into account their pr«ev ious stance at the
           Inquest and consistontly since 1989, and also the DPP’s successive
           decisions that there were no criminal charges to ansvswei>r. It was resolved
           subsequently to offi f ‘reasonable* legal support ttowards any private
           prosecutions which might follow. The £0.5m whicf the Authority had
           originally earmarked in August 1997 for costs in Connection with the
            Scrutiny was identified to provide funding.

            June/July 1998

            Private prosecutions were commenced by Ann Adlir gton. Each of the
            former officers was charged with two counts of ma nslaughter and one
            count of wilfully neglecting to perform a public duty One of the former
            officers faced a charge of attempting to pervert tho course of justice,
            although this charge was eventually withdrawn in Apiril 1999. The DPP
            was invited to take over the conduct of the private jrosecutions and to
            discontinue them      On 19 December 1998, the D PP announced his
            decision not to take ever and discontinue the charges.

            Late 1998/early 19S9

            The issue of Police Authority powers to fund defen :e costs in criminal
            proceedings was railed. Mo specific powers exist, and the Authority is
            reliant on its general duty under Section6 of the >olice Act, and the
            supplementary powe: available to it under S 111 of th'3 Local Government
            Act. Counsel’s advice was sought, and subseqlujently the Authority
            appointed indepencent legal advisers.            The Cl 3irk and Treasurer
            suspended further pi.yments until the issue was clarifio'id. A full report was
            presented to the Authority on 5 February; the Authority’’s advisers felt that,
            on balance, there w j s sufficient doubt about the exiijstence of powers to
            raise the possibility of a successful challenge. Howet/<(er, recognising that
            there were strong co jnter views - principally from the legal advisers to the
            Chief Constable - it v ■as resolved to seek a ruling from the Court.

            March 1999

            The Divisional Court ruled that Police Authorities do have the necessary
            powers, but each case must be considered on its mirits. The Divisional
            Court ruled on two n atters. First, it decided that poli cje authorities may, in
ooutn lorKsrure j t    oec                               Zi   ULI        3 •Ju      r .




         principle, decide to fin d officers and former officers/ le gal representations
         in proceedings on he grounds that to do so is conducive to the
         maintenance of an efficient and effective police force in its area, but the
         Court made it clear th Jt each case must be considered on its merits.

         In a separate action heard by the Court at the same time, Mr Duckenfield
         and Mr Murray soujht judicial review of the DPP’s decision not to
         intervene in the prosucution. The Divisional Court decided that the DPP’s
         decision not to take o /er the prosecution of the charge s against the former
         officers was lawful, s iv e in respect of the charge of attempting to pervert
         the course of justice, which the DPP was directed to
         April 1999, the DPP decided that he would take over und discontinue this
         charge.

         2 1 M ay 1999

         The Authority met to <consider the whole issue of suppo|rt afresh, in the light
         of a comprehensive report prepared by Garretts its independent legal
         advisers. The outcome of the meeting was:

         (i)       confirmation o. previous offers of support, subjo ct to a review by a
                   costs draftsman of the reasonableness of the co sts to be claimed;
         (ii)      agreement to und to the conclusion of the coirpmittal proceedings,
                   subject to a fo mal agreement indicating the level of representation
                   the Authority \Aould fund and the maximum costs; to be reimbursed.

          Issues considered by the Authority in reaching these decisions included:

         •      the belief that while mistakes were made, the ofljicers acted in good
                faith

         •      the officers were on operational duty at the time of the incident

          •     as a general proposition, police officers need to know that if they act in
                good faith and even if errors are made, their Authority will stand by
                them

          •     the alternative of legal aid would have required substantial personal
                contributions fronr. the officers’ capital and income

          •     the morale of cunent serving officers in South Yorkshire and elsewhere
                would be affected by a decision not to support

          •     the Divisional Courts comments on the powers issue, and the
                implications of Heme Office advice

                the financial imps ct on the Authority

          •     the need to con:rol legal costs expenditure from public funds in a
                corresponding munner to the Legal Aid Board
oOut h    lui ^oi i i i c   ji   jet




   1.2        Outcome of Com m it"» fa r in g in July 1999

              The Stipendiary Magistrate concluded that there was a case to answer,
              and was not persuaded by the officers’ arguments on fsjbuse of process’ (ie
              in relation to the elapsed time since 1989, and that the level of public
              comment on the case, precluded a fair trial). This issibe is being pursued
              by the officers, and s. hearing with the Circuit Judge has been granted in
              December 1999.

   1.3         Applications fo r sue port

               The Authority's commitment to support ended at th(i conclusion of the
               committal proceedings Further applications are avvjaited in connection
               with the trial (scheduled for June 2000).

    1.4        Costs

    1.4.1 The present position is as follows:
                                                               £000         £000
                Costs to 5 February ,999                       279
                Costs to 20 July 199U                          326
                Costs in connection v/ith Judicial Review       64          669

                Chief Constable’s le f al costs                              100
                Police Authority lega. costs                                 186

                                                                             955

                This figure will redjce by approximately £100,000 if the Authority is
                allowed to recover VVT, and at this stage it takes no Account of reductions
                arising out of the coits draftsman’s review. In the per od to 5 February, he
                has put forward recommendations that the Authority seeks a reduction of
                £37,000 (13% ) in the former officers’ legal costs.

                The Authority has in total set aside £1m to cover ajsts already paid out
                and under review.

     1.4.2 Apart from clarifying the VAT issue the Authorfty is also seeking
           confirmation from tha Tax inspector that payment of legal costs does not
           constitute a taxable benefit for the former officers, This issue has only
           been raised recently by tax specialists consulted by the Authority. Case
           law on the subject is unclear The Authority’s leg ul advisers have put
           forward a strong cai;e to the Tax Inspector that there is no taxable benefit
           accruing. If the rulir.g is contrary to this, then subject to appeal there could
           be substantial additional costs for the Authority and/or the officers.

     1.4.3 The costs have so tar been funded from reserves, Options for the future
           include:

                 •     further calls on reserves
                 •     budget reductior.8
ooutn lorKsrure j t oec                                                            ULI     U                       r . u i




            •         raise additional cash via the precept
            •         seek contributions or funding from other sources

  1 4.4 If the former officers are tried but acquitted, or the ch arges against them
        are dismissed or otherwise do not proceed to trial in tthe Crown Court, an
        order for costs in their favour to be paid out of central funds will be made
        unless there are posi ive reasons for doing so eg whene their conduct has
        brought suspicion or themselves, or where there is ample evidence to
        support a conviction but they are acquitted on a techni dality.

                                                                                                       the judicial review
   1.4.5 Legal aid was not available to the officers for
         proceedings      1 ^ 0    Iin
                                     II     which
                                            W H V ll        they became involved;. nor wll it be available
         retrospectively in the criminal proceedings. Furthermare, legal aid would
                    r            .                                                  . __ M n l/in A bi iK fita n tia l
         only be made available to the officers upon their making substantial
         contributions
         W I I U I U U U U I I O from
                                   I I V I I I thoir       income andW Massets,
                                                   .......................... M - v w namely,
                                                                                       * , .      r _£
                                                                                                        for
                                                                                                        . . .
                                                                                                              every*
                                                                                                                       £3 or 'part
         thereof by which the average weekly disposable income exceeds £50, and
         the amount by which their disposable capital exceeds 113,000.                                                             W

   1 .5         Basis of the Author tv** application for support

             The facts of this cast relate to South Yorkshire, but th * principles behind it
             could apply anywher 3. This was the basis of the Diviniional Court hearing,
             Police officers need issurances that if they act in goodi faith in operational
             circumstances, then their Police Authority will suppi jrt them if they are
             challenged.

             In this context, it is a widely held precedent in bot public and private
             sectors that when a,i employee is engaged on his n srmal duties, but his
             actions result in losu, damage, or injury, then the e nployer will stand by
             him as long as the.e is no suggestion of deliberats or wilful action or
             neglect If there is a question of whether proper proc^dures were followed,
             this is an entirely jeparate matter to be dealt wi"     ilh under disciplinary
             procedures. This \/a s the process which commen 4;ed on Hillsborough,
              until ill health rules intervened. Police officers are    t 'employees’ - they
              are servants of the Crown. The equivalent of their      Employer  is therefore
                either the Crown or, locally, the Police Authority.

                It was on that basis that the Authority believed that t should stand by its
                former officers.

                A decision not to support could be rationalised on on|o of several grounds,
                which were debated by members:

                (i)       The availability of Legal Aid, albeit that the ormer officers would
                          have to make very substantial contributions from limited private
                          resources if I egal Aid was forthcoming;

                (ii)      The ability of the Courts to make costs award^ from central funds if
                          the officers were acquitted; and
oouin lorKSiure j i   oec                             ^ 1   UL i      • w11    I.w




                 The potential implications for Police Authority unds of supporting
         (in)
                 these cases to a full trial.
                                                                 irs to expend their
         The members felt, however, that asking retired officui
                                                               sts  incurred from the
         savings and most of tneir pension in meeting legal co
         bona fide performance of their duties would be viewe by serving officers
                                                                 former officer most
         as abdicating responsibility at the very time when s
         needed support. Set ing this precedent would, it was !elt, impact badly on
         the morale of the current force and the willingness of officers to put
         themselves in a position where safety critical decisio is have to be taken
         instantly. The case arising out of the Hillsborough Sitadium Disaster is all
         the more acute because nine years have passed beitween the day of the
         Disaster and the ccmmencement of the prosecution and because the
                                                               niution brought by the
         former officers had b ie n told there would be no prosed
          DPP.

          Nevertheless, membars are concerned about the finijincia! implications of
          this support for the existing Police budget and the refore imposed strict
          conditions on the level of representation it would fund and initially agreed
          funding only up until Committal, which remains the position. A trial has
           now been listed to bigin June 2000 with an estimate of 6-7 weeks. A pre-
          trial hearing has also been listed for December 1999 where the febuse of
           process" arguments will be re-argued before the trial judge.

           Estimates of the likely costs of proceeding to a full tr at have been sought
           from the former officers’ legal representatives but fsre clearly difficult to
           give before they ha\ e mapped out their trial strategy in detail. Indications
           are, however, that t ie total costs could be well into seven figures. The
           potential impact of this sort of additional expenditune on police budgets
           means that member j may be reluctant to approve a cr intinuation of support
           for the trial costs, without additional funds to min imise the impact on
            policing resources.

           The potential budgetary impact is substantial, if tinie case proceeds to
           trial and conceivatiy to other stages beyond that, In view of that, and
           the national implications for employers and Police officers, the
           Authority has resolved to ask the Home Secretary to consider
           whether additions support might be made avalilable to mitigate the
           costs for South Yorkshire residents.

            Separate discussions have been sought with the Poli :e Federation and the
            Superintendents' Association
ouuui    iu(KSiiiit   ji   oec                            zi   Utt        300        r . ui>




  PART 2 : Costs of s e ttlin g aersonal inivry claims

  2.1       This is a separate isiue. The Authority’s public liabil ity insurance cover
            had an indemnity limit of £8.5m at the time of the disaster. This limit
            together with the £ 4 n contributions made by other parties accepting a
            share of the liability towards the settlement of claims was exceeded in
            June of 1997. Since that time the Authority has had tc fund the settlement
            of outstanding claims including the Claimants’ legal ccsts. The position to
            date is as follows:-
                                                                                £m

            Payments made by the Authority in the                            2,227,000
              settlement of claims

            Reserves placed on outstanding claims                            S ^ OOQ

                                                                             7.305.0QQ


   2.2      The reserves represent 15 outstanding personal injury claims of which two
            claims have reserve s totalling £3.5m. This figure represents a substantial
            increase in the initial reserves placed on the two claims by the insurers
            when they were referred to the Authority following recant advice from the
            solicitors handling the claims concerning medical reassessment of the
            Claimants' life expectancies. In addition three "new" claims have been
            received from one fi/m of solicitors during the last throe months, the value
            of which they assesi at a total of £750,000. All three
            concerned, two of whom were previously unknown to
            Police, are alleging physical and psychiatric injuries e nd have obtained
            legal aid to bring ac.'ions against the Police. Limitation will be a major
             issue in each case but insufficient is known about the cases at the present
            time to enable an assessment of the value of the claims to be made.
            These developments have resulted in the Authority h aving to set aside an
             additional £2.4m in the 1998/99 accounts and the pomsibility of further
             claims being made cannot be excluded although it is now 10 years after
             the event.

    2.3      The Authority sepaiately wishes to explore the poss ihility of support
             towards the cost to the Authority of meeting the personal injury claims,
             When the insurancj indemnity limit of £8.5m was arr ved at in 1989 it was
             inconceivable that i my one incident involving police Officers could give rise
             to claims under a public liability policy exceeding tha* amount. Nothing on
             the scale of Hillsbc. ough had ever occurred and the disaster generated
             approximately 16,000 claims. Hillsborough has re w iitten the rules and will
             have caused all po ice authorities to review the limits of their public liability
             policies. South Yo;kshire Police Authority now have an indemnity limit
             under their policy cf £21 m and this is currently under review.
s>UUUi   l U l l N O l i i l C   Ji,   O C t                        Z i UCt   33   303      r . 1U




                                                                              Home Secretary the
   2 4          Th« Authority vrt*l e» to »xplor« w ith the
               possibility of:
                                                                               of settling personal
               (i)               direct flnancii 1 assistance toward# the cost
                                 Injury claima; and/or                         oval, to enable the
                (ii)             a capitalisation direction, with credit appn
                                 costs of settling the claim * to be spread.




     Bill Wilkinson
     Clerk and Treasurer
     21.10.99
