From:          R J Clifford
               ABC Unit
               Room 977 QAG
               273 3560

               19 March 1997

Mrs McDougall
OPPU

HILLSBOROUGH

Thank you for sending me a copy of your recent submission on Hillsborough.

2.      I am afraid we have been remiss in not reciprocating in respect of our submission
on the indirectly related matter of the Interdepartmental Working Group Report on Disasters
and Inquests, which was published last week. The report considers the relationships between
disaster inquiries and inquests and makes recommendations which would have the effect
of relieving a coroner of the need to hold an inquest where a pubic inquiry satisfactorily
dealt with the issues with which the coroner is concerned.

3.     I enclose for your information a copy of our submission of 17 December (which sets
out the background), together with a copy of the report (public copies are in HO corporate
colours and not dated), its covering letter, the press notice, and the Q&A brief (which
includes a brief reference to Hillsborough on page 2). I hope this is adequate.

4.     Some coroner representatives have expressed concern to us at the prospect of a fresh
inquest into the Hillsborough deaths. We have explained that this is not an issue at present,
and that in any case it would be a matter for the Attorney General. It would, however, be
helpful to continue to be kept informed of developments so that, among other things, we
can respond to coroner enquiries.




                                                   R J CLIFFORD
  FEEDBACK
  For addressees: Please circle response below and return copy of this page to the originator of the submission

  1        Bearing in mind the subject m atter, was the paper:       Too long      Too short    About the right
  length

 2         Was there: Too much detail        Too little detail   The right amount of detail

 3         W as the paper: Very clear      Clear    Not very clear     Not clear at all

  We would welcome any further comments you might have


From: Rick Evans                                                 cc        Home Secretary
      ABCU                                                                 Permanent Secretary
      Room 980 QAG                                                         Miss Sinclair, CCPD
      ® 273 3777                                                           Mr Morris
                                                                           Miss Paul, EPU
           December 1996                                                   Mr Bawtree, CEA
                                                                           Mr Granatt, CD
                                                                           Mr Bramley, LAB
                                                                           Mr Clifford, ABCU
                                                                           Mrs Bacon, ABCU
                                                                           Mr Rock
                                                                           Miss Whetsone


DISASTERS AND INQUESTS WORKING PARTY REPORT

Issue

Handling of the delayed publication of the report of the Working Group on Disasters and
Inquests, including consultation and prospective legislation.

Timing

2.     Pressing, having regard to currently revived interests in the Hillsborough disaster and
the restlessness of key lobbying groups/individuals.

Summary

3.     An interdepartmental working group set up in 1990 to consider the duplication
between public enquiries and coroners’ inquests produced a draft report which was
circulated to EDH in 1994. The report recommended amendments to primary and secondary
legislation to enable inquests to be adjourned pending any public enquiry, with limited
scope for them to be resumed on completion of the enquiry. This was to avoid unnecessary
duplication between the enquiry and the inquest. It was agreed that the report should be
published as a package with related documents produced by the Lord Chancellor’s
Department (about the form of enquiry), the Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
(consideration of criminal proceedings) and the Crown Office (the situation in Scotland).

4.    A final round of consultation was to be conducted at official level to agree public
consultation arrangements, but the Northern Ireland Courts Service sought to defer the
matter pending extended consideration of the inclusion of a description of the arrangements
in Northern Ireland. The matter is now coming to a head as a consequence of a new
television ’documentary’ about Hillsborough, and renewed action by key members of
pressure groups who are starting to probe for signs of progress.

5.    The delay has had the following effects:

       *        the report is now somewhat stale and out of date;

       *        although consultation on proposals for legislation was agreed two years ago,
                 the prospects for early legislation now seem remote;

       *        the limited proposals from the Working Party may seem disproportionate to
                 the time spent and an inappropriate response to the perceived needs;

       *        the association with the OGD papers increasingly lacks focus and purpose
                 (and their publication may reveal inconsistency in their application);

       *        the Scott inquiry has since reported and has raised more general questions
                 about the handling of enquiries.

7.     Nevertheless, undertakings have been given to publish the report and it would not
seem right to avoid these. There were no such undertakings, however, in respect of the
associated documents and these might, with advantage, now be left to one side. Moreover,
the renewed interest in Hillsborough provides the opportunity to respond with the findings
and the recommendations of the Working Party report, even if implementation is not
presently feasible. A copy of the report, as proposed for publication is at Annex A. A copy
of the associated papers not now recommended for publication is at Annex B.

Recommendation

8.    That you agree to the publication of the Working Party report, without the
accompanying OGD papers, under cover of a short explanatory letter which raises no
expectations of early action on the recommendations.

Consideration

9.     Following a string of disasters in the late 1980s, concerns were expressed at the
duplication between public inquiries and coroners’ inquests, involving re-hearing much the
same evidence, and adding to the grief of the bereaved and causing delays. A Home
Office-chaired interdepartmental working group was set up in November 1990 to investigate
this overlap and find solutions. This duly reported and made recommendations for changes
to the law (Coroners Act and Rules) which would provide a statutory basis for the
adjournment of inquests where a public inquiry was also set up, and would limit the
circumstances in which the inquest might be resumed. Such provisions are similar to those
where criminal proceedings are anticipated; or are in hand, and serve much the same
purpose.

10. In July 1994, the report was circulated to EDH with a recommendation for it to be
published for public consultation, together with two other documents: a note by the Lord
Chancellor on deciding the form of enquiry into a major disaster; and one by the Legal
Secretariat to the Law Officers on the inter-relationship between public inquiries and
criminal prosecutions. The case for legislation seems to have been accepted, and the
proposals were agreed, with a suggestion from the Lord Advocate’s Office that a similar
note by the Crown Office regarding the position in Scotland should be added.

 11.    Subject to the resolution of a minor legal point in the report, the way appeared clear
for arrangements to be made for publication, which included a further round of consultation
at official level to settle the list of consultees and a covering letter. Instead, the Northern
Ireland Court Service sought postponement of publication while consideration was given
to adding a similar statement on the arrangements in the province (then under review).
Attempts were made to bring this to a conclusion, but were unsuccessful, and the issue was
put to one side in the face of more immediate priorities.

 12. In recent months correspondence has been received from solicitors Michael Napier
(prominent in the Hillsborough disaster) and Louise Christian (acting on behalf of the
families in the ‘Marchioness’ disaster). They have been sent holding replies, but this was
never likely to satisfy them, and Napier is already pressing for action on the report to be
taken.

13. Although the report was essentially complete and ready to issue once NICS decided
whether or not to add to the "package", the passage of time had rendered the report out of
date and inaccurate, the prospects for the primary legislation needed had receded, and the
addition of the associated papers lacked coherence and was likely to raise questions as to
how far the package represented current Government policy and a full response to the range
of shortcomings which commentators had identified in dealing with disasters of this scale.
(This is characterised by a ’one stop shop’ disaster court which could dispense
compensation and bring the perpetrators of criminal offences to book at the same time as
establishing the cause of the disasters and how the individuals involved came to their
deaths.)

14. The timing of the publication is also an issue. For example, it was decided in July
1996 that no charges would be laid in the ‘Marchioness’ case. More recently, the television
programme on the Hillsborough disaster may renew criticism of coroners’ inquests as
inadequate to deal with large scale fatalities. While this is to some extent true, the reality
is that there is no opportunity for the legislation required to be promoted in the current
Parliament. Legislation concerning coroners is also liable to be controversial and there could
be no guarantee that attempts would not be made to abuse any attempts to amend coroner
law. This will mean that responses will be all the sharper, but the programme will provide
a convenient peg on which to hang the report if it is agreed that, while it should be
published, no action should be taken to implement the recommendation and expectations
of early progress should be dampened.


Handling/presentation issues

15.     The report is likely to be of interest to a limited audience and it is proposed to
circulate copies only to the local authority associations, ACPO and the Coroners’ Society,
together with Napier and Ms Christian. The main responses can be expected from the latter
and others more directly concerned with recent disasters. While these can be expected to
be hostile, the lapse of time is in itself likely to have lowered their realistic expectations.



RICK EVANS
         HOME OFFICE
         Constitutional & Community Policy Directorate
         Animals, Byelaws & Coroners Unit
         Room 980, 50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
         Tel: 0171 273 3777 Fax: 0171 273 2029

        Reference: CRS/96 13/3/1                                  10 March 1997



       The Clerk to the Association of County Councils
       The Clerk tothe Association of Metropolitan Authorities
       The Clerk tothe Association of District Authorities
       The Clerk tothe London Boroughs Association
       The Clerk tothe Association of London Authorities
       Association of Chief Officers of Police
       Hon Secretary, Coroners’ Society




Dear Sir/Madam

INTERDEPARTMENTAL WORKING GROUP REPORT ON DISASTERS AND
INQUESTS

Because of concern expressed about the overlap between public enquiries and coroners’
inquests, an interdepartmental working group was set up under Home Office chairmanship
in 1990. Its terms of reference were to consider the duplication of inquiries which result
when a major public enquiry is held into a civil disaster and the deaths in the disaster are
also investigated in a coroner’s inquest in England and Wales; and to make
recommendations. A copy of its report is enclosed.

Publication of the report has been delayed pending consideration of the possible inclusion
of consideration of what seemed to be related matters. In the event it was decided that it
would be inappropriate to appear to widen the scope of the report in this way and that the
original report should be issued. As a consequence of the delay in the publication, the
report has become a little out of date: where appropriate, the text has been updated by
means of annotations.

The working group comprised officials from the Home Office, the Department of Energy
(later DTI), the Health & Safety Executive, the Crown Prosecution Service, the
Department of Transport, the Treasury Solicitor’s Department and the Lord Chancellor’s
Department. Its investigations extended to the handling of the major disasters of the late
1980s (excluding technical statutory enquiries) and it took the views of the chairmen of
public enquiries into disasters and of those coroners who investigated deaths arising from
the same disasters.                             ,

The concern about duplication between enquiries and inquests centred on the re-hearing of
evidence and the prospect of adding grief to the bereaved and causing delays. The main
findings of the report concern the three options which the Working Group considered to
tackle these issues. The conclusion reached was that the only satisfactory solution was to
require the suspension of the inquest pending a public enquiry, and to provide for the
inquest to be resumed only on conclusion of the enquiry and only if the coroner was
satisfied that there was good cause to resume it. Such a procedure, which is broadly
similar to existing provisions where there are extant or anticipated criminal proceedings,
would, if accepted, require changes both to the primary legislation (the Coroners Act
1988) and to the Coroners Rules 1984 before effect could be given to the proposals.

The Government believes that the recommended procedure will provide real relief to the
bereaved while ensuring that both the individual deaths, and the wider circumstances of
the disaster, can be properly investigated. Suspension of the inquest would also save
unnecessary expenditure in time and resources, and would enable deaths to be registered
at an earlier stage. Only in exceptional circumstances might the inquest need to be
resumed.

There is no immediate prospect of finding sufficient Parliamentary time to give effect to
the working group’s recommendations, but the situation will be kept under review. Any
comments which recipients may wish to offer as to the findings and recommendations of
the working group would, of course, be welcome.

                                                   Yours faithfully




                                                                 \TCUa S


                                                   RICK EVANS
                                                   HEAD OF ANIMALS, BYELAWS
                                                   & CORONERS UNIT
                     000/97

10 March 1997                                                 0171 273 4640

     DISASTER INQUIRIES : WORKING GROUP REPORT PUBLISHED

Plans to remove the overlap between public inquiries and coroners’ inquests
following civil disasters are set out in a report published by the Home Office
today.

An inter-departmental working group was set up following a series of
disasters in the late 1980s to address concerns that public inquiries and
inquests overlapped.

At present, an inquest needs to be held into all deaths in major disasters even
though a public inquiry may also have been set up. A coroner can adjourn
the inquest but has to resume it after the public inquiry.

This duplication prolongs the investigation process. And victims and their
families face having to repeat the same evidence - causing them additional
distress.

The Report of the Disasters and Inquests Working Group concluded by
recommending that:

      “Where a public inquiry headed by a judge is established by the
      Government, the Lord Chancellor may issue a certificate to the coroner
      notifying him of the establishment of the inquiry whose terms of
      reference and other factors ensure that the inquiry will constitute
      sufficient investigation into deaths arising from disaster. The inquest
      should be adjourned pending the conclusion of the inquiry, in the
      absence of reasons to the contrary.

      ‘Twenty-eight days after the conclusion of the relevant public inquiry or
      (perhaps) after the publication of the inquiry report, the coroner may
      resume the inquest but only in the most exceptional circumstances."
 These recommendations would require changes to the Coroners Act and
 Coroners Rules. The Government intends to take this forward when there is
 Parliamentary time available.

The report was produced by the working group in 1994 and was followed up
by further consultation with Government Departments. Copies of the report
have been sent to local authority associations, the Association of Chief Police
Officers and the Coroners’ Society. The Home Office welcomes any
comments on the findings of the working group.

NOTES FOR EDITORS

1. Media copies of ‘The Report of the Disasters and Inquests Working
   Group’ are available from the Home Office Press Office on 0171 273
   4640.

2. Non-media copies are available from Constitutional and Community Policy
Directorate, Room 972, Home Office, Queen Anne’s Gate, London SW1H
9AT. Tel: 0171 273 4000.

3. The working group’s terms of reference were:

        To consider the duplication of inquiries which results when a major
       public inquiry is held into a civil disaster and the deaths in the disaster
       are also investigated in a coroner’s inquest in England and Wales; and
       to make recommendations.’’

4. The working group was only concerned with inquiries undertaken by a
judge or Senior Queen’s Counsel (both statutory and non-statutory), not
technical statutory inquiries.

5. The group consisted of officials from the Home Office, the Department of
Energy (later the Department of Trade and Industry), the Health and Safety
Executive, the Crown Prosecution Service, the Department of Transport, the
Treasury Solicitors Department and the Lord Chancellor’s Department.

5. It was chaired by the Home Office and reported to the Home Secretary.

6. Home Office news releases are available on the Internet:
                 www.coi.gov.uk/coi/depts/GHO/GHO.html
                    THE REPORT OF
      THE DISASTERS AND INQUESTS WORKING GROUP




                     HOME OFFICE




January 1997
   THE REPORT OF THE DISASTERS AND INQUESTS WORKING
                        GROUP
                                               note by the Home Office


Introduction

An interdepartmental working group was set up in November 1990 to consider the overlap
between coroners’ inquests and public inquiries into disasters. The terms of reference of the
working group were:

          "to consider the duplication of inquiries which results when a major public inquiry
          is held into a civil disaster and the deaths in the disaster are also investigated in a
          coroner’s inquest in England and Wales; and to make recommendations."

2.     The working group held seven meetings and considered the views of Government
departments which have experience of disaster inquiries. The working group was composed
of officials from the Home Office, the Department of Energy (later Department of Trade &
Industry), the Health & Safety Executive, the Crown Prosecution Service, the Department
of Transport, the Treasury Solicitor’s Department, and the Lord Chancellor’s Department.
It sought the views of the chairmen of public inquiries into disasters which occurred within
the previous six years1; and also the views of the coroners who investigated the deaths
arising from the same disasters.

3.     As explained in paragraphs 13 and 14 below, the working group was not concerned
with technical statutory inquiries but only with inquiries undertaken by a judge or Senior
Queen’s Counsel.

4.    The report of the working group sets out the problems which have been identified,
together with the various options for a solution.

The problem

5.     Public inquiries following a disaster may be ordered on a statutory basis under
legislation which enables witnesses to be compelled, the production of papers, and the taking
of evidence on oath: for example, under the Regulation of Railways Act 18712; Merchant
Shipping Acts 1894, 1970 and 19793; the Police Act 1964; Civil Aviation Act 19824; and


The six years before 1990.


This Act will shortly be repealed by the Railway Safety (Miscellaneous Provisions) Regulations 1997. In future, inquiries into railway
accidents will be held under the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974.

These Acts have been consolidated into the Merchant Shipping Act 1995.


under the Civil Aviation (Investigation of Air Accidents) Regulations 1989 and the Air Navigation (Investigation of Air Accidents involving
Civil and Military Aircraft or Installations) Regulations 1986 since superceded, or due to be supeceded, by regulations omitting provisions
for a public inquiry.


                                                                 1
the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974. Alternatively, a public inquiry may be
established on a non-statutoiy basis. In such inquiries, there is no power to compel witnesses
and evidence is not given on oath. In both cases, the terms of reference of the inquiry will
usually require investigation of the cause of the disaster and the surrounding circumstances
and seek recommendations to avoid a recurrence.

6.      Where a body lies within his jurisdiction, the corona: also has the statutpiy duty to
inquire into any violent or unnatural death (section 8 of the Coroners Act 1988). The
coroner’s inquest has a more limited function than that which is usual for a public inquiry.
The purpose of the inquest is defined as establishing who the deceased was; and how, when
and where the deceased came by his death; and to ascertain the particulars required for death
registration purposes (section 11, Coroners Act 1988). The Coroners Rules 1984 specifically
prohibit the coroner and the jury from expressing opinions on any other matters (rule 36(2))
and from determining any matters of criminal liability on the part of a named person or civil
liability (rule 42). A coroner, who believes that action should be taken to prevent the
recurrence of similar fatalities, may announce at the inquest that he is reporting the matter
in writing to the person or authorities who may have power to take such action and he m a y
report the matter accordingly (rule 43).

7.      When a death occurs and is reported to the coroner, the body falls under his
jurisdiction until he releases it to relatives for funeral purposes. It is the coroner’s
responsibility to decide whether a post-mortem examination and other tests are necessary and
to arrange for these to take place. This usually occurs within the first day or two o f the
death being reported but, in the case of disasters involving the loss of many lives, this may
take longer. On the conclusion of his investigation, the coroner is under a statutory duty to
send a certificate to the registrar of deaths, giving the details of the conclusion of the inquest
(section .11(7),                 1988). This enables the death(s) to be registered.

8.     The overlap between any inquest and a public inquiry arises when the coroner
investigates how the deceased died. The coroner’s responsibilities are focused more on the
death of individuals, compared with a public inquiry which is likely to take a broader look
at the causes, with the aim of making recommendations to avoid recurrence. It is a matter
for the individual coroner to decide the width of his own inquiries as to how the death
occurred but inevitably, as recent disasters have shown, there can be a considerable overlap,
so that the inquest hears much of the same evidence as the earlier public inquiry.

9.      The duplication is compounded by the fact that the law requires an inquest to be held
with a jury, both where the death is notifiable under another Act to a Government department
(such as an Inspectorate) and in cases where "the death occurred in circumstances, the
continuance or possible recurrence of which is prejudicial to the health and safety of the
public or any section of the public" (section 8(3), Coroners Act 1988). In the cases of
disasters, if the former criterion does not apply, the latter almost certainly will. The
presence of a jury, combined with the limitations on introducing dommpintary pviHenre to
material which is unlikely to be disputed together with the right of properly interested
persons to object to the admission of documentary evidence (rule 37), means that most
coroners will consider it necessary to call witnesses to give oral evidence at the inquest, even
though the same individuals may have already given evidence at the inquiry.


                                                2
  10.    More than one investigation can also result in competition for the same pieces of
  evidence. This can give rise to conflict between the two forms of inquiry

  11.    Another result of this duplication is to prolong the inquiry process. Usually coroners
  will open the inquest to hear evidence of identification and possibly evidence of the medical
  cause of death and then adjourn the inquest, resuming after the conclusion of the public
  inquiry. Where criminal proceedings are also instituted which relate to the disaster, the
  coroner may be required to continue to adjourn until these are completed (section 16,
  Coroners Act 1988). But he does have the option of deciding not to resume the inquest in
  these cases.

  12.    A system in which the same matters are gone into on more than one occasion delays
  the completion of the inquiry process and can cause distress to the relatives of whose who
  have died. Those who may be called as witnesses to give broadly the same evidence to an
  inquiry, a criminal trial and an inquest will also be subject to stress, particularly if they are
  alleged to have been at fault. Furthermore where matters are gone into on more than one
  occasion, evidence can change and differences of emphasis emerge; this can only add to the
  tension. Duplication is also expensive in terms of time and resources.

  Definition of public inquiry

  13.     As indicated in paragraph 3, there are various types of inquiry that may be held into
  a disaster. When considering the overlap between inquests and inquiries the working group
  concluded that a distinction could be drawn between, on the one hand, the large scale public
  inquiry, chaired by a judge (or a senior Queen’s Counsel) often sitting with expert assessors;
  and, on the other hand, the technical inquiry undertaken by an appropriate inspectorate
  Examples of the latter are the Marine Accident Investigation Branch (under the Merchant
  Shipping Acts5), the Air Accidents Investigation Branch (under the Civil Aviation Act
  19826) and HM Railway Inspectorate, which is now part of the Health & Safety Executive
  (under the Regulation of Railways Act 18717). In addition, the Health and Safety at Work
  etc Act 1974 empowers the Health and Safety Commission to direct the Health and Safety
  Executive (or any other person) to carry out an investigation in respect of incidents which
  the Commission thinks should be investigated.

  14.    These technical inquiries are often held in private, although their reports are usually
  made public. The aim of such inquiries is to ascertain the cause of the disaster and to make
  recommendations to avoid a future recurrence whereas the inquest investigates the
  circumstances leading to individual deaths. In such cases, the coroner usually adjourns the
; inquest until the conclusion of the technical inquiry and then resumes. Under the Regulation
  of Railways Act 1871, coroners can ask the Secretary of State for Transport to appoint an



  These Acts have been consolidated by the Merchant Shipping Act 1995.

  and Council Directive 94/56 which establishes the fundamental principles governing the investigation of civil aviation accidents and
  incidents.


  See footnote 2, page 1.


                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                      I




  assessor to assist at inquests into railway fatalities8. The assessor makes a report to the
  Secretary of State which will then be published. In practice, the experience of both the
  Department of Transport and the Health & Safety Executive is that there need be no great
  overlap between the technical inquiry and the inquest, provided that the inquest is not
  resumed until after the inquiry has been completed. It was therefore decided to exclude those
  technical inquiries from consideration. It has been suggested, however, that in the
  Manchester Airport Disaster of 1985, a degree of overlap and consequential confusion did
f occur. The group consider that similar problems should be reduced to a m in im u m by
  improved communications between the technical investigators and the coroner9. In the
  following discussion, references to public inquiry and inquiry chairman refer only to those
  public inquiries headed by a member of the judiciary.

   Possible solutions

   15.     The working group’s consideration of disasters and their inquiries has shown that each
   was very different and gave rise to different problems. Therefore, solutions must be
   sufficiently flexible to deal with a variety of circumstances.

  16.   The working group has identified various options which might resolve the overlap
  between public inquiries and inquests. These fall into three broad categories:-

   ;        A         subsuming the inquiry into the inquest;

            B         subsuming the inquest into the inquiry;

          •C          retaining both the public inquiry and the inquest but limiting the role of the
                       inquest, which can be achieved by various means.
             ■■                                           j,. ■■: ■                           '.. >              '''Mi . ?;r; , ~ :
                                    ' v f t c - 'H 1 .K .fcY                     Y K \y ,'.5 ;:v
  A         INQUEST SUBSUMING INQUIRY
. Y ..;                                                                   ■   X > iv:y             - ' ■ 'f:Vv            . f-V           ■   :

  17.    Coroners already have a wide experience of investigating unnatural deaths and of
  dealing with relatives of the deceased. To take advantage of this expertise, it has been
  suggested that the remit of the coroners inquest could be broadened to include the public
  inquiry aspect. In addition to removing the need for two separate inquiries, this solution
  would have the advantage of speed in that the local coroner is on the spot and already h as
  a duty to investigate individual deaths. To handle a disaster inquiry, however, he would
  need additional support staff which would have financial implication for the local authority.
  Also, the time involved in handling such an inquiry might present difficulties for part-time
  coroners (the majority) who combines the duties with a private legal or medical practice.

  18.    If this broader role were given to the coroner’s inquest, the present requirement to
  hold such inquests with a jury might not be the most effective way of reaching conclusions


  See footnote 2, page 1. Once this Act is repealed, no statutory provision will exist for the appointment of coroners' assesors.

  The Civil Aviation (Investigation of Air Accidents and Incidents) Regulations 1996 expressly provide for this.



                                                                      4
    on the safety aspects of the inquiry and making recommendations to avoid a future
    occurrence. An alternative to a jury might be a power to appoint lay assessors, with
    particular expertise, to assist the coroner. This would, however, represent a significant
    change in the character of an inquest.

    19.     In addition, apart from the present legal limitations on the function of an inquest
    which would need to be overcome, it seems unlikely that coroners would be generally
    perceived as having the sort of expertise and stature required for heading an inquiry into a
    disaster. Also, as the coroner’s jurisdiction derives from where the body lies, the identity
    of the coroner required to investigate the disaster would be determined by the location of the
    disaster. Thus, under the law as it stands, the Secretary of State would be unable to choose
    the coroner to conduct an inquiry.

    20.    The working group concluded that Ministers would probably wish to retain discretion
    to choose the person best qualified for the task in appointing chairmen of public inquiries.

    21.     In order to meet these disadvantages, it has been suggested that the Secretary of State
    might be given power to appoint a "super-coroner" from a panel to hear inquests arising from
    difficult and/or sensitive cases and perhaps to take on a wider investigative role in the case
    of disasters, y y ^ - . y ' ; J    y -'v y y y ^                    ...


    22.     A panel of super-coroners might consist of experienced coroners or judges (possibly
    former coroners). Although High Court judges already have an ex officio power to exercise
    the jurisdiction of a coroner, it has been suggested that such a panel should aim wider and
.   include circuit judges.
■   Y^Y     Y V Y ' Y V . :~i'   I s l J ; .‘V ■ Y   Y'Y   ; ' Y \ :Y Y Y : x YY Y . ' y Y' ; ; Y Y Y   Y- Y" '

    23.    While this option meets some of the disadvantages mentioned above, it does present
    certain difficulties. None of these is insuperable. For example, it would involve changes
    in the way in which inquests were financed as well as problems in determining who should
    be appointed to a panel of super-coroners. In addition, as there would inevitably be a delay
    in deciding whether and whom to appoint as a super-coroner in a particular case, the person
    concerned would not be on the spot to deal with the immediate decisions which are required
    on post-mortem examinations and the disposal of bodies. Although, in theory, the coroner
    in whose jurisdiction the disaster occurred could undertake the preliminary work and the
    super-coroner could deal with the later stages, there is at present no distinction in law
    between these two stages. To create this sort of two-stage process would require
    considerable amendments to the legislation. The requirement to hold an inquest with a jury
    would still remain, although this could be removed. In addition, for the reasons given in
    paragraph 19, Ministers would not necessarily wish to be limited to appointing a super­
    coroner to investigate a disaster.

     B      INQUIRY SUBSUMING INQUEST

     24.     This option would again avoid the need for two separate inquiries and ensure that the
     evidence was heard only once. The appropriate Government Minister would choose the
     chairman of the inquiry. Combining the inquest with the inquiry could be achieved either
     by the inquiry chairman additionally taking on the function of the coroner, or, alternatively,
     the local coroner could sit with the inquiry chairman to hear evidence relevant to his

                                                                                      5
function. This option does present various practical and legal difficulties.

Disposal of the bodies

25.    As in the super-coroner option, an inquiry chairman is unlikely to be in place quickly
enough to deal with the immediate decisions, such as post-mortem examinations and issue
of disposal certificates. This could still be dealt with by the local coroner sitting alongside
the inquiry chairman.               .

Procedure and evidence

26.     The working group concluded that this proposal presented insuperable legislative
problems in the case of non-statutory inquiries. If a public inquiry were to subsume the role
of an inquest it would be necessary for that inquiry to follow all the procedural requirements
and duties imposed under coronal law. In the case of non-statutory inquiries, there is no
power to compel witnesses, whereas a coroner has power to subpoena witnesses who give
evidence on oath.

27.     Coroners are under a statutory duty to furnish the particulars required for death
registration purposes, whereas an inquiry chairman is not. It would not be possible to
legislate to impose such a duty on a chairman of a non-statutory inquiry.

28.     A consequence of this option would be that a jury would be required for the combined
public inquiiy/inquest. Whereas this role in relation to the inquest is clear and well
established, it is difficult to see a justification for the involvement of juries in the public
inquiry process. If this option were to be taken forward, it would therefore probably be
necessary to legislate to remove the requirement to hold inquests of this sort with a jury
when they were combined with a public inquiry.

29.     A combined approach would completely alter the format of the inquest. This is an
inquisitorial process with the coroner having responsibility for deciding which witnesses to
call, determining their order of attendance, and leading the questioning. Certain categories
of persons have a right to be notified of inquest arrangements and to examine witnesses, but
legal aid is not available. A combined inquiry and inquest with the coroner and the inquiry
chairman could give rise to conflict as to who had the final decision on what evidence to
call.10                             ; ir m-. 'r

30.     Inquiries tend to be multi-adversarial hearings11. The inquest is focused on
establishing the facts about individual deaths but the inquiry will not necessarily need to
obtain such detailed information. The working group recognises that relatives can benefit
considerably from hearing such details about their loved ones. In Scotland, the Piper Alpha
inquiry combined the functions of an inquest and inquiry. Many weeks were spent at the
beginning of the inquiry dealing with the identities of the bodies etc. Whilst there were


This approach to enquiries was called into question in the Scott Report, where departure from some of the Salmon principles was justified
by the need to avoid too much of an adversarial approach.

See footnote 10.


                                                                6
undoubted benefits, particularly as far as the relatives were concerned, the consideration by
the inquiry of the wider issues was thereby delayed.

31.     The prime objective of the inquiry is to establish the cause of a disaster and to ensure
that is it not repeated. If this task were combined with the inquest process, there is a risk
that safety matters would get overshadowed.

32.      Finally, an individual death associated with the disaster may not have been caused by
it: for example, a sudden heart attack unrelated to the incident or a murder carried out during
the disaster. In these circumstances, a full inquest into such deaths would be necessary.

C      LIMITING THE ROLE OF THE INQUEST

33.     There are advantages in retaining the involvement of the coroner to deal with the
issuing of disposal certificates, inquiries into individual deaths and the supply of information
to the registrar of deaths. One option is to retain his role but to limit it in such a ways as
to avoid overlap with any public inquiry. This could be achieved in three ways.

(i)            Admitting the Inquiry report as documentary evidence at the inquest

34.    Under the Coroner’s Rules, a coroner may only admit documentary evidence at the
inquest if it is unlikely to be disputed and no properly interested person objects to its
admission. This provision, together with a jury requirement means that, in general, coroners
tend to call witnesses and hear evidence orally which has already been presented to an
inquiry. If the rules were changed to permit the admission of the inquiry report as
documentary evidence, this would avoid the need to re-hear such evidence.

35.    The coroner, however, would need discretion to allow for two circumstances where
he might not wish to admit the report: where contradictory evidence is presented at the
inquiry, or where new evidence emerges.                            v

36.     Giving the coroner discretion would provide the opportunity for disputes (eg where
relatives seek a re-hearing of the evidence). This could lead to judicial reviews. Thus, this
solution would not necessarily lead to any change from the present practice.

37.    In addition, an inquiry report which was accepted as documentary evidence and was
the only evidence available could not be regarded as having reached conclusions "beyond
reasonable doubt". This would preclude the returning of an "unlawful killing" verdict which
the courts have held requires the criminal standard of proof. It would increase the likelihood
of objections to admission of such evidence.

(ii)           Limiting the coroner’s role by statute

38.     Where a public inquiry has been undertaken into a disaster, the coroner’s role in such
cases might be limited by statute to determining who the deceased were; when and where
they died; and the medical cause of death - sufficient to enable the coroner to fulfil the death
registration function. Any additional information on the causes of the disaster which led to
the death would be ascertained by the public inquiry. Possibly a new category of verdict

                                               7
  might be used (eg "traumatic death” or death arising from a particular disaster).

  39.     The working group concluded that the disadvantage of this approach would be its
  inflexibility. It would be necessary to provide that the limitation on the resumption of the
  inquest did not apply to deaths caused by other facts unconnected with the disaster. This
  would present practical difficulties since coroners would necessarily need to make some
  inquiries before deciding whether or not to resume the inquest. Also, it could preclude the
  coroner from initiating an investigation if fresh evidence emerged after the public inquiry was
  completed. ■,                                         ■    ■ ..-v

  (iii)          Adjournment

  40.    The Coroners Act 1988 already provides procedures to avoid an overlap between a
  criminal investigation and an inquest. Section 16 provides that a coroner shall adjourn an
  inquest if he is informed by a Clerk to the Justices that someone has been charged with
  murder, manslaughter or infanticide of the deceased, or certain Road Traffic offences, or if
  adjournment is requested by the Director of Public Prosecutions because a person has been
  charged with an offence (whether or not involving the death of a person other than the
  deceased) alleged to have been committed in circumstances connected with the death.

  41.     At the conclusion of the criminal proceedings, the coroner has discretion to resume
  the inquest (ie. he may resume the adjourned inquest if, in his opinion, there is sufficient
  cause to do so). If he does resume, the law provides that the finding of the inquest musit not
  be inconsistent with the outcome of the criminal proceedings. If he does not resume, he
  supplies the Registrar with details of the outcome of the criminal process. The general
  practice is for coroners to decide not to resume such inquests on the grounds that there has
  already been a public airing of all the issues at a criminal trial.

  42.     One option, therefore, would be to provide for the adjournment of an inquest when
  a public inquiry has been initiated and to limit the circumstances in which it could be
  resumed, following the completion of the inquiry. Such an approach would need to be
  flexible to take account of the need to investigate those deaths linked to the disaster but not
  necessarily directly attributable to it (eg. natural or suspicious deaths). There are various
  ways in which this object could be achieved.

  Securing the adjournment of the inquest

  43.     The working group recognised that the coroner would have a vital role to play in
  arranging post-mortem examinations of the victims of such disasters, issuing the disposal
  certificates for burial or cremation, and possibly opening the inquest to take identification and
  medical evidence. All this may take place either before any public inquiry has begun or
  during its early stages. It would be usual for such inquests to be adjourned by the coroner
  until after the public inquiry has been completed but there is no legal requirement to do so.
  A mechanism could be provided to ensure that a coroner did adjourn the inquest in such
■ circumstances.                 .

  44. While the working group was agreed that such a procedure should only apply to
  public inquiries headed by a judicial figure, defining the type of inquiry to which any

                                                  8
adjournment provision would apply is likely to present considerable difficulties in legislative
terms. It would need to include both statutory and non-statutory inquiries but to exclude
technical inquiries where there is apparently no problem of overlap. In order to overcome
this difficulty, rather than just informing the coroner that an inquiry had been established,
one possible approach would be to provide for a specific certification procedure. When a
public inquiry is established, on being satisfied, bearing in mind the terms of reference of
the inquiry and any other factors, that the inquiry will constitute sufficient investigation into
the deaths arising from a disaster, the appropriate Secretary of State or the Lord Chancellor
could certify that the inquest should be adjourned pending the conclusion of the inquiry in
the absence of reasons to the contrary. This would parallel the provisions in criminal cases.

45.     Since various Government departments might be involved from time to time in
establishing a public inquiry into a disaster, or be the subject of criticism at such an inquiry,
the working group concluded that there would be difficulties in imposing the certification role
on the appropriate Secretary of State. The Lord Chancellor was considered. Such a function
would fit in with the guidance which the Lord Chancellor offered to Cabinet colleagues in
1991 when he recommended that, when considering the establishment of an inquiry chaired
by a judicial figure, the Lord Chancellor should be consulted. As he would already be
addressing such issues, a requirement to consider certifying that any related inquest must be
adjourned would seem to be a natural extension of his role.             a-

46.     It would also be possible to legislate to enable the death to be registered at this stage
(as in criminal cases) and so reduce the distress caused to relatives who, at present, have to
await the conclusion of the inquest before such formalities can he completed.

Limiting the resumption of the inquest

47.     Coroners already have an inherent power to adjourn but, without a legislative
provision, they would be bound to resume and complete the inquest after the conclusion of
the inquiry. One option would be to limit the circumstances in which the coroner would
resume the inquest after a public inquiry. This could be achieved by giving limited
discretion on whether to resume to:

       (a)     the inquiry chairman;

       (b)     the coroner.

(a)    The inquiry chairman

48. ; Instead of the coroner deciding which deaths should be subject to an inquest,
responsibility for this decision could be placed with the public inquiry chairman. This option
would involve placing a statutory duty upon the inquiry chairman to consider and to reach
a conclusion as to whether each death resulted from the disaster; only those deaths not
attributable to the disaster or where there was doubt would be remitted to the coroner for
determination by an inquest. But the coroner and not the inquiry chairman would have heard
identification and medical evidence at the opening of the inquest. Therefore, it would be
necessary to impose a statutory duly upon the coroner, when adjourning an inquest pending
the conclusion of a public inquiry, to submit a report to the inquiry chairman giving details

                                                9
 of any medical evidence which he had heard at the opening of the inquest.

49. This approach would involve the inquiry chairman effectively acting as a coroner in
the cases of those deaths attributable to the disaster. In these circumstances, it would be
necessary for the inquiry chaiiman to hear evidence on the same footing as a coroner (ie.
power to summon witnesses and evidence to be given on oath etc). White this would be
unlikely to cause difficulties in the case of statutory inquiries to which these provisions
generally apply, it would be necessary also to confer these powers upon non-statutory
inquiries.                            i. -'naci-v
';    I':-' v1. ■ ’i'J ' i'i eff.;,'" -   M? -"v        I;* M     '-M*: I . . M:               -:• ••    -..r;/'.';

50.    After the inquiry chairman had reached a decision as to which deaths were the result
of the disaster, there would remain the need to inform the registrar of deaths. This could
be achieved in two ways:

               (i)            by imposing a statutory duty on the inquiry chairman to notify the registrar
                              of those deaths which had been attributed to the disaster;           •

                              by requiring the inquiry chairman, by statute, to remit all deaths to the
                              coroner and to direct him to return a verdict that x deaths were due to the
                              disaster, leaving y deaths to be investigated by the coroner. In these
                              circumstances, the statutory duly to inform the registrar would be imposed on
                              the coroner alone.

51.     Where the death was a natural one unrelated to the disaster, this would have been
established by the post-mortem examination ordered by the coroner and the death would have
been registered in the normal way, without the need for an inquest. Where there were
suspicions of foul play, it would be open to the inquiry chairman to refer the matter to the
police for investigation.                                     t s*

52.     The need to give all inquiry chairman various powers and to impose statutory duties
upon them and to obtain fall evidential equivalency between a coroner’s court and an inquiry
in reaching the conclusion as to how the deceased met his death would mean that this option
would involve making public inquiries statutory in all cases where Ministers wished to
prevent a public inquiry from overlapping with an inquest. The various existing pieces of
legislation governing public inquiries into different types of accident (eg. rail, shipping,
aircraft, offshore mineral working, health and safety etc) could be amended appropriately.
In the case of all other inquiries, consideration could be given either to amending the
Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921, or to enacting new legislation.

53. »The 1921 Act was last used in 196612to set up the inquiry to investigate the Aberfan
disaster. The Salmon Report into Tribunals of Inquiry (1966) recommended that the 1921
Act should "always be confined to matters of vital public importance concerning which there
is something in the nature of nationwide crisis of confidence". Serious as many disasters are,
they do not necessarily always raise issues which would satisfy the Salmon Report criteria!
     ■ ■ J ..                V            "M'i M M'ts     MiOi;   Mfi': ?•,        ' -MM'':;            ...
                     ■                    .             - ■       -                     ‘                             ______
               ■;■■■ -MM-.. ■/ . ■ ■,.!,                                                                       ,
        1990, the 1921 legislation has been used on at least two more occasions.
     54. Any legislation which required the amendment of the 1921 Act would be of significant
     constitutional importance and would be controversial. One of the aspects of the 1921 Act
     which is perceived as a major disincentive to its use is the requirement to obtain a resolution
     of both Houses before the power to set up a Tribunal can be exercised, which Salmon
     recommended should be retained. The Wot                                 that any option which
     was based on a requirement to amend the 1921 Act would be cumbersome, wide-ranging and
     controversial.

     55.     A general power in legislation to enable the Secretary of State to set up a public
     inquiry into disasters would be a simpler option13. It would, however, be a major and
     far-reaching piece of legislation to tackle what is a fairly tightly defined, though important,
     problem. Legislating to provide a general power for Ministers to set up public inquiries
     would inevitably lead to an expectation that public inquiries would be set up more frequently
     than at present. And, while it would still be possible for Ministers to choose to establish
     public inquiries on a non-statutory basis, the existence of a statutory power would make it
     more difficult for them to take that option. If Ministers decided, nevertheless, to set up a
     non-statutory inquiry rather than a statutory inquiry, the present risk of overlap between the
     inquest and inquiry would remain.

     (b)      The coroner

     56.     As in criminal cases, a coroner could be given discretion to resume the inquest
     following the conclusion of the public inquiry if, in his opinion, there was sufficient cause
     to do so. Alternatively, this discretion could be tightly circumscribed to provide that an
     inquest may only be resumed where the coroner is of the opinion that the death of a
     particular individual has not been the subject of sufficient inquiry (for example, where fresh
     evidence cast doubt on the view previously taken of the identity of the deceased or indicated
     that the death may not have been caused by the disaster or on some other ground which did
     not duplicate the work of the public inquiry). In either case, this could be given added force
     by Home Office advice (in the form of a circular) to the effect that where a public inquiry
     has conducted an investigation into the circumstances of the deaths as part of its work, the
     coroner should consider carefully whether there was a very strong justification for resuming
     the inquest.

     57.     The risk in either option would be that the coroner might decide to resume the
     inquest unnecessarily or be subjected to considerable pressure to do so by, for example,
     relatives of victims who were dissatisfied with the result of the public inquiry and were
     seeking a second opportunity to go over all the evidence.

     58. , As in the case of adjournments for criminal proceedings, it would be necessary to
     impose a statutory duty upon the coroner to notify the registrar of deaths of the outcome of
     the public inquiry in cases where he decided not to resume the inquest. The Minister
     responsible for setting up the public inquiry could require the inquiry chairman, perhaps as


13   However, a general power, if ever pursued, would need to take account of the terms of the EC Directive relating to the investigation of air
     accidents, in order to ensure that nothing was done which might be regarded as incompatible with that Directive. The Directive provides
     for the creation of a permanent independent air accident investigation body bound to report in the shortest possible time on relevant air
     accidents and serious accidents. Anything which reduces the role of that body or delays its ability to report oh time may not be appropriate.


                                                                     11
part of the inquiry’s terms of reference or the chairman’s terms of appointment, to notify the
coroner of the outcome; otherwise it would be necessary to impose a statutory duty upon the
inquiry chairman (of both statutory and non-statutory inquiries) to notify the coroner.

59.     In order to ensure that relatives had time to draw any relevant information to the
attention of the coroner, the coroner could be required to reach a decision on whether or not
to resume an inquest after an inquiry, not earlier than 28 days after the completion of the
inquiry or (perhaps) the publication of its report.

60.     Where he did decide to resume the inquest, the coroner could be required to seek
directions from the public inquiry chairman on the conduct of the inquest to further assist in
the avoidance of duplication with the inquiry.

61.    Consideration could also be given to removing the requirement to hold such resumed
inquests with a jury; and to empowering the coroner to admit the inquiry report as
documentary evidence. These changes could assist in reducing the length of any inquest
heard after a public inquiry and in reducing the elements of duplication. :

Other options

62.     The working group also considered whether the decision to remit inquiries into deaths
arising from a disaster to the coroner should be vested in a third party, such as the
Secretary of State for the department which established the inquiry, or to the Lord
Chancellor. But the working group rejected this option on the grounds that the involvement
of the Secretary of State in such a decision would attract criticisms of potential conflict of
interest. Also, in the case of the Minister or the Lord Chancellor, advice from the inquiry
chairman would be relied on in reaching a decision.

Review of Decision      s

63 .    If the relatives of a victim of a disaster felt aggrieved at the ways the discretion not
to resume an inquest was exercised in a particular case, such a decision would be subject to
judicial review.                                                              - v- : - .

64.     In cases where a decision had been taken not to hold an inquest, or an inquest had
been held and concluded, it is possible that fresh evidence might emerge at a later date which
would indicate that an inquest or a fresh inquest ought to be held. To cater for these
circumstances, it would be necessary to preserve the powers contained in section 13 of the
Coroners Act 1988. These enable an application to be made to the High Court, with the
authority of the Attorney-General, for an inquest to be held or, if one has been held, for the
inquisition to be quashed and a fresh inquest ordered. Such an application may be made by
the coroner as well as by other interested parties.

Recommendations

65.    The working group considered that option A (the inquest subsuming the inquiry,
including the "super-coroner" variation) would fetter the discretion of the Secretary of State
in choosing the best person to chair a public inquiry into a disaster: and that option B
(subsuming the inquest into the inquiry) presented insuperable legislative obstacles.

66.     The group, therefore, favoured option C - limiting the role of the coroner by securing
the adjournment of the inquest when a public inquiry is established and limiting the
circumstances in which the inquest can be resumed. This would still enable the relatives to
learn details of the medical cause of the relative’s death and also enable the death to be
registered when the inquest is adjourned; thus alleviating some distress caused by delays.

67.     Conferring upon the inquiry chairman discretion to determine whether the inquest
should resume would introduce less risk of unnecessary resumption of the inquest but the
legislation required to achieve this would be too far-ranging and would remove Ministerial
discretion to hold a non-statutory inquiry.

68.      The working group therefore recommended that the coroner be given discretion, in
tightly circumscribed circumstances, to resume the inquest on completion of the public
inquiry. A minimum 28 day period after completion of the inquiry or (perhaps) after
publication of the inquiry report before the coroner can reach a decision will ensure relatives
can make representations to him. Relatives will have recourse to judicial review if they are
dissatisfied with the decision. Where an inquest is resumed, the removal of the requirement
for a jury and a relaxation of the rules on admission of documentary evidence would reduce
areas of duplication with the inquiry.

69.    This option would require the following legislative changes.

       (i)     Amendments to the Coroner Act 1988

               (a)     Where a public inquiry headed by a judge is established by the
               Government, the Lord Chancellor may issue a certificate to the coroner
               notifying him of the establishment of the inquiry whose terms of reference and
               other factors ensure that the inquiry will constitute sufficient investigation into
               deaths arising from disaster. The inquest should be adjourned pending the
               conclusion of the inquiry, in the absence of reasons to the contrary.

               (b)     28 days after the conclusion of the relevant public inquiry or (perhaps)
               after the publication of the inquiry report, the coroner may resume the inquest
               but only in the most exceptional circumstances.

               (c)     Where a coroner adjourns an inquest after receiving a certificate from
               the Lord Chancellor, he is required to send to the registrar of deaths a
               certificate under his hand stating, so far as they have been ascertained at the
               date of the certificate, the particulars which under the Births and Deaths
               Registration Act 1953 are required to be registered concerning the death.

               (d)    Where a coroner does not resume an inquest which he has adjourned
               in compliance with a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, he is required to
               send to the registrar of deaths a certificate stating that the death was due to the
               disaster concerned as found by the public inquiry.


                                                13
       (e) Where a coroner resumes an inquest which has been adjourned pending
       the conclusion of the public inquiry, the requirement to hold the inquest with
       a jury (in section 8(3) of the Coroners Act 1988) is disapplied and the coroner
       has power to seek directions on the conduct of the inquest from the inquiry
       chairman.

(ii)   Amendments to the Coroners Rules 1984

       (a)   Provision for adjournments following the issue of a certificate from the
              Lord Chancellor (similar to Rules 26 and 27).

       (b)    Rule 31 would require amendment to provide for the notification to the
              registrar of deaths of the outcome of the public inquiry.

       (c)    Rule 33 would require amendment to provide notification of a decision
              not to resume the inquest on completion of the public inquiry.

       (d)    Rule 37 would require amendment to give the coroner discretion to
              admit the public inquiry report as documentary evidence.

       (e)    The notes to Schedule 2, Form 22, to be amended to provide for an
              additional suggested verdict: "traumatic death" or "death arising from
                ......   disaster".




                                      14
                                                                           ANNEXA


Why was the report not published earlier?

       *     Consideration needed to be given to some wider4ssues, including

                     the position in Scotland and Northern Ireland (the report deals
                     only with England and Wales);

                     whether there were any additional points about inquests and
                     public enquiries to be addressed.

             Each department needed to review the implications of the report for its
             responsibilities for inquests, inquiries and the administration of the
             relevant law.
                                                   t
      If pressed:

       *     The working party's recommendations touch on the broader question of
             how public enquiries are set up in response to disasters, and about the
              handling of possible criminal investigations where such enquiries are
              held.

       *     There were some legal points which needed to be resolved.

       *     A number of Government Departments, not members of the working
             party, subsequently needed to be consulted.

       *     The Scott inquiry included comments on public inquiry procedures and
              consideration needed to be given to whether there were any relevant
              implications here for the working party report.

Why has the Government not consulted on the working party's recommendations?

       *     Although it was decided that formal consultation would not be
             appropriate, copies of the report have been sent to interested parties and
              any comments received will be welcome.

What other options did the report consider?

       *     That the inquest subsume the inquiry by providing for the coroner, or
              perhaps "super" coroners, to conduct the inquiry, or
                                           r

       *     That the inquiry J^subsume the inquest, with the inquiry chairman
              taking on the function of coroner, or the coroner sitting with the inquiry
              chairman.
Why are these options not favoured?

      *      Both would substantially alter the functions of either coroners or inquiry
             chairmen and radical changes to the law would be required.

       *     The first option would constrain the choice of inquiry chairman
             (normally judges or QCs), while the second would present significant
             legal difficulties concerning juries and witnesses


The report recommends changing the law to give effect to its recommendations.
What action is to be taken to achieve this?

       *     The main change proposed is to relieve coroners of the need to resume
             their inquest after the inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate
             prospect of a suitable legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act
             1988 but the Government intends to pursue the matter when such an
             opportunity arises.

       *     It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if
             they feel it appropriate to do so.

       *     The situation will be kept under review.


What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the time
of the Hillsborough disaster?

       *     Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been
             no need to resume the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there
             was some exceptional reason for doing so.

       *     The families of those who died would have been spared some additional
             distress.


What is the background to the report?

       *     An interdepartmental working group was set up in 1990 in response to
             concerns about the overlap between public enquiries and inquests in a
             series of disasters (see Annex B) which had taken place in the late 1980s.

       *     the working group consisted of officials from the Home Office, the
             Department of Energy (later the Department of Trade and Industry), the
             Health and Safety Executive, the Crown Prosecution Service, the
             Department of Transport, the Treasury Solicitor's Department and the
             Lord Chancellor's Department.
       *      The group's terms of reference were:

                      "To consider the duplication of inquiries which results when a
                      major public inquiry is held into a civil disaster and the deaths in
                      the disaster are also investigated in a coroner's inquest in England
                      and Wales; and to make recommendations."


       *      The group was chaired by the Home Office and reported to the Home
              Secretary.


In view of the delay in publication is the report now out of date?

       *       No. The report addresses procedural problems which have not otherwise
               been alleviated during the intervening period.

       *      The report has been annotated where necessary to update details (such as
              changes in other legislation).


What about proposals to create a new sort of court which could deal with issues of
guilt or compensation as well as the circumstances of the disaster and the causes of
death?

       *      The working party's remit was always a limited one to address the
              practical problems at the interface of disaster enquiries and inquests.

       *      There has never been any question of devising a new tribunal to
              encroach on the jurisdiction of the civil or criminal courts.

       *      No wider review is planned, although any particular lessons which
              emerge from a public enquiry will be carefully considered
DISASTERS AND INQUESTS: RECENT DISASTERS

JL     Herald of Free Enterprise/Zeebruge

The sinking of the cross channel ferry outside Zeebruge harbour on 6 March 1987 with
the loss of 193 lives. The disaster was subject to a formal'investigation under the
Merchant Shipping Act 1970. The coroner's inquests returned verdicts on unlawful
killing in nearly all cases. Criminal proceedings were initiated but not pursued following
directions by the judge to find all but two of the defendants not guilty.

2*     King's Cross

The fire at King's Cross underground station on 18 November 1987 in which 31 lives
were lost. A public enquiry was held under the Regulation of Railways Act 1871. The
inquest returned verdicts of accidental death.

1      Clapham Junction

A railway accident involving two commuter trains on 12 December 1988 which resulted
in the loss of 35 lives. A public enquiry was held under the Regulation of Railways Act
1871. It was decided not to institute criminal proceedings. Inquest resulted in a verdict
of unlawful killing.

4*.     Hillsborough

The disaster at the Sheffield football stadium on 15 April 1989 in which 95 people died.
A public enquiry was ordered by the Home Secretary. Consideration was given to
criminal proceedings, but it was decided not to prosecute anyone. The inquest returned
verdicts of accidental death in all cases.

5*      Marchioness

The sinking of the passenger launch 'Marchioness' in the Thames on 20 August 1989
with the loss of 51 lives. Anon-public inquiry was institutedunder the Merchant
Shipping (Accident Investigation)Regulations1989. An inquest wasopened and
adjourned pending the outcome of criminal proceedings. The inquest was subsequently
resumed on the directions of the Court of Appeal and a verdict of unlawful killing was
returned.
