                                         OXFORDSHU      ALTH AUTHORITY               44-f
                                                                                             n h .
                                                                         Ambulance Serv‘d P            <arters
                                                                                               Churchill Drive
                                                                                                     Old Road
                                             tw                                                   Headington
                                                                                                     Q'*”i 7'M
F. Thornley, fa s i. lh s m . m rs h .
Chief Ambulance Officer                                CstU.   +   ilw v             Admin: Oxford 84841
                                                                                Operational: Oxford 61336
                     FT/BJR
                                              A
O ur ref:
Your ref:
                                                               br-Mut,
                                                                                 12th July, 1989.

                     Lord Justice Taylor,                      Rw 4
                     Chairman,
                     Hillsborough Inquiry,                         uj-)
                     City Chambers,
                     Sheffield,
                     Yorks.


                     Dear Lord Justice Taylor,


                             Please find enclosed with this letter a copy of a Report which
                     has been produced consequent on a Major Incident De-Briefing Seminar
                     which took place at the Postgraduate Medical Centre, Nottingham, on the
                     7th April 1989 just prior to the Hillsborough Disaster.

                             You will see that the Report contains several recommendations
                     following on discussion at the Seminar andf in ratifying the Report for
                     publication which took place after Hillsborough, the Regional Ambulance
                     Officers took the view that we should insert a recommendation relative
                     to the Services' statutory role which is contained in recommendation 2.

                             The purpose of sending this document to you, however, is in the
                     hope that you will find it useful when looking at the wider issues and
                     implications of Major Incidents and it is possible that you may find
                     that some of the lessons learned in the Clapham, Lockerbie and Kegworth
                     incidents may be helpful to you when producing your findings on
                     Hillsborough, although one does recognise that the three incidents dealt
                     with in the attached Report were different in nature.

                             I do hope you find the enclosed helpful and if I can be of any
                     further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me.


                                                          Yours sincerely,




                                                              F. Thornley,
                                                     Regional/Chief Ambulance Officer
                                                     Chairman, Regional Ambulance Officers
                                                     Major Incident Task Group.         ^
                            Northern Regional Health Authority




 Tel: {091)273 1212                                                           Ambulance Headquarters,
 Fax: (0 91)273 7070

                                                                              Newcastle upon Tyne.
                                                  Our Ref:
                        Mr L 1 Caple
 Please ask for                                   Your Ref:

                  23 June 1389




                  Distribution

                  Chief Ambulance Officers .
                  Regional General Managers Group
                  Department of Health (Division HS4C)
                  Dr L Martin - Department of Health, Richmond louse ■



                  Dear Colleague

                  Re:    Major Incident D ebr ief ing Seminar

                  With the increasing incidence of major incidents in the United Kingdom
                  during the past two years. Regional Ambulance Officers identified a need for
                  early feedback to identify what lessons could be learned from            the
                  experiences and whether there was any need to amend current advice to the
                  Health Service. -                          .        ■     ■

                  Accordingly, a debriefing seminar for all United Kingdom ambulance ■services
                  was held in April and the Major Accident Sub-Committee of the Regional
                  Ambulance Officers Group have prepared a report, for wide circulation,
                  throughout the National Health Service drawing together the conclusions
                  reached.                              .       '                ■ '

                  On behalf of the Group, I have pleasure in enclosing copies of that report
                  which it is hoped will stimulate further debate on this important subject. .          .

                  Yours sincerely      ■      '         ■                '.           -




                  TO REGIONAL AMBULANCE OFFICERS GROUP




A Northern Regional Health A u th o rity M anaged Service
                                                                                               O/
 §§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§!§§§§§.§§§§§§§§§§fl§§f§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§!§§§§§§§§&
e<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                           t<5»
e<5>»                                                                                           O
e<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                           «<>»
e<5>»                                                                                           e<5>»
e<5>»
t<5»
«<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                           «?»
e<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                           €^»
t<5»                                                                                            «<?»
e<5>»
t<5»
t<5»
t<5»
e<5>»
t<5»
e<5>»
<^»
                         Re g i o n a l Am b u l a n c e Of f i c e r s     Group               e<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                           O
e<5>»                                                                                           e<5>»
e<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                           <0*
e<5>»                                                                                           <0>
e<5>»                                                                                           td»
e<5>»                                                                                           !<»
«<5>»                                                                                           <<»
e<5>»
e<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                           «<?»
e<5>»                                                                                           t<5»
e<5>»                                                                                           4<S»
e<5>»                                                                                           «<5*
                                                                                                <«95
e<5>»                                                                                           «?»
t<5»                                                                                            <#»
«<5>»                                                                                            e<5>»
                                                                                                <&*
e<5>»                                                                                           4^»
t<5»
t<5»                                                                                            e<5>»
t<5»                                                                                            «#■»
t<5»                                                                                            «<5>»
e<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                           «<?>
                                                                                                e^i
«<5>»                                                                                           <&»
e^>
e<5>»                                                                                           t<5»
e<5>»                                                                                           c<J»
e<5>»
e<5>»
«<5»

e<5>»                                                                                           «?)
e<5>»                                                                                           t<5»
                                                                                                «<£»
«<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                           «<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                           e<5>»
e<S>>                                                                                           e<5>»
                                                                                                e<5>»
t<5»
t<5»
t<5»                                                                                             e<5>»
t<5»                                                                                             ctf>»
t<5»                                                                                             e<5>»
t<5»                                                                                             e<5>»
K5>9
t<5»
t<5»                                                                                             e<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                            e<5>»
                                                                                                 t<5»
«<5»
e<5>»
e<5>»
e<5>»                      Ma j o r   I n c i d e n t De b r i e f i n g   S e m in a r          t<5»

e<5>»                                                                                            c£>-»
e<5>»                                                                                            «^9
                                                                                                 «<>»
«<5>»
e<5>»                                                                                            {(JJl
 t<5»
 t<5»                                           He l d A t
 e<5>»
 e<5>»                                                                                           «<5>»
 t<5»
 t<5»                                                                                            e<5>»
 t<5»                                                                                            e<5>»
 e<5>»                                                                                           e<5>»
 «<5>»                                                                                           e<5>»
 e<5>»                                                                                           t<5»
 e<5>»           T h e Po s t g r a d u a t e Me d i c a l Ce n t r e , No t t i n g h a m .     e<5>»
 e<5>»
 e<5>»                                                                                           e<5>»
                                                                                                 e<5>»
 6tf»                                                                                            «<5>»
 t<5»
 t<5»                                    7 th   A p r il,    1989.                               t<5»
                                                                                                 e<5>»
 t<5»                                                                                            e^»
 t<5»                                                                                            t<5»
 t<5»
 ctf»
 e<5>»                                                                                           <49*
 e<5>»
 e<S>>                                                                                           «<?*
                                                                                                 e<5>»
 e<5>»
                                                                                                 e<5>»
 e<5>»                                                                                           ^>»
 t<5»
 t<5»
 t<5»
 e<5>»                                                                                              e<5>»


                                                                                                    «<5>»
 e<5>»
 e<5>»
                                                                                                    t gn
 e<5>»                                                                                              e<5>»
                                                                                                    t&»
 e<5>»
 «<5>»                                                                                              e<5>»
 t<5»
 t<5»
'C<?5
 t<5»                                                                                               «?»
 e<5>»
 e<5>»                                                                                              «»

  §§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§ §§§§§§§§§§§§ilH§H§HMi§§§§HB§l§§§§§§§§§§§§§§§H§l§§§§§§§§§§§§§§^’
                   JOlCiWLEDGEMElNT




Thanks are due to all of the Speakers who contributed
to the Seminar. Special thanks are due to the secretarial
staff of the Norfolk and Oxfordshire Ambulance Services
who transcribed all of the discussion which took place at
the Seminar and who have worked diligently towards the
production of this Seminar Report.
                                contents




(1)   Introduction


(2)   Programme.


(3)   Objectives of theSeminar.


(4)   Recommendations.


(5)   REPORT   -     The Clapham Rail Disaster and Discussion.


(6)   REPORT   -     The Lockerbie Air Crash and Discussion.


(7)   REPORT   -     The Kegworth Air Crash and Discussion.


(8)   The Open Forum and    Discussion.
                               INTRODUCTION


As the demand for more and faster travel grows and our roads, rail and air
networks become more under pressure, so the risks increase. If you add on
to the foregoing terrorist activity and the movement of dangerous chemicals
and other materials, the potential for a Major Incident occurring anywhere
in the U.K. cannot be minimised.


In the past two years, the U.K. has witnessed eight such Major Incidents
resulting in many deaths and large numbers of people sustaining serious
injury. The outcome of such tragedy is that many of the families of the
dead and those who survived will possibly remain scarred, both physically
and emotionally for the rest of their lives. Indeed, many if not all, of
those involved in the rescue and treatment of the injured will never forget
their experiences.


Out of all such tragedies emerge the opportunity to learn and, as a
consequence, correct those shortfalls that we identify in our Major Disaster
Plans.


It is for this reason that the Regional Ambulance Officers Group decided to
hold a Major Incident Seminar in Nottingham for all Chief Ambulance Officers
and those of their Officers who have a responsibility for Major Incident
Planning in the U.K. Ambulance Services.


The Ambulance Services role in the response to Major Incidents both as an
Emergency Service and also as the front line force of the N.H.S., cannot and
indeed must not be underestimated. It is critical to the success of the
N.H.S response.


This publication seeks to share our experiences of the Seminar with the
wider forum of the N.H.S. in the hope that ws will all take out of such
experiences those things which will be helpful for the future and, at the^
same time, shake us all out of any complacency that may still exist. It is
a sobering thought that, within days of the Nottingham Seminar, yet another
Major Incident occurred at Hillsborough, Sheffield, with a loss of 95 lives
and over 171 injured.


We never know when or indeed where an incident will occur next. Our level
of preparedness will always depend on how much we learn from the tragedies
of others.
*&




                      MAJOR INCIDENT DEBRIEFING SEMINAR.


                     POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION CENTRE

                                    NOTTINGHAM.


     0930   Coffee


     1000   WELCCME AND OBJECTIVES OF SEMINAR       MR. THORNLEY
                                                    Oxford Region.


     1015   CLAPHAM RAIL DISASTER                   MR. HUGH CHAMBERS
            Chairman: Mr. Larkin                    London Ambulance Service


     1100   DISCUSSION


     1130   LOCKERBIE AIR DISASTER                  MR. JOIN WILBY
            Chairman: Mr. Willis                    Scottish Ambulance
                                                    Service


     1200   DISCUSSION


     1230   Lunch


     1330   M1 KEGSORIH AIR DISASTER                MR. ALAN PARKER
            Chairman: Mr. Handy                     Leicestershire Ambulance
                                                    Service.

     1415   DISCUSSION


     1445   Tea


     1500   OPEN FORUM AND ACTION PLAN              MR. THORNLEY


     1600   DEPART
                    MAJOR INCIDENT DEBRIEFING SEMINAR.

            POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION CENTRE   - 3SUTTINGHAM




OBJECTIVES OF THE SEMINAR



          To gain knowledge and share experiences arising out of the six
          Major Incidents which have occurred in the United Kingdom in
          less than two years.


          To draw out of the day comments and lessons which may well
          benefit all Services and possibly influence our current and
          future planning arrangements for Major Incidents.


          To determine whether or not we can further influence the
          Department of Health in the areas of Disaster Planning,
          particularly in the light of the Regional Ambulance Officers'
          initiatives relative to the updating of HC(77)1.


          To decide whether or not benefit will be gained from a further
          symposium initiated by the Ambulance Service but involving
          other disciplines within the N.H.S.


          Consequent on the day's findings, prepare a comprehensive report
          and institute recommendations emanating from the days proceedings.
          This report to be disseminated to all Ambulance Services, the
          Department of Health, and the N.H.S. as a whole.
                               RECQMMENDATTONS


(1)        There is an urgent need to further the work of the RAOs Group
           relative to the revision of HC(77)1, which is now over twelve
           years old.


(2)        It is recommended that there is a statutory requirement for the
           participation by NHS Ambulance Services in the present licensing
           arrangements for public events which could have a potential for
           Major Incidents which may involve serious injury of loss of life.


(3)        Further thought needs to be given to the provision of Medical
           Teams, their composition, and who should provide them.


(4)        There is a need to ensure that the Ambulance Service is recognised
           as the medical focal point on an incident site for professional
           and voluntary first aid organisation.


(5)    _   It is recommended that the "Thames Casualty Label", recently
           recommended by the Regional Ambulance Officers Group, should be
           adopted as a standard label for the NHS to use in primary triage
           at the scenes of Major Incidents; this replacing the multiplicity
           of labels at present in use within the NHS.


(6)        There is an identified training need in respect of Officers,
           particularly in the area of Control/Command.


(7)        There is an urgent need for Services to provide full protective
           clothing {especially helmets). Such clothing should be clearly
           marked/signed so as to identity Ambulance/Paramedics.


(8)        There is a need to ensure a disciplined approach to the wearing
           of such clothing at all times.


(9)        There is a need to improve mechanisms for the sharing of
           information relative to Major Incidents. This aspect is crucial
           if expertise is to be gained and techniques improved.


(10)       There is arequirement for improved media relationships and
           contacts.


(11)       Services must improve the mechanisms for giving staff more
           education and continuing help with relieving stress.
   LONDON AMBULANCE SERVICE


   THE CLAPHAM RAIL DISASTER

    MONDAY 12 DECEMBER 1988




       PAPER PRESENTED BY

       MR. HUGH CHAMBERS

ASSISTANT CHIEF AMBULANCE OFFICER




    MAJOR ACCIDENT SEMINAR

        NOTTINGHAM 1989
PREFACE


Let me begin this morning with an ending!



"Nevertheless, when that day comes, when that time comes, when the
unthinkable becomes reality and we are faced with such trauma, the men
and women of this country's Ambulance Service will readily respond".




These words, colleagues, were my concluding remarks at our AMBEX Conference
in August last year. Little did I know then how our Services would be asked
again, and yet again, to respond. Our personnel having to face the trauma
at Clapham and Lockerbie, all on the lead up to Christmas. Then to be faced
with the air crash on the M1 Motorway.

This morning, colleagues, my presentation will give you an insight into the
Clapham Rail Crash as seen through my eyes.

 I intend to present all aspects of this disaster which, hopefully, will
 generate some interest and stimulate an exchange of views between us.
CLAPHAM RAIL CRASH     - MONDAY 12 DECEMBER 1988


INTRODUCTION

It was a Monday morning, really just like every other Monday morning.

It was December.     In most homes, in most work places, the talk was of
Christmas.

I was en route to my office, monitoring the early morning radio traffic.
Then I heard the call:- "Train Crash, Windmill Road, SW18, near Clapham
Junction".

I looked at the car clock     -   it was 0818   -   The Clapham Train Crash had
happened.


HOW IT HAPPENED

A train stops, the driver contacts the signal box, the train is full.

Another train from Bournemouth, at considerable speed, ploughs through the
stationary train. Carriages were thrown onto an embankment, derailed and
some were telescoped into others, resulting in blocking a local line.

A third train, empty from Waterloo, collided with those carriages.


ROAD NETWORK

The crash occurred in a railway cutting not far from Clapham Junction
Station. Access and egress from the site was easily established and,
because of a triangular road network, a one-way system of working was easily
implemented.



OUR INITIAL RESPONSE

Our Major Accident Plan was initiated and our Central Ambulance Control
began its deployment of ambulances, forward control unit, officers,
personnel, notification of hospitals and alerting medical teams.
EMERGENCY CALLS RECEIVED

The first call was received at 0816 from a member of the public.

At 0818 the first two ambulances   were despatched      to    the scene.

A further 14 calls were received in the first 38 minutes from all sources.

The first ambulance was on scene at 0821.

Within 20 minutes, 12 ambulances were despatched     to    scene, with other
support vehicles. The Forward Control Unit was on scene and set up at 0833.


MOBILISATION OF OFFICERS

It was obvious within a few minutes of the first call that this was a
serious incident.

At 0820 I was directed to the incident, arriving there at 0832, taking
command as Incident Officer. The Chief Officer and Deputy Chief Officer
were also mobilised to scene.

In all a total of 33 Officers were in attendance, either at the site or at
the designated and supporting hospitals.

Officers from our Regional Training Centre were also deployed, which proved
to be a valuable asset on site in the treatment of casualties, triage and in
support of crews.


TOTAL DEPLOYMENT

In all a total of 44 Ambulances, 14 Sitting Case Vehicles/coaches and 6
support vehicles were deployed. 33 Officers, 90 Qualified Ambulancepersons
and 13 Routine Ambulancepersons were in attendance, in the wreckage and on
the road surface with equipment and vehicles. This included invaluable
support given by our colleagues in the Surrey Ambulance Service.


HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL TEAMS

The help and assistance given by the hospitals was first class.    Five
hospitals were alerted :

                                                     Yellow   Major Accident
                                                     Alert       Declared

Designated          St George's                      0823          0848

Support (1)         St Stephen's                     0833          0852

Support (2)         St Thomas,                       0833          0852

Support (3)         Queen Mary, s Roehampton         0833          0901

Support (4)         Westminster                                    0901
The first medical team, from St Stephen's, was on scene at 0858, just
42 minutes into the Incident.

The site Medical Officer was provided by St George's Hospital -
Dr. Calvert - who arrived at 0914 - 58 minutes into the Incident.

The second team, from St George's, arrived at 0908.

During the course of the incident, a total of 4 medical teams attended.
Additional medical support was given by members of the BASICS organisation.


EQUIPMENT

At such an incident there is an immediate need for all types of equipment
and, initially, every ambulance vehicle attending was stripped of its
equipment, from blankets to medical gases. Therefore an early call for
equipment was made and our three divisional equipment vehicles plus one from
Surrey were on scene very quickly.

As the Incident progressed, access to the wreckage was made at three points
along the embankment. These became equipment points with personnel in
charge to control the movement of equipment to and from the site.

An important feature was the use of these dumps, to re-equip ambulances.

An inordinate amount of equipment was used and lost during this Incident, at
some considerable cost.


CASUALTY MANAGEMENT

It has to be said that extrication of casualties was both difficult and, in
some instances, dangerous. A variety of stretchers were used, Furleys, Neil
Robertson, etc.

Between the trains, initially, triage was conducted by ambulance crews,
officers and attending medical teams.

Walking wounded were catered for at a nearby school at first and
subsequently at a nearby public house. Ambulancepersons were deployed with
a GP to look after these patients.

The embankment was a fairly steep incline and it was necessary for stretcher
bearers to be assisted from the wreckage. Teams were positioned up the
incline, with further teams at the top to take over - a very exhausting
task.

Full credit must go to British Rail and the London Fire Brigade, who were
able to cut steps into the embankment and lay a fence to make the climb
easier.

This undoubtedly was one of the worst accidents on the railway. It happened
at peak coiranuter travelling time, which led to large numbers of casualties
as follows:-
               106 to St. George's Hospital
               4   to St. Stephen's Hospital
               4   to St. Thomas' Hospital

There were 34 people who lost their lives.

At the scene we achieved a 'field work-force', actively engaged with the
medical teams and Fire Rescue teams. Wherever there was a casualty there
was an LAS presence throughout.

The incident was spread over some 70 metres of track, which involved
ambulance teams being separately engaged, and nearly all the time there was
an officer presence.

Trapped victims were attended to throughout the rescue operation, by crews,
doctors and LFB personnel in the wreckage, with an officer close by to
provide the coiranunications link.


TEMPORARY MORTUARY

One thing that strikes me at such incidents is the manner in which the dead
are removed, with the same care and dignity as a live casualty. I mention
this because I consider it important. Important to our crews, rescuers,
onlookers and, above all, to relatives.

At Clapham, a temporary mortuary was set up in a nearby Clubroom that was
within walking distance of the site.

The Police, under the jurisdiction of the Coroner, arranged their team and
assistance was given by BASICS doctors in the mortuary.

I know that the measures to be adopted for the removal of the dead from such
incidents is to feature in various discussions with Police Authorities and I
believe we should also pay some attention to this in our procedures for
Major Incident Management.

It is a topic which requires special attention.


LIAISCN

How do we achieve this with such a multi-disciplined attendance?

We established good effective liaison, achieved in different ways:-

1.   In the wreckage - by talking to each other. Let us not forget that
     with all the m o d e m technology - cellnet, R/T, etc - communications can
     still be by the spoken word to each other in situ. The various
     disciplines at the scene discussed the treatment and release of some
     trapped casualties. Such discussion involved an input from the LAS,
     Surrey Ambulance Service, BR Staff, LFB and the Police.

2.   Forward Control Units - Coiranunication lines were established between
     all Forward Control Units. In the LAS vehicle a position was occupied
     throughout by the Transport Police.
3.   Senior Officer Meetings - These were called by the Police Officer-in-
     Charge and were attended by all Senior Officers, including a Police
     Press Officer. It was invaluable for everyone to establish a chain of
     command, the responsibilities of each service, an exchange of up-to-
     date information and to look forward to contingency plans for the days
     ahead. At Clapham four such meetings took place, some of which
     Government Ministers attended.


HEALTH AND SAFETY/STRESS

A matter to which we have to address ourselves.

1.   Stress Counselling/Debriefing - after our experiences at Kings Cross,
     our Occupational Health Team repeated their arrangements to see all
     staff. In addition, a team from St. George's Hospital Medical School
     attended our Ambulance Stations for pre-arranged meetings with staff.
     Some of our staff are still in contact with the team.

     But we do need to examine the subject more deeply? For instance, is it
     in our best interests for the initial crews, involved in heavy rescue
     and treatment of casualties at such incidents, to complete that tour of
     duty and to report for work the next day to commence normal duties?

     I simply pose the question!

2.   Protective Head Gear - must be worn, but should we develop more
     protective clothing over and above the normal uniform?


MEDIA

An ever increasing problem, but at Clapham they were dealt with effectively
and conveniently - why? Because they were afforded many 'controlled'
opportunities to take pictures and attend conducted 'regulated' interviews.
It has to be said that they were very well behaved and did not get in the
way at all.

From the Ambulance Service point of view it was agreed that all casualty
figures and numbers of dead would be given via one source only, that being
the Casualty Bureau at New Scotland Yard.

VIP's also attended the scene and officers should always be made aware of
their presence and ensure that any information given is wholly accurate. If
it is not - do not give it.

Under this heading I will briefly mention the Public Enquiry that follows
such events. I commend to you, colleagues, again, to ensure that your
reports and all documentation are completed accurately, so that they can be
submitted as evidence at any hearing. As you know the Clapham Enquiry still
continues.
LESSONS TO BE LEARNT


An effective disaster plan has to be a logical sequence of the common
accident and emergency organisation. Under strain or strenuous conditions
even well trained people only lean on their familiar way of working. To
impose different practices will only lead to increased stress.

In the main our Major Incident Plan worked well at Clapham, but to be
critical, the following points arose:

Equipment/Clothing - Crews and Officers must don their high visibility
jackets and helmets.


Debris Gloves - An increase of the numbers carried on equipment vehicles is
necessary.


Vehicles - The first ambulance crews arriving at Clapham were immediately
drawn to the site, leaving some vehicles unattended. Because of their
everyday practice in London, crews removed ignition keys.


Communications - AT SITE - Additional cellphones to be provided on a Support
Unit vehicle to assist Medical Incident Officer or doctors to talk with
hospitals.

AT HOSPITALS - Consideration for fixed aerial points to be installed to
cater for the installation of LAS portable radio sets. A costly exercise
with 31 DGH's in London.


Telephone Alert Numbers - Some confusion arose between the Central Ambulance
Control and the hospitals over the telephone numbers to be used for Major
Incidents. Steps are being taken with DGH's to establish and confirm the
method they wish the LAS to use.


Uniform Recognition - There is a need to recognise visually a crew's
ability, particularly those with extended skills. To see a difference
between the Routine Day Care Ambulanceperson and the Paramedic Qualified
Ambulanceperson particularly when NATO jumpers are worn, can be difficult.
COMMENTS


Our response to this incident was excellent.   We were helped by:


(a)   the time the accident occurred,

(b)   good weather,

(c)   the maximum number of staff on duty.


Hospitals were staffed. Staff were coming on duty, still uncommitted and in
the main clinics had not started.

Access and egress to the site was ideal.

Also helpful was the very close proximity of the nearby Emanuel School,
whose pupils deserve the highest praise. This initially provided a holding
centre for the walking wounded until a nearby public house became available.

All these factors made the management of the incident so much easier.

My presentation would not be complete without mention of the countless
offers of assistance, so readily made. From my colleagues in Surrey and
Essex Ambulance Services, the voluntary services, British Red Cross and St.
John's, both from London and the Home Counties, to such people as the SEGAS
First Aid Team, volunteer nurses and blood donors.

Last but not least - the Salvation Army - who, as always, provided a never
ending supply of light refreshments.
CONCLUSION


This then was a railway disaster at its worse.

Colleagues it was just over two years ago that we met at a Seminar in
Blackpool. My paper on that occasion was, ironically, "Major Incidents on
the Railways".

Clapham should not have happened Moorgate should not have happened!

What a catalogue of unbelievable disasters: Bradford, Kings Cross,
injuries and death through horrific fires, Zeebrugge, Piper Alpha, yet more
tragedy. The Hungerford Incident.

We in London were just picking ourselves up after Clapham. Reading all the
accounts of the incident, the adjectives being used were endless,
"horrific", "awful", "terrible", etc.

Then Lockerbie happened, how can that be described?   "Death in the air and
on the ground".

In the wake of Lockerbie - Kegworth - another plane incident.   More deaths
and injuries.

Surely, we would think, that must be the end, but no, Purley became the
scene of another disaster.

Gentlemen, undoubtedly, what once was the exception is sadly becoming the
rule.

Yes, our daily task is of resources, demand, budgets, staffing problems,
management of change, NHS Reviews, contingency planning and so on.

We must never, ever, be complacent about our Major Incident Management.

Gone are the days of picking up the Major Accident Plan and blowing the dust
off it.

In the light of all that has happened, I am of the opinion that Major
Incident Management should come high in our list of priorities and a greater
emphasis made in our Training Centres.

We conduct these Debriefing Seminars which give us the opportunity to
exchange our experiences with each other, but we do need to be positive in
our Action Plan for handling Major Incidents.

We, the Ambulance Services, need to pool our expertise and knowledge and
show the way forward. Or do we wait until the next one!!

Thank you.
                                DISCUSSION

                          CLAPHAM RAIL DISASTER.

                       Question and Answer Session.



QUESTION:      Mr. Peter Hunt, Dept, of Health & Welsh Office Adviser.

I note that 106 casualties were despatched to the receiving hospitals,
although the vast majority went to St. George's, with hindsight, would the
same be done again?

ANSWER:        Mr. Chambers said that there was no spread of casualties and
there probably should have been. The decision was entirely due to the very
close relationship with St. George's. He indicated that after the incident
somebody had observed that casualties could have been transferred to other
hospitals.

QUESTION:      Mr. Vernon Jolliffe, Dorset.

In relation to Health and Safety precautions and Protective Clothing,
Mr. Jolliffe noticed that the clothing ranged from shirt sleeve order to
full protective gear. Was any data recorded regarding injuries to rescue
personnel?

ANSWER:        One of the rescuers sustained a graze on his forehead.
Because crews behave in this way every day - they jump out of their vehicles
and go into houses - they did just that at this incident. I agree, they
must be more aware of how to behave when faced with Major Incident
situations, i.e. the wearing of hard hats is essential and also the wearing
of high visibility jackets clearly marked is essential.

OBSERVATION:   Mr. Roley Furber, Derbyshire.

Mr. Furber said that the quality of survival is really down to planned
response. He was keen to see the right people, i.e. skilled crews, tending
the severely injured.

ANSWER:       This was borne out by skilled crews being with the severely
injured. That is why the skilled crews should not be divorced from the
scene. They can stabilise patients before they are extricated from the
scene.

QUESTION       Mr. Peter Ediss, Department of Health.

Regarding equipment - It was a reasonably bright day. I am sure if the
weather had been bad it would have been more difficult. What lessons have
been learned regarding keeping equipment dry, etc?

ANSWER         If it had been wet, windy, or icy, as far as equipment was
concerned, we could have got it under cover at a nearby pub. However, there
is a need to ask for more money for more equipment to supplement the present
equipment/control vehicles in services.
QUESTION:     Mr. Frederick Thomley, Oxfordshire.

I wonder if you have got a view on the possible use of inflatable equipment,
tents, etc.

ANSWER:        Excellent things in the long term but in our Service there is
always a cost problem. My view is yes, we do need one.

QUESTION:     Mr. Barry Johns, West Midlands.

Looking at your slides, the incident consumed a number of vehicles and
manpower resources. What impact did that have on the quality of service
given by the rest of the London Ambulance Service?

ANSWER        It was not greatly affected. Whilstthisincident      was
ongoing, we responded to about 900 Accident and Emergency calls.   We did
have to cut back on non-emergency work. Otherwise, no impact.

QUESTION:     Mr. Michael Willis, Norfolk.

There are two things that came out of your presentation, one the
identification of grades of staff which are now clearer and, secondly, you
have a definite idea on more appropriate clothing. Could you please
clarify?

ANSWER:       I had built into the Plan that if you have a longdrawn out
incident you need something similar to a boiler suit to pull over uniforms
for protection with identification for those with extended skills as opposed
to the ordinary Ambulanceperson. These ordinary Ambulancepersons were
invaluable and you need to make use of them, but they should not be put into
the trauma situation to perform skills they cannot undertake.

QUESTION:    Mr. Michael Willis, Norfolk.

Amongst the three Emergency Services, is there likely to be a common
agreement on colour?

ANSWER:      Medical Green is our type ofcolour. It     is the high
visibility jackets that are the problem; You don't know who the people are.
It must be clearly shown it is ’Ambulance’ and distinctive markings for
those who are paramedics.

QUESTION:     Mr. T. Hoyland, Cleveland.

Clarification is required regarding statements from the joint Emergency
Services. The Press Officer took a lead and went round to the individual
officers.         How did this work?

ANSWER:      Four round the table meetings  took place - there wasgreat
media interest which was well co-ordinated. The Metropolitan Police are
very strict about casualty figures and dead. It creates trauma to the
travelling public and the relatives of the people who were on the
train.Misguided information is dangerous. Information given by Cellnet must
be guarded.
ANSWER (Cont'd)

One statement was generally agreed between Emergency Services and this given
out. Even interviews carried out separately were agreed beforehand.

QUESTION          (?) Merseyside.

Because of the steep embankment, how effective were communications in regard
to radio/telephone procedures, etc?

ANSWER:        There was verbal communication and shouting, but it was
important to make sure when messages were given that there was somebody
about to receive them. There were also handheld portables and communication
direct from the scene to the Forward Control Unit - several lines of
communication.

As far as communication to hospital was concerned, we were delayed getting
portable sets into St. George's and in the first instance we were
criticised, but this was later rectified.

QUESTION:         Mr. David Cobb, Gloucestershire.

First of all may I thank you for the interesting talk. One thing you have
not mentioned is casualty labelling. Have you any advice?

ANSWER:       In that instance,because of the nature of the incident   and
the wreckage, patients were moved straight from the scene and I did not see
a need for casualty labelling. We are at the present time giving
consideration to this but in a controlled way.

QUESTION:         Mr. Desborough, Northamptonshire.

You mentioned about equipment, what other equipment would you have sought?
What were your losses?

ANSWER:        We had adequate equipment but it was the speed to get it to
the scene. We lost approximately £19,000 worth of equipment, blankets, etc.
The Fire Service said one of their Divisional Officers had found some
equipment and would return it to us. When it arrived it was a laryngoscope
and on the top it was marked 'St. George's'!1

QUESTION:          Mr. Peter Ediss, Department of Health.

With regard to lessons learned from Major Incidents, do you intend to
publish your thoughts on this, and your solutions,and if so in what form
will you be doing this?

 ANSWER:        It is a bit premature for me to publish anything because of
 what will come out of the Inquiry.


 QUESTION:         Mr. M. Ruffle, Lincolnshire.

 At AMBEX our thoughts were on stress. I was interested to hear of
 arrangements that you had put in train regarding Occupational Health
 visiting Ambulance Stations. How are you handling the stress which has
 arisen in personnel which was not identified at the time, perhaps because
 they did not identify the fact?
ANSWER:        It is important to avoid the word 'counselling'. We should
say stress debriefing. Once you mention going to the doctor to be
counselled, staff think "if I break down and cry I will never make Station
Officer, everything is ruined". The LAS has an open door policy through the
Station Management and it doesn't have to filter through to the Chief
Officer.

QUESTION:      Mr. M. Ruffle, Lincolnshire.

On the open door policy, are there any arrangements to deal with those who
are not self referrals?

ANSWER:        The volunteer aspect was important. Sooner or later those in
need would talk to somebody. Some crews talk to the Station Officer and at
that level of debriefing overcome the stress factor.

OBSERVATION:   Mr. Michael Willis, Norfolk.

Paperwork is one of the less glamorous things. There are significant
administrative tasks to be completed with this sort of incident. Could you
identify what you found to be the most important part of putting the
paperwork together for any formal Inquiry?

ANSWER-.      I believe from the London Fire Brigades point of view, from
the 13th December, they had no fewer than 12 Officers who were left to
collate paperwork for this Inquiry - Reports, thoughts, etc. I do believe
that in an incident of this nature, we in the Ambulance Service, should
examine our administration and have our paperwork collated by a dedicated
unit with an input from Officers at the site. The paperwork is demanding
and the further up the tree you go, the harder it becomes. So I think
people should be set aside to do it. It has got to be accurate and
truthful. Don't try to cover up and hide facts. It is important that
patients do not suffer.



                                 Conclusion.
                       SCOTTISH AMBULANCE SERVICE


                         LOCKERBIE AIR DISASTER

                              21 DECEMBER, 1988.




                              PAPER PRESENTED BY


                               MR. JOHN WILBY

               DIRECTOR OF THE SCOTTISH AMBULANCE SERVICE




                         MAJOR ACCIDENT SEMINAR


                                NOTTINGHAM 1989




Copyright J.M. Wilby - 1989
Because of the ongoing murder inquiry, no inter-Service debrief has taken
place and the information contained in this paper is extracted from
Ambulance Service records. The views and opinions expressed are those of
the author and not necessarily those of the Common Services Agency or the
Scottish Office.


The town of Lockerbie lies some 75 miles South of Edinburgh and Glasgow,
14 miles from Dumfries and 25 miles north of Carlisle. At a little after
1900 hours on Wednesday 21 December 1988, the tranquility of this small
Scottish Border town was shattered by an aerial bombardment reminiscent of
wartime Britain. Moments before Pan Am 747, Flight 103 outward bound from
London Heathrow to the United States had disappeared from radar screens.
What followed was to thrust the town's 3,000 inhabitants into the world's
spotlight, provoke a massive response from the Emergency Services and
initiate the United Kingdom's largest ever mass murder inquiry.

This paper sets out to describe the organisational circumstances then
prevailing, the Ambulance Service response, the lessons learned and the
subsequent action taken to address identified problems.



          The Scottish Ambulance Service is a Division of the
          Common Services Agency of the Scottish Health Service.
          It provides a national service to Scotland's 5.2m
          population and covers an area equal to one-third of
          the UK's land mass. Directed from National Head­
          quarters in Glasgow, it is operationally managed and
          controlled by eight Chief Ambulance Officers whose
          Areas serve one or more of Scotland’s fifteen Health
          Boards. Its 2,500 personnel operate nearly 1,000
          vehicles out of 158 Ambulance Stations and in 1988 dealt
          with over 350,000 accident and emergencies and 2 million
          patient transport cases.



BACKGROUND:

The Scottish Ambulance Service was in the process of a major reorganisation
involving a reduction in the number   of ambulance controls from 27 to 8 - one
for each of the operational Areas.    The objective was not only to centralise
controls but to release a large number of Control Officer posts which would
enable the creation of 52 District Ambulance Officer posts with field
management responsibility. Lockerbie is served by the Ayrshire & Arran and
Dumfries & Galloway Area with, at the time, an ambulance control at Dumfries
manned by one Control Officer.

Although plans were well advanced for its replacement, the Scottish
Ambulance Service radio system comprised AM low band with some of the
equipment dating back twenty years.Radio coverage, particularly   in rural
areas such as Dumfries and Galloway was generally poor. The nearest
compatible major incident command vehicles with hand portable radios were
based at Ayr and Motherwell, 75 and 65 miles away respectively.
The English and Welsh Ambulance Authorities changed to FM high band in the
raid '70s and added a national emergency reserve frequency for major
incidents. Consequently, it was not possible to communicate by radio across
the Border with the Cumbria Ambulance Service.

The Service was and is committed to a programme aimed at eliminating the
practice of single manning of accident and emergency ambulances - which then
accounted for some 10% of emergency and urgent cases - and to reduce the
dependence of standby call-outs during the quiet hours. At the time, the
standby ambulances based at Lockerbie, Annan, Moffat and Langholm were
single manned.

A revised draft Major Incident Procedure for the Scottish Ambulance Service
had been circulated for comment to other Emergency Services and Health
Boards and the CSA had approved the appointment of a National Emergency
Planning Officer for the Scottish Health Service. The extant Scottish
Health Service Circular 1976 (Gen) 1982 differs from the DHSS Circular
H C (77)1 - January 1977 for England and Wales in that it places greater
emphasis on medical control and field management of Major Disasters by
individual Health Boards. There was, therefore, no consistent cross-Border
procedure or common terminology.

The Service began updating its Major Accident equipment in 1987 and had
limited stocks of NATO folding stretchers available throughout the Service.
All new accident and emergency units (AEUs) and patient transport vehicles
 (PTVs) carry these stretchers. There were no dedicated Major Accident
equipment vehicles.

Although the Scottish Ambulance Service's Professional Advisory Group has
recommended the introduction of the NHSTA Extended Training (Paramedic)
Programme, only a dozen or so Training and District Ambulance Officers were
qualified and practicing in the field.


THE RESPONSE:

At 1906 hours, Dumfries Ambulance Control received a 999 call from a member
of the public indicating that an aircraft had crashed and exploded in
Lockerbie. A single manned standby ambulance was despatched from Lockerbie
Ambulance Station and the Police were advised of the incident. Additional
ambulances were despatched from Dumfries, Annan (single manned) and Moffat
(single manned). A Lockerbie BASICS doctor was also despatched by ambulance
control. On arrival at the scene at 1910, the Lockerbie ambulanceman
confirmed that this was a Major Incident. An Ambulance Incident Officer was
despatched from Dumfries, the Dumfries Royal Infirmary alerted and three
further ambulances deployed from Dumfries. Cumbria Ambulance Control was
asked for assistance and despatched one ambulance from Carlisle.

At 1925 hours, the Lockerbie single manned ambulance left the scene for DRI
with two casualties with serious b u m s - a bystander acting as attendant.
By 1931 hours, 7 ambulancemen, 5 ambulances and an Ambulance Incident
Officer were at the scene. By 2005 hours, a casualty clearing station had
been established with general practitioners at the Town Hall. A number of
lightly injured casualties were given.first aid by local GPs and Ambulance
personnel and one youth was conveyed to DRI with a head injury. At 1924
hours, the Dumfries Control requested backup resources from Ayr Control and
ambulances were despatched from Cumnock and Ayr.
As a result of TV and radio news flashes, vehicle crew staff and officers
began reporting in to the Area and Divisional Headquarters in Greater
Glasgow, Forth Valley and Lanarkshire and Lothian and Borders. Because of
poor corammications at the scene and the continuous engagement of the two
landlines at Dumfries Control, the dissemination of information was slow
and, as a consequence, supporting Areas began despatching additional
resources to the scene. On arrival at the scene at 2100 hours, the Director
found a Divisional Officer from Carlisle with effective coranunications with
the Carlisle Ambulance Control by which messages were conveyed from the
scene.

Two ambulance parking points had been created at the Ice Skating Rink and at
the Town Hall and liaison established with local GPs for the care of walking
wounded. By 2230 hours, 36 ambulance crews, a mobile ambulance control from
Motherwell and 11 Ambulance officers were at the scene. At this point the
Director sent a STOP message and the number of ambulances on scene was
reduced to 20. A joint Services' briefing took place at the Masonic Hall at
2300 hours and Ambulance and Fire command centre equipped with emergency BT
lines were established at the Lockerbie Academy by 0040 hours. The
Secretary of State for Scotland, his Shadow Opposition and the local MP were
given an on-site briefing by Police, Fire and Ambulance Chiefs and toured
the disaster area.

Although given the nature of the disaster there was little hope of finding
any survivors from the aircraft, searches continued over a wide area of the
town and its surrounds. At 0045 hours, 6 teams of 68 ambulance personnel
comprising an Ambulance Officer, Paramedic and Qualified Ambulance personnel
were formed to search with Police and Fire Service personnel for survivors
or bodies. Others were held in reserve as reliefs and in total more than
100 ambulance personnel were involved. Refreshments were provided for
Emergency Services personnel in the Academy canteen.

At 0345 hours, Police confirmed a STAND-DOWN until first light. By 0700
hours, following the planned return of some ambulance personnel to their
stations, 21 officers and vehicle crew staff with two accident and emergency
units (AEUs) and two patient transport vehicles (PTVs remained at the
scene. At 0840 hours, the Deputy Chief Constable, Strathclyde, briefed
Emergency Services on plans for further searches and confirmed that since
this was now a Police investigation, it would be conducted primarily by
Police and Defence Force personnel. The CSA Chairman and General Manager
arrived at this time to meet on-site Ambulance personnel. At 0900 hours,
all remaining personnel, with the exception of an officer and an AEU crew,
were returned to their stations. In view of the number of Service
personnel, visitors, relatives and press present in the town, a AEU was
retained on permanent standby for the next two days.

At 0900 hours on 22 December, Doctor Alma James, a specialist in stress
counselling and speaker at last year's Ambex Conference, offered her
services to the Scottish Ambulance Service. The Service's own Occupational
Health Service was advised of this offer and counselling facilities were
established at Glasgow and Edinburgh with local OHS staff. A few ambulance
personnel took advantage of this service.
THE LESSONS:

The presence of a District Ambulance Officer based in the locality with
local knowledge, and close working relationships with members of the other
Emergency Services, would have improved the early on-site command and
control of ambulances and medical resources. These officers are now in post
and development training will include leadership and command and control at
Major Incidents.

The inadequate manning levels and limited telephone landline facilities at
Dumfries Ambulance Control contributed to potentially serious delays in
alerting and deployment of resources, providing situation reports, matching
resources deployed to the demands of the incident and the transmission of
STOP and STAND-DCWN messages. The centralisation of the ambulance control
at Ayr with improved staffing and - eventually - computerised command and
control with ensure more efficient overall deployment of resources.

Difficulties of cross-Border radio communications were evident and limited
on-site to control communications contributed to the lack of inadequate
information emanating from the scene. The Scottish Office has now approved
a £6.5m Scottish Health Service Radio Communications System which will
produce comprehensive communications for the Ambulance Service and Health
Boards. The need for early on-site command and control was evident at
Lockerbie. Proposals to locate additional Rapid Response Units/Mobile
Ambulance Control Units strategically throughout Scotland will now be fully
implemented. These include provision for one based at Dumfries. In the
event, the nearest available unit at Motherwell did not arrive until one-
and-a-half hours after the incident occurred. Message display pagers have
since been supplied to all operational officers to ensure a fast and
appropriate response in future.

As at Hungerford, the cellular radios in the mobile ambulance controls were
affected by congestion in the system. The initiative taken jointly between
the Home Office and the Vodaphone Cellular Company in establishing priority
arrangements for Emergency Services in Major incidents is now in force.

The importance of the availability of patient transport vehicles (PTVs) to
convey additional ambulance manpower to the scene and evacuate quickly the
walking wounded was demonstrated well on this occasion. The specification
for competitive tendering of the Patient Transport Service will include a
requirement for these vehicles to be available for use by the Accident and
Emergency service.

Had there been a large number of live casualties in similar circumstances
spread over a wide and exposed area of countryside, the need for temporary
shelter would have proved essential. The Service is therefore purchasing
inflatable casualty clearing stations, additional thermal blankets and NATO
folding stretchers. Strategically located throughout the eight Areas of
Scotland, they will be stored in and conveyed to the scene by 4 x 4
equipment vehicles.

Inter-Service liaison for the duration of the incident between the
Ambulance, Police, Fire and General Practitioner Services was not as good as
it might have been due, in large measure, to the inadequacies of the
Ambulance Service telecommunications system.
Discussions had already taken place between the Association of Chief
Ambulance Officers and the Association of Chief Police Officers and Chief
and Assistant Chief Fire Officers Association in Scotland with a view to
establishing regular contact at national level on matters of operational
concern. More routinely, Divisional Liaison Committees comprising Officers
of all three Emergency Services are being established. These will
facilitate routine inter-Service problem solving and form a sound basis for
Major Disaster Planning.

The draft revised Major Incident Procedure for the Scottish Ambulance
Service addresses two perceived flaws in the extant Scottish Office advice.
Namely, that medical officers without routine field emergency medical
experience and lacking familiarity with the procedures and capability of the
Emergency Services can function effectively as site medical supremos with
responsibility for making decisions affecting the efficiency and
effectiveness of the Emergency Services. Secondly, that disasters and the
necessary response will be confined to one Health Board Area or indeed to
Scotland. It therefore proposes that the procedure should be in line with
that which already exists for the rest of the United Kingdom and the newly
appointed National Emergency Planning Officer for the Scottish Health
Service will be pursuing the publication of a comprehensive procedure which
takes full account of inter-Authority and cross-Border co-ordination needs.

The early response of Ministry of Defence helicopters highlighted the
potential for conveying ambulance and medical teams quickly to the scene and
for evacuating large numbers of casualties dispersed to several hospital
accident and emergency units. Pre-determined arrangements for three
medical, nursing and ambulance teams, suitably equipped and conveyed by MOD
rotary wing aircraft are being considered. The close proximity of an intact
inter-city railway line could have been exploited to convey to the scene
medical, nursing and ambulance personnel. In the event, Police re-
enforcements were moved in this way.


CONCLUSION:

This incident highlighted the key role of the Ambulance Service in the
initial alerting and primary mobilisation of hospital, medical and
paramedical services and the need for effective telecoranunications. The
potential for well organised on-site treatment and stabilisation of the
seriously injured prior to evacuation was also well demonstrated. The need
for an overall consistent and unambiguous Major Incident Procedure was
heavily underlined.

In general, it re-enforced the view that the NHS Service charged routinely
with responsibility for pre-hospital patient care and the maintenance of
24-hour telecommunications should assume an identical but enlarged role in
the event of a Major Disaster.

The Lockerbie disaster constituted in real terms an incident involving a
small number of relatively lightly injured casualties. In that sense, it
did not stretch the Service. It did, however, provide a unique opportunity
to test the Service's ability to respond to an incident involving a large
number of live casualties. It therefore served as a valuable lesson in
reinforcing already identified deficiencies and an imperative for these
inadequacies to be rectified before the Service is called upon to respond to
incidents of Clapham Junction, King's Cross or Bradford Stadium proportions.
                                DISCUSSION

                         LOCKERBIE AIR DISASTER

                      Questions and Answer Session


OBSERVATION: Mr. Jolliffe, Dorset.

Both of the previous Speakers laid great emphasis on communication with
particular reference to the cellular 'phones. Mr. Wilby made the point that
the problem at Hungerford had now been resolved. I would like to say that
it is only 50% resolved. There are currently in the market only Vodaphone
and Cellnet. Vodaphone came up with a solution but more should be done by
Cellnet.


QUESTION:     Mr. Paul Meek, Surrey.

In your presentation you showed how Ambulance teams were used in the role of
search, rescue and recovery. What was the response from colleagues in the
other Emergency Services?


ANSWER:       In the general search, which was mainly in the fields, there
was a need for    manpower rather than skills.Working together is the way
forward and I felt there was a need to try and promote full inter-Service
co-operation in the search process.


QUESTION:      Mr. Paul Meek, Surrey.

Did the Fire Service see that as their role?


ANSWER:        Not really. In that particular part of Scotland, the
relationship between the Emergency Services is very good.


QUESTION:      Mr. David Larkin, Bedfordshire.

Had there been many casualties needing hospital treatment, would that have
been a problem?


ANSWER:        A large number of helicopters from the Ministry of Defence
were present and they would have been able to transport patients to Glasgow
and Edinburgh. We are now proposing a plan with the MDD and Health Boards
to establish three ambulance and medical teams in Scotland able to respons
anywhere - ideally based in Aberdeen, Glasgow and Edinburgh.
QUESTION:      Mr. Roley Furber, Derbyshire.

Have you taken positive steps to actually write into your plan who will
undertake the role of the Site Medical Officer, e.g. doctors from BASICS?

ANSWER:        We have not taken that action yet. There is a commitment on
the part of the Scottish Home and Health Department to develop a structured
plan. It is envisaged they will be issuing advice with regard to the role
of Site Medical Officers. A new post of National Emergency Planning Officer
has been created for the Scottish Health Service.


QUESTION:      Mr. M. Ruffle, Lincolnshire.

Management of stress must have been somewhat unique because you were dealing
mainly with people who were already dead and grossly injured?


ANSWER:       With first light, it was quiet, the situation was grossly
obscene, devastating and very stressful. There was an offer from Alma James
to assist with stress counselling. In the event, the Common Services
Agency's Occupational Health Service set up two centres in Glasgow and
Edinburgh. Eight people took advantage of stress debriefing and
counselling. I and my Officers took the view that there was not an
immediate need to get Occupational Health Service staff at the scene. I
believe we should be training our Officers in debriefing and then only if
there are serious problems should the Occupational Health Service be
involved. I think self-referral is what is required.


OBSERVATION:   Mr. Barry Johns, West Midlands.

Regarding Rapid Response Officers and their initial training, there is a
necessity to train in control command and leadership.

ANSWER:       At every exercise we find officers havedifficulty  incoping.
We must take initiatives regarding control and management. We don't put
enough into it.

QUESTION:      Mr. C. Orme, Hereford and Worcester.

Clearly this was very much a recovery situation of dead bodies. In the
light of experience, are there any different arrangements you would make?
How were the bodies recovered?

ANSWER:       After a while we were told not to remove bodies at all but
just to peg and mark. In exercise terms it was a learning experience. We
have been allocated £100,000 to spend very quickly. We have bought four
inflatable tents and other equipment. The Lockerbie situation demonstrated
shortages in certain areas. If circumstances had been different,
inflatables would have been very helpful. We are now also purchasing back­
packs .

                                 Conclusion
LEICESTERSHIRE AMBULANCE SERVICE


   M1 KEGWORTH AIR DISASTER



         8 JANUARY, 1989




       PAPER PRESENTED BY


        MR. ALAN PARKER,

    CHIEF AMBULANCE OFFICER.




     MAJOR ACCIDENT SEMINAR

         NOTTINGHAM 1989
                     AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT 8 JANUARY, 1989

                         THE M1 KEGWDRTH DISASTER


East Midlands Airport is situated in Northwest Leicestershire just off
Junction 24 of the M1 and adjacent to Castle Donington Racing Circuit and
the Derbyshire Leicestershire border.

The Airport was established in 1965 and has seen substantial growth over the
years, currently handling 1.3 million passengers annually. Being close to
major air routes and enjoying a weather pattern that enables it to remain
open when other airports are closed, it is often used for diversion landings
or for aircraft in difficulties.

Dae to the prevailing south-westerly wind, the majority of landings approach
from the north-east, passing directly over the village of Kegworth and the
M1 just south of Junction 24.

Sunday evening, 8th January 1989, was a perfect night in the East Midlands,
it was warm, dry and clear, with little or no wind.

Flight B.D.92 with 127 passengers and crew had left Heathrow for Belfast
when it diverted to East Midlands Airport with a reported engine fire.

East Midlands Airport Air Traffic Control declared a FULL EMERGENCY at 2011
hours and notified the Leicestershire Police Control Room. This message was
passed by the Police to the Leicestershire Ambulance Service Control Room,
the Leicestershire Fire Service and was -

              "East Midlands Full Emergency
               A D.C.9 with an engine on fire
               High over East Midlands at the moment
               and losing altitude."

Upon verification of the details, the Ambulance Control Room initiated the
normal full emergency procedures, which include requests for assistance from
Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire Ambulance Services, the deployment of the
"on-call" Officers. The Chief and Deputy Chief Ambulance Officers were also
notified and mobilised to Ambulance Headquarters and the Airport
respectively.

Taking cognizance of the approach route of the Aircraft, the Ambulance
Service attends the Airport Emergency Rendezvous Point and at strategic
locations adjacent to the flight path.

Fifteen minutes after the Full Emergency was declared, at 2026 hours, calls
were received via Police Control and the 999 system indicating the Aircraft
had crashed on the M1 Motorway one to two miles south of Junction 24.

At this stage, the Ambulance Services were at minimum staffing levels and
had already committed ten to twelve vehicles and Officers in response to the
Full Emergency.
The first Ambulance attendance at the scene at 2037 hours was
Leicestershire's Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer who was almost immediately
joined by ambulance crews from all three Ambulance Services.

At 2039 hours the first report requested 20 ambulances and a further 10 in
reserve. 20 casualties were immediately available with the potential for a
considerable number of survivors, and an estimation of six to eight hours
duration for the incident to be dealt with.

It was approximately 30 minutes into the incident before it was physically
possible to separate the normal emergency service from the incident radio
traffic, and to begin to cope in any ordered way with the saturation of
phone calls.

Intriguingly the level of domestic work dropped away, and with the
unstinting support of the local G.Ps and Deputising Service, the call upon
the Service for normal situations was minimal, although during the duration
of the incident, from 2011 until 0600 hours, the Leicestershire Service
dealt with 20 Emergency and 13 Urgent cases.

At this time on a Sunday the Leicestershire Ambulance Service Control is
staffed by one Superintendent (AOII) one Control Officer (AOI) and one CA I,
and on this particular evening, an off duty Superintendent who had called in
to see a colleague.

They were joined by myself at 2037 hours and were at that time ensuring the
resourcing of the incident. It was rapidly obvious with the early reports,
that it would be necessary to call in additional staff, and one member of
the team was delegated to this function.

By the time the Divisional Commander Communications had arrived in the roan
at 2045 hours, information relating to the incident had reached the media.
The result was a continuous stream of calls seeking information, sore from
as far away as Melbourne and New York.

This immediate media response, whilst placing an almost intolerable burden
on the Control Room, had the effect of alerting many staff who also
responded by phoning the Control.

The net effect of these factors enabled a rapid build-up of personnel, but
in a manner which was difficult to manage, particularly prior to the
reinforcement of the Control staff who experienced unbelievable pressures in
their endeavours to resource the incident, collect and disseminate
information, and maintain a normal emergency Ambulance Service.

The first two hours had to be experienced to be believed. The pressure of
incoming telephone calls reached saturation point, blocking all available
lines. It is in these circumstances that the Discrete incoming and outgoing
lines proved invaluable. Until the reinforcement of the Control staff it
was not possible to do more than barely cope with the essentials. This
delayed the transfer of the incident to E.R.C. and meant that even after
this the radio operator had to also deal with the normal workload as well as
the incident traffic.

From approximately 2300 hours the workload diminished enabling the Control
staff to collate the necessary information and commence assessing the likely
effect on the next day's work.
It had been necessary, due to the operational distribution of vehicles, to
move ambulances to other Stations for oncoming night crews, thus depleting
the normal Day Outpatient fleet.

A considerable logistics problem had to be co-ordinated during the remainder
of the night, arranging for vehicles to be fueled, cleaned and ready in the
correct places for the outpatient staff at 0730 hours on the Monday morning.

This activity continued, together with the requirements of the incident,
until 0600 hours when the Control returned to normal for the ensuing day.


ACCIDENT SITE

The crash site was approximately one mile south of the M1 Junction 24 on
the western embankment. At this point the motorway passes through a cutting
and is separated from the A453 by an embankment sane 35 to 40 feet high.

Sunday evening is a busy time on this section of the motorway and, although
no vehicles were involved, a large number of motorists stopped to assist at
the scene. Some of the survivors were removed from the aircraft by members
of the public. The resultant traffic jams caused major difficulties for
vehicles approaching the area. The only access for the first hour was
either the hard shoulder for approximately five miles or South on the
Northbound carriageway from Junction 24.

The first vehicle and crew to arrive had an immediate availability to
casualties, most of whom were seriously injured, and there was a high
expectation of treatment and rapid removal by large numbers of public
present, as well as the need to assist in the treatment and rescue of those
still in the aircraft.

Upon impact the fuselage broke into three sections. The front section
detached approximately half way between the wings and the cockpit. This
part travelled forward about 30 - 40 feet from the main section. The
internal damage to the fuselage was considerable, with many passengers being
buried in debris or passing through the floor into the luggage compartment
creating major difficulties in the location, treatment and extrication of
the casualties. The tail, from the rear of the cabin as the fuselage
starts to taper, broke away and flipped up to a just off vertical elevation.

The embankment at this point is steep, with the clay soil wet and slippery.
Available manpower was deployed to cut three flights of steps, one up to the
port side of the wreckage, one to the lower end of the tail section and a
third up to the top of the embankment.

An initial triage/loading point was established under the command of a
Derbyshire Leading .Ambulanceman on the M 1 .

After an assessment of the scene, the decision was taken, in the light of
the injuries that had been sustained, to effect the immediate removal of
those casualties that were available, and a second triage/loading point was
identified on the top of the bank on the A453, which was required-for those
casualties who were taken up the bank from the front of the fuselage.
The severity of injuries required immediate supportive treatment and rapid
evacuation to hospital. The majority of patients having sustained multiple
fractures were in need of infusion, analgesia and splinting. Sane of the
difficulties to be overcome were -

1.   Severe facial injury plus fractured mandible, required 86 units of
     blood to replace losses, plus ligatures of both external carotid
     arteries. Other injuries included head requiring 4 burrholes,
     fractures to C1 and C2 cervical spine, fractured left tibia.

2.   Compound dislocation of the right ankle resulting in eventual
     amputation of the leg.

3.   Ankle dislocation with a fractured talus.

4.   Severe compound fracture of tibia and fibula treated with an external
     fixation and a skin-graft around area of the compound wound.

5.   Fractured tibia and fibula.

6.   Bilateral multiple lower leg fractures.

7.   Fractured left shaft of femus.

8.   Bruising to the pelvic hip region by lap seat belts.

9.   Right dislocation of hip.

These are just a few examples of how most patients presented.


PATIENT DISTRIBUTION.

Due to the road links and favourable traffic conditions, the bulk of the
early casualties removed were taken to the Queens Medical Centre in
Nottingham. The QMC received a total of 40 casualties between 2115 and 2235
hours, the majority by 2218 hours. Derbyshire Royal Infirmary admitted 25
patients between 2110 and 2346 hours but traffic conditions were more
difficult on this side of the motorway.

The Leicester Royal Infirmary received 21 patients, 14 between 2200 and
2330, a further 6 by helicopter between 0013 and 0219 and the final patients
by helicopter at 0500 hours.

The flow of patients was dictated partly by traffic and road conditions, the
capacity of the hospitals influencing the distribution as resources became
stretched.


TRANSPORT

The incredible response of the staff, together with the support from
Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Staffordshire Ambulance Services, enabled
sufficient vehicles and personnel to be deployed to effect an almost
immediate removal as casualties were released, vehicles often leaving with
one or two casualties only as each needed constant attention to their
injuries and general condition.
Sufficient staff were also available to be deployed within the aircraft
where they were invaluable in treating patients prior to their release.
Many staff distinguished themselves on this occasion and brought into sharp
relief the effectiveness of extended skills in a multi-casualty situation,
bringing much praise from the medical and nursing staff involved.

Access to the R.A.F.. Helicopters was on this occasion a bonus, providing
rapid transport to the furthest hospital, the Leicester Royal Infirmary,
where the survivors who had been trapped for long periods were admitted.
For example, the last survivor was finally released at 0410, his injuries
were so severe that he received medical attention on site for approximately
30 minutes before being airlifted to Leicester where he was admitted at 0500
hours. Regrettably he died within a few minutes of his arrival, having
spent nearly seven hours trapped in the cargo hold. He was conscious
throughout and had talked with the team who rescued him.


HAZARD

Due to the large number of personnel involved, approaching 700, and the high
fire risk, it was decided to maintain a large ambulance presence during the
night, backed by one helicopter, and a fourth hospital, Burton District,
remained on standby until the early hours of the morning.

Ambulance cover continued continuously until dusk on Monday 9th January and
then during daylight hours until the last wreckage had been removed on
Friday 13th January.


VIDEO (talked through by Mr. Parker).

The video gives a snapshot of the events at Kegworth on the evening of the
8th January, and goes some way to illustrate the scale of the operation.
It shows how in the early stages the only light was from Fire Service
floodlights and street lamps. Note how this builds up with the scene being
very well illuminated with assistance of the Miners Rescue Service. See the
close teamwork simultaneously occurring throughout the scene and the
involvement of ambulance crews at all times and with all casualties.

The video, which is made up of news footage, also shows that whilst there
were more Beacons than should have been on, it was not the scene depicted by
television, although this shot is included and possibly did more to enhance
the public image of the Ambulance Service than any other coverage on that
night.


LESSONS TO BE LEARNED

The M1 Kegworth Air Disaster was unique, as are all Major Accidents, and it
brought with it lessons to be learned. That is not to say that, overall,
the incident was not successfully managed.

What have we learned?

1.   Aircraft accidents are survivable.   63% of those on board Flight DB 92
     survived.
2.   The resultant injuries, together with Ambulance Paramedic skills,
      require the overall availability of sufficient stocks of fluids, giving
      sets and analgesia.

3.   It is not necessarily the best option to account for patients leaving
      the scene. On this occasion we checked them into destinations. This
     proved very successful.

4.   It is imperative that ground communications are rapidly available and
      not totally vehicle dependant. Our Communications vehicle engine
      failed, causing the failure of 90% of our ground communications system.

5.   Cell phones are a useful adjunct to the communications equipment,
      proving their worth on this occasion.

6.   The media coverage led to difficulties in co-ordinating the number of
      staff who contacted the Service, resulting in some staffing
     difficulties the following day.

7.   Stress counselling mast be readily available and positively encouraged.

8.   The need to provide toilet facilities for the ever increasing number
      of female staff deployed to incidents.

9.   The value of planning. It is a relief to know that it does really work
      in other than exercise conditions.

10. The need for good site control. We had too many ad hoc Doctors,
     Ambulance Staff, Mountain Rescue etc. including public who gained
     unchallenged access. This requires close Police-Ambulance co-operation
     and communications.

The tragedy of this incident brought with it many successes.

The high initial and ongoing survival of those involved proves the
effectiveness of the response at all levels. Tremendous credibility was
achieved for the training of ambulance staff in Extended Skills.

The co-ordination of an incident involving three Ambulance, Police and Fire
Services, plus support from many agencies, was remarkably good.

The professional relationship between the Leicestershire Emergency Services
has improved beyond the previously good state, particularly between the Fire
and Ambulance Services where considerable mutual respect has been achieved.

The fact that on a Sunday night, the Ambulance Service was able to deploy
within a short time -

                      181 Ambulance Personnel

                       14 Officers

                       75 Ambulance Vehicles
                                                i

               Plus   Ambulance Control and Liaison Staff

who between them treated and conveyed 82 seriously injured survivors to
hospital, 76 within 21/2 hours of the accident.
The injuries sustained in both severity and number are difficult to
comprehend, the slides give the details, but 191 fractures were sustained
between the 82 survivors.
                     191
               TOTAL FRACTURES
       (IDENTIFIED FROM 82 SURVIVORS)

          Fractures - Upper Limb
            (from 82 survivors)

Clavicle                                    1
Scapula                                     6
Dislocated Shoulder                         7
Humerus Radius & Ulna                       8
Radius & Ulna                              20
Carpal Bone                                 1
Hand                                        5


          Fractures - Lower Limb
              (82 Survivors)

Pelvis (10 acetabular                      25
Hip dislocation                             5
Femur                                      22
Knee injuries                               3
Tibia/Fibula                               30
Ankle                                      17
Talus                                       4
Calcaneus                                   1
Mid foot                                    4
Metatarsal                                  6



               C.N.S Injuries

Hand Injuries                              35
Skull fracture                              3
Facial fracture                             3
Spinal fractures                           20
  5 with neurological loss




Disasters are incidents that create casualties
substantially in excess of the capacity of the
local Health Care System.
                               DISCUSSION

                        Ml KEGWORTH AIR DISASTER.

                           Questions and Answers



QUESTION      Mr. David Carrington, Scotland.

Your initial notification was classified as Full Emergency. Was this
upgraded to Aircraft Crash? Do you normally respond to an incident in that
way?

ANSWER:       Yes, we do normally respond in that wayto an aircraft
incident. The response of myself and the Deputy was unusual. It was
upgraded by the Police to an Aircraft Crash at 20.26 hours.

QUESTION:     Mr. R. Rogers, Clwyd.

You chose to take the casualties to three designated hospitals. At what
stage was that decision rrade? Was it a conscious decision or did you wait
for one to become full and then use another?

ANSWER:       Derby and Nottingham were equaldistance from the scene.
Road and traffic flow dictated the course of action. Derby took those from
the top of the scene as they were nearer to the top road.

QUESTION:     Mr. M. Tarry, Northamptonshire.

Would you like to comment about the Medical Teams from the three hospitals?

ANSWER:        There were three Medical Teams. Whether it was the wisest
decision is difficult to say. It did not seem to jeopardise the response of
the hospitals.

QUESTION:     Mr. Paul Meek, Surrey.

Was any on-site triage performed?   Was there a Casualty Collecting Point?

ANSWER:         Initially triage was carried out. The response was such, and
injuries were such, that it was unwise to delay the departure of casualties
from the scene.

The remaining casualties were treated by a combination of Doctors and
Ambulancemen in the aircraft itself and then delivered to the hands of staff
at the bottom of the scene.

QUESTION:     Mr. David Larkin, Bedfordshire.

It would be helpful if you could share with us your thoughts regarding
communications in this particular incident. -There is a constant theme about
communications at Major Incidents. You have indicated that your own Major
Incident Vehicle was not able to be used. Did you have it at the scene?
ANSWER:        There was a mobile control on scene, but totally inoperable
so this did not perform a useful function, so it was back to runners on
foot. I have my own personal view on how a Major Incident should be
controlled. Also possibly to consider that the mobile control is no more
than a communications facilitator.

We had to rely on Officers as runners, but we had four back to back handheld
portable radios specifically for motorway incidents. We have taken a
decision that to be very effective w e 'should build up ground communications
to link through with ERC.

My concern is that any vehicle based system can suffer the same problems
again. We are now designing a module, vehicle based, but which has the
facility to be independent of that vehicle.

Concerning communications between the three Services, both through control
systems and on the ground, was excellent. It was based on people talking to
each other - there was no difficulty. Communications between the three
Services was excellent.

QUESTION:      Dr. L. Martin, Department of Health.

Volunteers always do, and always will, arrive on scene. Could you say
something about calling for volunteers? I know the voluntary Aid Societies
are concerned about their role; Who calls for what and when?

ANSWER:        Within our own Service Procedures for Major Incidents we
would initially request on the basis of assessment by the Officer in Charge
of the Incident. The basic medical manpower on the scene is our staff and
we leave the rescue to the Fire Service. I would put forward the view that
volunteers should be co-ordinated through Ambulance Control so that we know
who is there. One of the problems at this Incident was thefreedom of
people generally to wander round the scene.

It did not come in a controlled way. As far as St. John and Red Cross are
concerned, I support the concept that they should be co-ordinated through
the Ambulance Control.

QUESTION:      Mr. K. Nuttall, Berkshire.

We hear the question about Regional Trauma Centres, given that Trent is a
large area, and say Sheffield was the Trauma Centre, how would this have
affected your situation?

ANSWER:       I come from a District with one large CasualtyReceiving Unit
and feel this should be done in Leicester. If it goes ahead this will bring
benefit. In answer to your question, I would say sheer panic, it would cost
lives because of the distance.

QUESTION:      Mr. Peter Ediss, Department of Health.

I was conscious of Alan's (Mr. Parker's) excellent relationships and then,
when we saw the video, there seemed to be confusion at the scene who was
directing what within the aircraft. If you have any problems when a patient
is trapped, is it the Medical Officer who deals with it?
ANSWER:        We did not experience any problems in this particular
incident, i.e. crossing boundaries of responsibility. As casualtieswere
discovered a shout went up for Ambulance or Medical input. The Ambulance
Service has the responsibility for Major Incidents. This was a triapartide
effort.

OBSERVATION:   Mr. Bill Almond Staffordshire.

When we call out the Voluntary Services we do it through the County
Emergency Planning Officer and he becomes part of the team.

ANSWER:       They were called to a location away from the scene and then
called as appropriate. This gives the Voluntary Services the feeling that
they are fulfilling an effective role in the incident. The Ambulance
Service has the responsibility for the VAS and the Ambulance Officer is well
briefed to handle this.

OBSERVATION    Mr. Frederick Thomley, Oxfordshire.

I support what Alan (Mr. Parker) says. We within Oxfordshire have secured
an agreement with Voluntary Services that they go to holding areas at our
request and they will place themselves under our control. They accept the
principle. The good point is that volunteers should be employed where you
need them rather than where they think they ought to be .

OBSERVATION: Mr. Tom Crosby, London.

Last year we had to rescue people from a Chemical Incident and we had great
help from the VAS but totally under ourcontrol.

ANSWER:         We do recognise the role that the VAS play and most systems
work well.

OBSERVATION: Mr. David Cobb, Gloucestershire.

Voluntary Aid Societies are valuable. What we are really talking about is
that the Ambulance Service has been striving to get a more professional
image. I have not seen any voluntary resource on any of the films we have
seen today. Management of the site needs to be done by a professional
service.

ANSWER:        We are a professional Service there to save life. There is
always a question mark as to whether we have the resource.    On this
particular occasion the Ambulance Service managed, on a Sunday evening, to
put 181 Ambulance Personnel, 14 Officers, and 75 vehicles into the incident.

                                 Conclusion.
  OPEN   FORUM   AND


    ACTION   PLAN




MAJOR ACCIDENT SEMINAR


    NOTTINGHAM 1989
                        OPEN FORUM AND ACTION PLAN.

Mr. Thomley chaired this session and reaffirmed the objectives of the
Seminar identifying those which had already been achieved which were :

1.   To gain knowledge and share experiences arising out of the three most
     recent Major Incidents which had occurred in the United Kingdom.


2.   To draw out of the day comments and lessons which may well benefit all
     Services and possibly influence our current and future planning
     arrangements for Major Incidents.

At this point delegates were invited to put any final questions to a panel
of the day's Speakers. These questions and answers were as follows :

QUESTION:      Mr. Alan Murray, Northern Ireland.

A point has been made that we lag far behind our Sister Services in Officer
Training, i.e. leadership, command and control training, etc. Is there not
a case for a National Ambulance Staff College?

ANSWER:        Mr. John Wilby, Scotland.

We are at present making the best use of available resources. We are so
pre-occupied with the more broad NHS management training that sometimes I
feel we are beginning to lose our way. We are left holding the baby and I
think we should say that we are not getting the resource we require. We
need training in the NHS Ambulance Service to prepare ourselves and officers
with the increasing likelihood of Major Incidents like the other two
Emergency Services. They tend to take initiatives. Now is the time to take
this matter seriously.

The other two Speakers agreed with Mr. Wilby and Mr. Parker said Chief
Ambulance Officers are responsible for the management of a resource which is
forever stretched.

QUESTION       Mr. Roley Furber, Derbyshire.

Is it not significant that the current training review excludes officers?

ANSWER:        Mr. Michael Willis, Norfolk.

Once we have achieved Basic Training for Ambulance Staff we will move on.
The NHSTA are aware of the problems and we are pushing for
command/leadership initiative training. It is what is taking priority at
the moment. Services must support this type of training for officers.'

OBSERVATION:   Brian (?), Merseyside.

Following on from training, there is a need for a Press Relations Officer on
site. The Service is lacking in this aspect.
ANSWER:       Mr. Parker, Leicestershire.

We are sending Senior Officers on a Media Course. At the incident we were
having a major problem in the Control Room with an overwhelming number of
media calls, so I support that.

ANSWER:       Mr.   Hugh Chambers, London.

We did have a Public Relations Officer in London and it does take the
pressure off the Ambulance Service.

QUESTION:     Northern Ireland.

Site Control and Site Handling - what documentation was completed at the
site? What value and use were the Medical Teams and Volunteers.

ANSWER:       Mr.   Parker, Leicestershire.

The co-ordination of medical aid should go through Ambulance Control to
ensure that you get the right resource and not more than you need.

The Medical Teams were used, there were amputations. The Nursing
involvement was excessive and they were not properly equipped.

Documentation? The bare minimum, the AS 11 (Casualty Report Form) was all
that was completed. It was not appropriate to do anything else.

ANSWER:       Mr.   John Wilby, Scotland.

The NHS Ambulance Service must assume responsibility for the injured as we
are charged with pre-hospital emergency care. Suddenly we have to make
arrangements for people who are unfamiliar with the procedures. As far as
the VAS are concerned, it is a paramedical role and they must come under the
control of the Ambulance Service.

ANSWER:        Mr. Hugh Chambers, London.

Regarding documentation, as far as the train disaster was concerned, this
was logged by the control team at a special incident desk and the
documentation is an important part of the evidence that has to be given to
any Inquiry.

Regarding Voluntary Aid Societies, from experience it is not the control
responsibility that is a worry, it is when it reaches the headlines and
people with First Aid Certificates, General Practitioners, etc., arrive on
site. Therefore, Forward Ambulance Control Units must be the focal point
for all medical resources on site. Everyone should report to the Ambulance
Medical Control point on site.

QUESTION:      Mr. Keith Nuttall, Berkshire.

With regard to the NHS Review, you made reference to 14Sitting Case
Vehicles attending the incident. With competitivetendering, where   does
this leave us at a future incident?
ANSWER:         Mr. John Wilby, Scotland.

In Scotland, competitive tendering includes this eventuality.

OBSERVATION:    Mr. B. Jukes, Yorkshire.

I think what has been raised by the last question is the difference of
philosophy in the NHS which is more often than not looking at local level.
You need to go above that to deal with crisis situations. There is a need
to maintain an adequate infrastructure. This could pose a conflict for
Ministers. I think we ought, as a group, to be putting this issue forward.

ANSWER:         Mr. A. Parker, Leicestershire.

In our experience, if we lost our outpatient service manpower/vehicles, we
would not be able to maintain our other services during a Major Incident.
Take that resource away and I would not be able.to have an Emergency Plan.

OBSERVATION:    Mr. Laurie Caple, Northumbria.

Perhaps at this time it would be helpful to advise that the nationally
accepted Casualty Label is the Thames Regional Label.

OBSERVATION-.   Mr. Frederick Thomley, Oxfordshire.

When the Major Incident Sub Group of the Regional Ambulance Officers Group
looked at the issue of Casualty Labelling, we actually looked at 132
different types of labels. This is surely wrong. There must be a will to
change away from such non-standard methods.

At this point the commended label was shown to delegates and the Chairman
urged all those present to move towards the National Standard Casualty
Label.

Symposium members were agreed that there were still many issues to be
addressed. Emerging out of the discussions were the following
recommendations :


(1)       There is an urgent need to further the work of the RAOs Group
           relative to the revision of HC(77)1, which is now over twelve
           years old.

(2)       It is recommended that there is a statutory requirement for the
           participation by NHS Ambulance Services in the present licensing
           arrangements for public events which could have a potential for
           Major Incidents which may involve serious injury of loss of life.

(3)       Further thought needs to be given to the provision of Medical
           Teams, their composition, and who should provide them.

(4)       There is a need to ensure that the Ambulance Service is recognised
           as the medical focal point on an incident site for professional
           and voluntary first aid organisation.
(5)      It is recommended that the "Thames Casualty Label", recently
         recommended by the Regional Ambulance Officers Group, should be
         adopted as a standard label for the NHS to use in primary triage
         at the scenes of Major Incidents; this replacing the multiplicity
         of labels at present in use within the NHS.

(6)      There is an identified training need in respect of Officers,
         particularly in the area of Control/Command.

(7)      There is an urgent need for Services to provide full protective
          clothing (especially helmets). Such clothing should be clearly
         marked/signed so as to identity Ambulance/Paramedics.

(8)      There is a need to ensure a disciplined approach to the wearing
          of such clothing at all times.

(9)      There is a need to improve mechanisms for the sharing of
          information relative to Major Incidents. This aspect is crucial
          if expertise is to be gained and techniques improved.

(10)     There is a requirement for improved media relationships and
          contacts.

(11)     Services must improve the mechanisms for giving staff more
          education and continuing help with relieving stress.

Considerable discussion took place involving all the delegates regarding the
desirability of holding a broader based NHS Seminar. It was agreed that the
RAOs Group should seek to organise such an event and invite representatives
from the following groups :

          (1)   Department of Health

          (2)   Regional and District General Managers

          (3)   U.K. Chief Ambulance Officers.

          (4)   Casualty Consultants Association.

          (5)   HEPOs

          (6)   BASICS

          (7)   Senior Medical Officers

          (8)   Critical Care Nurses.



PRODUCTION OF REPORT

It was agreed by all the delegates that a comprehensive report should be
prepared, approved by the RAOs Group, and circulated to all Ambulance
Services, the Department of Health, and other interested parties in the NHS.



                                       oOo
