         THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
         Room 1106
         50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
         Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



C P Domes Esq                                                Your reference:
H M Coroner
Medico-Legal Centre                                          Our reference:
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD S3 7ET                                             Date:              9 February 1998




    cDcoy /Mr Q o //
I expect you know that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has completed his report about the evidence
relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster, and given it to the Home Secretary. I
anticipate that the Home Secretary will publish it soon and I will ensure that you are sent a
copy (a separate copy will go to Dr Popper).

2.      Meanwhile, I am clearing the office. I have a letter from the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, dated early in January, in which they ask if I can let them have a copy o f the
transcript of a ‘business meeting’ about the inquests which took place on 6 March 1990. I
see that I wrote to you about this before Christmas, following an earlier approach from the
Group, and I attach a copy of my letter. You did o f course respond at some length to the
main issue (about the Kevin Williams death certificate) which I mentioned then, but I do not
recall hearing any more about the transcript.

3       We have checked again and been unable to find the transcript here. I do not think it
would be right for me to send the Group a copy o f it even if we had it, but I would like to be
able to send them a positive reply of some kind. Can you (or PC Greenway) help please?




 C F BONE
 Secretary to the Scrutiny




 A:\CORONER.247
                  THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                  Room 1106
                  50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London, SW1H9AT
                  Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



C P Domes Esq                                                    Your reference:
H M Coroner
Medico-Legal Centre                                              Our reference:
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD S3 7ET                                                Date:         I tO December 1997




I enclose a copy of a letter which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has recently sent to Dr Popper
concerning the death certificate for Kevin Williams.

2.      We understand that Dr Popper has already alerted you to our interest in this, but it might
help if I recap by saying that Dr Popper replied to the Judge’s letter in terms that the certificate
was altered after you had taken over the post of Coroner. He suggested that we redirect the
Judge’s questions to you.

3.      Can you tell us please whether, when the certificate was altered, Dr Slater had changed
his view that the asphyxia which caused Kevin’s death was due to compression o f both his neck
and his chest? I think it would be useful also if - as Dr Popper has suggested to us - we could
have a copy of the post-mortem report on Kevin Williams and (a better copy of) his death
certificate.

4.     I am sorry to be troubling you on these points. On another issue, I have had from Ann
Adlington at the Family Support Group a copy o f your letter to her o f 4 December, saying that
you do not have a copy of the transcript of a business meeting which took place on 6 March
1990. You suggest that we might have it here.

5.      We have had from the South Yorkshire police what Iunderstand are your office’s copies
of the full transcript of the Hillsborough inquests - the ‘mini-inquest’ transcripts are kept loosely
in a box and the transcript of the main inquest is in a run o f black ring-binders. The earliest
occasion for which we have a transcript is the preliminary proceedings on 18 April 1990. But I
am afraid that we cannot find any material about the ‘business meeting’ on 6 March 1990.

6.         I am not sure how best to progress this. It may be that Mr Greenway     will be able to
help.      If he has sent it to us, when and with what?




C F BO NE
Secretary to the Scrutiny

G \H IL L S B O R \M A IN \C O R O N E R . 2 0 8
