INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                            London SW1H 9AT
                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370


F R C Luff Esq
Head of Safety, Security,
 Community & Supporters Liaison
QPR Football & Athletic Club Ltd
Rangers Stadium
Shepherds Bush
LONDON                                      Date
W12 7PA                        j
                                               30 November 1989




                >



HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
NATIONAL FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME

I am writing on Lord Justice Taylor's behalf to thank you for
your letter of 22 November with your paper on a response to the
Football Spectators Bill.  I know Lord Justice Taylor will find
this most interesting.

You kindly invited Lord Justice Taylor, on behalf of the Chairman
and Board of Directors of Queens Park Rangers FC, to join them
for the fixture against Chelsea on Saturday 9 December.  Lord
Justice Taylor was most grateful for that invitation, but has
already made other arrangements for that day, so will not be able
to accept.
                                        y

                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
Queens-                                                                                 QPR F o o tb a ll & A th le tic C lu b Ltd,                                                                                                Date 22nd November 1989

 Pa r k                                                                                  Ra n g e r s S t a d iu m , S h ep h e r d s B u s h ,
                                                                                         London  W12 7PA                                                                                                                           0urRef
                                                                                         Telep hon e: 01-743 0262.

rangers                                                                                  Fax Num ber: 01-749 0994                                                                                                              Your Ref




                                     Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor,
                                     50 Queen Anne's Gate,
                                     London, SIV1H 9AT




                                     Dear Lord Justice Taylor,

                                     National Football Membership Scheme

                                     Following the Hillsborough tragedy, I forwarded a copy of
                                     "A Response To The Football Spectators Bill" incorrectly
                                     addressed to yourself at the House of Lords. A second copy
                                     is enclosed, minus the Appendices, which are available if
                                     required.
                                     The paper was sent to the Prime Minister, the Home Secretary,
                                     the Minister for Sport, the Football Association and League etc.
                                     in January this year. A number of issues discussed relate to
                                     crowd control, misbehaviour and violence in soccer with proposed
                                     remedial measures.
                                    Since the Bill became statute, and the scheme is now inevitable,
                                    I have joined A.D.T. Check-In as a consultant, promoting their
                                    personalised ticket voucher system. In my view, the system
                                    is effective, simple, low cost and a much better option than
                                    the I.D. computer cards with expensive computer technology.
                                    It is a sensible ctmpromise solution to the current situation
                                    complimenting safety without resulting in the demise of football
                                    as a spectator sport.
                                    The Chairman and Board of Directors of Queens Park Rangers F.C.
                                    extend an open and cordial invitation to our stadium at any
                                    time. We will be honoured and delighted if you are able to
                                    accept. Our fixture against Chelsea on Saturday, 9th December,
                                    kick-off at 3.00 p.m., with a probable capacity crowd, may
                                    assist your research.




C o r p o r a t e D i r e c t o r s : R .C . T h o m p s o n (C h a ir m a n )    C .B . B e r l i n   b .a .(h o n s )   ( M a n a g in g )   R .B . C o p u s ,   m ,a „ a . c a   S e c r e t a r y : M is s S.F. M a r s o n

R e g is te re d in E n g la n d N o. 6 0 0 9 4 .        R e g is te re d O ffic e a s a b o v e .
There are no perimeter fences in our stadium, despite considerable
pressure over the years form the authorities to install them.
We express our sincere support and best wishes in your
important and demanding enquiry.

Yours sincerely,




F.R.C. Luff
Head of Safety, Security,
Conmunity and Supporters Liason




enc.
                          A RESPONSE TO

             THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL




                         Frederick Luff
             Head of Security, Safety,
         Comnunity 8 Supporters Liaison at

                     qomNS PARK RANGERS F.C.
     .   .   .   .         .   -          ■ \

(ex-CMef Superintendent Metropolitan Police)
                              CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION        1.(1) - 1.3(a) and       (b)

THE CONSEQUENCES    2. (1) (i) - (v)

VITAL ATTITUDES     Government - 3.(1)
                     Football Authorities - 3.(2)

IDENTIFICATION OF   4(1) (i) - (vi)
THE CURRENT PROBLEM

STRATEGY AND        General - 5.(1)
RESPONSE            Initial approach to reduce the dilemna - 5.(2)

PROPOSED CODE OF CONDUCT

                     Specific Ground Rules - 6.(1)(i)
                     Teams to enter pitch together - 6.(1)(ii)
                     Effective liaison - 6.(l)(iii)
                    ;Training 8 briefing of stewards - 6.(l)(iv)
                    '-Dedicated family and membership areas - 6.1(v)
                     'Other initiatives - 6.(2)
                     priority - 6.(3)
                     Government response - 6.(4)

BASIC PRINCIPLES AND ISSUES - THE COST

                     Government policy - privatisation - 7.(1)
                     Consultants, Arthur Young - Bankruptcies - 7.(2)
                     No monetary charge for police - 7.(3)
                     League clubs contribution - 7.(4)

KEY PRINCIPLES AND ISSUES

                     Defined areas of liability and costs - 8.(1)
                     Police costs - 8.(2) - 8.(3)
                     Determined Manning levels and costs - 8.(4) - 8.(7)

MEASURES TO REDRESS BALANCE

                     Arbitration - 8-(8)(i )
                     Proportionate payment - 8.(8)(ii)

PROPOSED NATIONAL MIMJERSHIP SCHEME/FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

                     General - 9.(1)
                     Minister's "League Table" of Arrests - 9. (2)(i )
                     Analysis and sunmary of Q.P.R. Arrests - 9. (2)(ii)

WEUEME PROPOSALS

                     Restrictions on hooligans travelling abroad - 10.
                     Exemptions from scheme - 11. (i) - (ii)

CONFINE LEGISLATION TO SUSPECT GROUPS    -    12.
                                   - 2 -


MEMBERSHIP CARDS

                        Working Party recomnendations - 13.(1)
                        Signature required - 13.(2)
                        Potential benefits'of photographs 8 signatures - 13.(3)
                        Free issue of membership cards - 13.(4)

PROPOSED NEW CRIMIMM. OFFENCES     -   14. (1) - 14. (2)

CO-ORDINATED POLICY FOR REVIVAL

                        General - 15.(1)
                        Key responses for survival and revival - 15.(2)(i) - (xii)

REQUIRED RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER PGR SPORT 6 POLICE

                        The Minister - 16.(1)
                        Police - 16.(2) - (3)(a ) and (b)

SIMvlARY OF STRATEGIC OPTIONS

            OPTION 1   - National I.D. Card - 17.(1)(i) - (v)
            OPTION 2   - Mandatory National Membership Scheme - 17.(2)(i)
        I   OPTION 3   - Mandatory National Membership Scheme restricted
    j                    to suspect groups AND Voluntary Membership
                         Scheme for the remainder - 17.(3)(i)
            OPTION 4   - Voluntary Membership Scheme F.A. Code of Conduct
                         co-ordinated policy - 17.(4 )(i ) - 17. (5)(iii)

CONCLUSION              18.
INTRODUCTION

1.(1)     The primary objectives of this paper are an attempt to secure the
          future of our national game and acceptable standards of decency in
          our society. The sad reality is that too many authorities involved
          have adopted an inflexible approach, shaping the facts to their
          theories.
          The problem has not yet been precisely identified, exaggerated by
          the Minister for Sport to support the perceived solution of
          a national identity scheme and simultaneously played down by many
          involved in football, who totally reject the proposal.

1.(2)     The current specific problem must first be accurately identified
          before balanced effective measures can be determined to provide
          a long term solution. Objective co-operation from all agencies
          involved is essential. Continued confrontation and intransigent
          attitudes must somehow be replaced by a common determination to
          achieve effective legislation, which will ultimately eradicate
          violent and offensive behaviour by the minority.

1.(3)    The Government and the football authorities presently sit on the
         horns of a dilemma as they join together on a working party, which
         seeks to find a solution for the problems in soccer.
          (a)   Government are committed to imposing a national membership
                scheme which, hopefully, they now begin to realise would be
                anti-soccer, rather than anti-hooligan, evidenced in part by
                a letter to all chairmen from the Minister for Sport, in which
                a number of exemptions are now proposed in the draft Football
                Spectators Bill (see Appendix 'A' and 'B').
          (b)   The Football Association, Football League representatives and
                other football executives probably now recognise they should
                have agreed to implement a voluntary membership scheme. They
                should have refrained from uttering declarations which
                understated the real problem of violence and bad manners by
                certain spectators in soccer. Their mutual dilemma is how to
                find a balanced strategy which will effectively deal with the
                issue without loss of further credibility from the public at
                large.

THE CONSEQUENCES

2.(1)     (i)   Football gates have declined by 45% over the past decade.
                The current 5 million fans are now a minority group in society,
                with the majority turning to fishing, rugby, hockey and bowls
                as an alternative.
         (ii)   This Government, supported by the public at large, are prepared
                to sacrifice our national game because they unjustly perceive
                it to be an industry, which has abandoned the principles of
                sportsmanship and decency, purely for commercial gain.
        (iii)   The true law-abiding supporters despair at the intransigent
                attitudes of Government and football authorities, with little
                confidence that the decision making groups will determine
                a sensible solution to save the game they love. They will
                welcome tough measures to root out and penalise- the minority
                of ill-mannered, violent individuals who have exploited their
                sport as a base for selfish and unacceptable behaviour. However,
                they are sick and tired of being arbitrately branded as hooligans
                because of the offensive antics of a few selfish and irresponsible
                individuals.
                                   - 2 -


         (iv) The vast majority of League clubs who have achieved acceptable
               standards of behaviour, despite the general regression in
               society, resent being grouped together and legislated against
               because of the deficiencies of those few clubs with atrocious
               records of disorder who have not responded effectively to their
               long-standing problem of appalling behaviour. How can the
               larger group begin to educate such visitors on their annual
               visit?

          (v)   The Home Office, Police and football authorities, supported
                by successive Governments, have implemented defensive strategies
                such as "segregation", "perimeter fences" and "barbed-wire
                cages", which have proved so counter-productive. These long­
                standing policies must be progressively discontinued, albeit
                they cannot sensibly be reversed overnight.

VITAL ATTITUDES

3.(1)    Government must concede that football is the victim, not the cause,
         of widespread public disorder and abominable behaviour. They should
         viow the problems which confront our national game and taint our
         worldwide image as an opportunity to introduce measures which will
         effectively deal with the antics of "lager lout" criminals in every
         area of our society. Such undesirables have already begun to turn
         their attention to cricket, horse racing, boxing and holiday resorts
         at home and abroad. The demise of soccer will not solve the problem,
         even in the short term.

3.(2)    Football authorities and a few identifiable League club managements
         must similarly accept that they have failed over the years to fully
         apply themselves to maintaining decent standards of behaviour. Too
         often they have described the problem as minimal, whilst violence
         and obscenities erupt all around them.   Repeated declarations that
         English soccer is now ready to re-enter Europe have resulted in
         general ridicule and alienation to the game. The general public
         vividly remember Heysells Stadium, West Germany v England, a serious
         incident at a London football stadium and Wembley this year.

IDENTIFICATION OF THE CURRENT PRCBLEM

4.(1)    (i) Most League clubs have achieved acceptable standards and have
              significantly reduced disorder and misbehaviour over the past
              few years by the introduction of CCTV, family areas, voluntary
             membership schemes and many other innovations.
        (ii) A few readily identifiable clubs have failed to do so.
        (iii) The Home Office and police statistics establish the trouble­
              makers as minority groups, virtually confined to males, aged
              between 14-25 years, the only exception being three or four
              well-known locations where there is a core of organised
              undesirable mature males, aged between 30-35 years.
        (iv) Over 50% of arrests and charges for football related offences
              occur outside stadiums before, during and after matches. „
         (v) The installation of CCTV and the implementation of family and
             voluntary membership areas over the past two years have
              assisted to reduce disorder AND halted a further decline in
              attendances.
                                       - 3 -


         (vi)   Attendances have fallen by 45% over the past ten years.
                Obviously many factors have contributed to this phenomenon but
                the "hooligan syndrome" is clearly the prime reason. (1987
                Digest of Football Statistics - Football Trust - Appendix 'C').

                Ccnment

                The "suspect groups" and venues for potential trouble are
                relatively simple to identify. Question: why is there no
                co-ordinated plan targeting such individuals and locations
                for a special operational response?

STRATEGY AND RESPONSE

5.(1)   General
        The prohibitive cost, administrative difficulties and predictably
        disastrous consequences to soccer of introducting an absolute national
        membership scheme are now widely accepted. (Arthur Young Report -
        comnissioned by The Football League).

5.(2)    Initial Approach to Reduce the Dileoma
        The Football Association, supported by The Football League, must
        introduce internal measures, which will impress the Government and
        society of their determination to rid soccer of the ill-mannered and
        unsporting minority. We suggest the F.A. issue a COLE OF CONDUCT to
        be observed by ALL League clubs, with punitive measures imposed upon
        those who fail to conform.
                                                                    I


PROPOSED CODE OF CONDUCT

6.(1)     (i)   Specific and additional "Ground Rules" to be posted around all
                stadia and published in all matchday programnes:-
                " . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Football Club welcome all true Supporters.
                  Enjoy the football. Our CCTV system will identify trouble­
                  makers and assist to enforce the main Ground Rules:-
                  (a)   No violence or swearing
                  (b)   No indecent gestures
                  (c)   No dangerous pushing
                  The aim with your co-operation and traditional support will
                  be to promote sportsmanship and our family atmosphere".

                These "Ground Rules" should be enforced by Police and Stewards
                and re-inforced by appropriate articles in programmes.

         (ii)   On matchdays both teams, led by the match officials, to enter
                the field of play together and greet the crowd from the centre
                circle. The result would be spontaneous applause from both home
                and away supporters, leaving the ill-mannered minority isolated
                and confused at being unable to barrack the opposition.

        (iii)   Regular constructive liaison between Police and key club officials,
                constantly reviewing the situation and flexibly adopting appropriate
                measures.
        (iv)   Matchday briefings of Stewards by a responsible club official, plus
               appropriate training in safety and evacuation procedures.

         (v)   The provision of dedicated family and membership areas.

6.(2)   Most Clubs will obviously introduce further initiatives to enhance
        acceptable behaviour and sportsmanship. However, the above five
        mandatory standard rules, applied by all Clubs, will dramatically
        reduce misbehaviour and be generally welcomed.

6.(3)   The priority being to harness the energy and support of the vast
        majority of decent law-abiding supporters to isolate the trouble­
        makers and educate them that they are unwelcome until they observe
        basic standards of decency. A similar strategy to that adopted by
        police in the Neighbourhood Watch Scheme.

6.(4)   Government Response

        Surely Government and the Minister will have to respond favourably
        to such measures and introduce further necessary concessions and
        exemptions, even perhaps a closely monitored voluntary membership
        scheme.

BASIC PRINCIPLES AND ISSUES - THE COST

7.(1)   This Government is committed to a policy of efficient housekeeping
        and management, demanding cost effectiveness, i.e. G.L.C., I.L.E.A.,
        education, The National Health Service and privatisation of nationalised
        industries.

7.(2)   The conmissioned consultants, Arthur Young, have exposed the unacceptable
        cost effectiveness of the Luton Town approach. Their additional
        projection of the monetary consequences of an absolute national
        membership scheme shows that such an introduction would result in many
        bankruptcies and redundancies in football, with a regression in
        unemployment statistics.

7.(3)   With credit and public acclaim this Government has successfuly dealt
        with serious public disorder in inner cities, industrial disputes,
        public demonstrations and carnivals. All costs were met from the public
        purse and rates. No monetary charges for police were levied upon the
        victim companies or the culpable organisers where riots, robberies and
        thefts occurred.

7.(4)   Surely the same standards and principles are as appropriate to soccer,
        particularly as League Clubs meet substantial costs for police services.

KEY PRINCIPLES AND ISSUES

8.(1)   Defined Areas of Liability and Costs

        Areas of liability must be defined. League Clubs should be accountable
        for policing/stewarding costs for the manning levels required INSIDE
        their respective Stadium and the imnediate curtilage. They cannot
        justly be required to pay for officers deployed upon patrols and traffic
        duties far away from the football ground.
                                  - 5 -


8.(2)   Police Costs
        It is common practice for Clubs to meet Special Service Agreement
        payments for numerous officers engaged for S M hours upon such patrols
        and duties a mile or more from the ground. Most of those officers come
        into the stadium 20 minutes after kick-off and leave 20 minutes before
        full-time to man those distant locations.

8.(3)   In many instances the in-house stewards successfully police dispersal
        from the stadium, assisted by a few police officers. This has presented
        few problems but those Clubs have unfairly met the overall high cost
        of 6/7 hours service, when in reality they have only received 50 Minutes
        service and, in some cases, for no internal duties when such officers
        take a meal break during the match.
8.(4)   Determined Manning Levels and Costs
        At the beginning of each season the Chief Police Officers and Club
        Secretaries negotiate manning levels and costs for the coming fixtures.
        Matches are graded an A, B or C priority, with fixed resources specified.
        The Special Services Agreement Contract is then signed by the Club
        officials. Very few Clubs will query the projected manning levels and
        accept the tendered quotation. They dare not argue for fear of
        objections to their safety certificate.
8.(5) Generally there is a high level of liaison and co-operation but, in
       practice, the Senior Officers will understandably err on the side of
       caution in assessing potential problems. Those projections will seek
       to protect career prospects, their Division and Force from possible
       criticism at any enquiry. The "client" is then canmitted to meet those
       additional costs, based on such wary speculations, for the rest of that
       season, with no reduced charges if the risk is subsequently reduced or
       provably over-assessed. Certainly there will be no hesitation by police
       to prefer increased bills if further manpower is unexpectedly required.
8.(6)   This inexact calculation to decide appropriate resources becomes even
        more unfair when Clubs who regularly achieve decent standards are
        required to meet higher costs because of the notorious behaviour of
        a visiting side.
8.(7)   The situation will become even more imprecise and unjust with the
        introduction of a national membership scheme, inevitably leading to
        higher estimates for officers to monitor entry and potential disorder
        from frustrated spectators seeking admission, etc.

MEASURES TO REDRESS THE BALANCE

8.(8) (i)   Arbitration
             An independent panel of arbitrators needs to be formed to consider
             appeals by League Clubs that the assessed manning levels and
             resultant costs are too high in relation to the risk, their
             reputation and efforts to maintain desirable standards. No
             accountable police force should be expected to determine the
             probable risk, consequent necessary resources and then require
             payment from the public as a monopoly, without review where
             necessary by independent assessors.                       ^
                                     - 6 -

        (ii)   Proportionate Payment
               Those few Clubs who regularly necessitate increased police levels
               because of the probability of disorder, should be liable for those
               additional charges when playing AWAY as well as at HOME.
               It is wrong in principle for the home Club to meet that cost,
               for the dubious privilege of receiving a side habitually followed
               by troublemakers. Such a provision would be a greater incentive
               for such Clubs to enforce the common GROUND RUUS at home, to
               reduce their problem.

PROPOSED NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME/FXXITBALL SPECTATORS BILL

9.(1)   General
        It is widely accepted that the imposition of an absolute scheme will
        not assist to prevent disorder and crime outside the stadia. Such
        external offences exceed those committed inside football grounds.
        The counter-productive effects to football of compulsory membership
        legislation, as previously outlined, cannot sensibly be denied.
9.(2)   Minister's'League Table" of Arrests (Appendix 'D')
         (i)   The statistics and conclusions released by the Minister for Sport
               in December are an example of mistakenly shaping facts to theories.
               They purported to illustrate the size of the problem and allegedly
               those clubs who had the most serious problem and offenders. The
               figures were inaccurately interpreted and so misleadingly presented,
               as to amount to a distortion of the actual situation.
        (ii)   Queens Park Rangers F.C. has a long standing tradition of high
               standards of behaviour and a friendly family atmosphere.
               The Minister's crude 1987/88 figures list 91 arrests at Loftus Road
               for 20 First Division home matches. Categories of offences are not
               specified, or whether they were committed INSIDE or OUTSIDE THE
               STADIUM. Similarly no results are included. They are simply added
               together in a vain attempt to support his allegation that an overall
               serious problem prevails.
               Reference to the actual details and analysis of all TWENTY home
               fixtures reveals the magnitude of the distortion.
               Summarised Facts:-    (Appendix 'E')
               (a)   There were 87 arrests at Q.P.R. at 20 home matches during
                     the 1987/88 season.
               (b)   59% were OUTSIDE the stadium - i.e. 51
               (c)   41% were INSIDE the stadium      - i.e. 36
               (d)   Categories:-   Drunkeness                       45
                                    Assault/Obstructing Police        4
                                    Threatening/Disorderly Behaviour 16
                                    Possessing Drugs                  4
                                    Criminal Damage                   2
                                    Offensive Weapon                  5
                                    Highway/Footway Obstruction
                                                                     11
                                      (Touts/Street Traders)

                                    Total                            87
                                   - 7 -

             (e)   Horae Supporters           26
                   Away Supporters            54
                   Not Supporters              7
                     (Street Traders, etc.)
             (f)    Results:-
                    29 were cautioned by police
                     3 were acquitted, and only
                     2 were sentenced to imprisonment.
                       The remainder were fined or conditionally discharged.
             (g)   In relation to attendances this represents an arrest rate
                   of 0.035% for the season. The truth is, the proportionate
                   arrest rate in soccer is 0.03% whilst the national average
                   outside among adults is over 3%.
             The Minister's analysis and conclusions were greatly exaggerated
             and resented, which does not assist his cause.

WELCOME PROPOSALS

10.   Restrictions on Hooligans Travelling Abroad

      The proposed restrictions and exclusion orders for those convicted
      abroad will be universally supported and have been suggested and
      requested by many in soccer for a long time. However, the proposal
      should contain harsher measures, with restrictions applied to all
      matches at home and abroad, for a lengthy period and not confined to
      "keymatches" abroad. (Minister's letter B - paras. 31-32. Appendix 'B')

11.   Exemptions from Scheme

       (i)   The provision of exemptions for certain groups - accompanied
             children in family areas, disabled people - are a step in the
             right direction. (Appendix 'B ' - para. 17).

      (ii)   However, "sensible and special arrangements" for groups outside
             of the identified group of troublemakers (para. 4.(i)(iii) of
             this report) are essential for justice to be seen to be done, i.e.

                    Club guests
                    Hospitality boxes
                    Supervised school groups
                    Foreign visitors
                    PLUS
                    Genuine visitors to London outside the identified
                      suspect age groups
                    All citizens outside the identified age groups, i.e.
                      males under 14 and over 25 years.

      Why should senior citizens, ladies and other citizens, who behave
      impeccably, be legislated against?
                                  - 8 -

CONFINE LEGISLATION TO SUSPECT GROUPS
12.    Only identified suspect groups should properly be affected by
       a mandatory scheme. League Clubs-should be required to introduce
       a progressive voluntary membership for all other groups, all such
       voluntary members and non-members to be liable for the overall
       restrictions and penalties if they commit offences. The Home Secretary
       to be empowered to proscribe certain designated League Clubs to
       implement a higher age limit for mandatory membership, i.e. 14-35 years,
       where there is a problem relating to such age groups.

MEMBERSHIP CARDS
13.(1) Such cards should be issued for two or three years and'include:-
                   member's name
                   a photograph
                   membership number
                   date of expiry
                   name of club nominated
                   national football allegiance
                   readable electronically
       (Working Party Report - para. 2(b) - Appendix 'A')
13.(2) It is suggested that voluntary and mandatory membership cards are alike
       and issued for three years to reduce administration and costs. The
       member's signature should also be required on the card to assist
       identification.
      Voluntary members should be offered incentives to join which, in due
      time, may extend to bankers card facilities.
13.(3) The introduction of a memberhip card, without a photograph and signature,
       would considerably reduce the credibility of any scheme, voluntary or
       mandatory. A card without such positive proof of identity could be
       used by anyone and seen generally as a cosmetic measure. Genuine fans
       and those considering returning to football will support such a scheme,
       particularly when benefits result in:-
                   Reduced admission prices
                   Discounts at national outlets on numerous goods,
                     travel, holidays, etc.
                   Club discounts for goods and away travel.
13.(4) Membership cards to be issued free to:-
                   Patrons
                   Executive box users
                   Season ticket holders
                   Supporters Club members
                   Over 60's

PROPOSED NEW CRIMINAL OFFENCES    (Appendix 'A' page 15, paras. 29-32)
14.(1) Should the proposed mandatory national membership scheme become law,
       it will be necessary for powers of arrest to be extended to club
       officials and stewards inside the ground, to enable clubs to begin
       to progressively police their stadium. Similarly, failure to produce
       or surrender a membership card to such officials upon request should
       be included as an offence.
                                  - 9 -

14.(2) For the same reasons the firm view of the football authorities that
       a refusal to surrender a card upon demand should be included as an
       offence deserves support.

CO-ORDINATED POLICY FDR REVIVAL
15.(1) General
       A national identity card scheme will have a limited effect upon the
       "hooligan" problem and, simultaneously, adversely affect thousands
       of decent citizens who are outside the identified suspect age groups.
15.(2) Similarly, the traditional response from the F.A., Football League
       and Football Management will not reduce the problem or encourage the
       thousands of well-mannered spectators to return to the game.
15.(3) A fundamental change in attitudes and a lateral thinking approach
       are vital for survival and revival.
       In addition to the proposed code of conduct (6.(1) - 6.(4) policies
       and priorities require urgent review and implementation to achieve
       better conditions for spectators and to improve the image of football.

KEY RESPONSES FDR SURVIVAL AND REVIVAL
16.(1) Football Management
       (i)   A co-ordinated policy to promote the brighter side of soccer,
             whilst objectively acknowledging problems as they exist and
             a positive approach to resolve them.
      (ii)   Consider a joint agreement to ban/barr those newspapers/tabloids
             who frequently publish untruths and inflammatory articles,
             deliberately provoking confrontation situations for the sole
             purpose of further copy.
     (iii)   Provide sufficient well-lit and clean toilets for everybody -
             particularly for the ladies and at the rear of terraces.
             Restaurants and pubs recognise this as a priority - wny not
             footbal1?
      (iv)   Provide adequate catering outlets at reasonable prices - again
             particularly for the terraces.
       (v)   Limit terrace attendances below the safety capacity where
             necessary to enable spectators to use those facilities. Imagine
             the embarrassment and discomfort of being trapped on the terrace
             unable to visit a toilet for over two hours which, in the case
             of parents with children, is intolerable.
      (vi)   Provide incentives for membership - voluntary and/or mandatory
             scheme.
     (vii)   Reinforce general observance of "ground Rules" (6.(l)(i) -
             6.(3) by further innovations and imaginative use of the public
             address system.   (Consider recorded tapes from respected
             personalities in soccer, requesting good manners to eliminate
             obscene chanting such as "You're . . . . . eh!" etc.) The overall
             strategy of this would be to harness the energy and support ofthe
             majority to isolate and educate the ill-mannered minority.
                                     - 10 -


   (viii) Review and seriously consider reducing admission prices, which
          may well require cut-backs in transfer fees and contracts.
     (ix) Develop a long-term strategy - 5/10 years - to reverse the proven
           counter-productive policy of SEGREGATION.
         (x)     Underline and achieve attitudes of sportsmanship - on and off the
                 pitch. Bnphasise "no cheating" and eradicate the "win at all
                 costs" and "us and them" syndromes. This will require a different
                 attitude from managers, players and marketing outlets.
     (xi) Further develop the Football Trust's lead in community involvement.
    (xii) Develop and implement a policy to reduce the "macho" image of
           football - board rooms to cease being sacrosanct areas for male
           executives - more women directors - more women stewards, etc.
                 Given the chance, the ladies can make a major contribution in
                 achieving a softer image for soccer and to realise the overall
                 objectives.

16.(2)    The Minister
          Implementation of most of the measures tendered will further render
          the Minister's current proposals inappropriate and redundant before
          the statute can be invoked. Once soccer has set an example of
          desired standards, Government will find great difficulty to refuse
          requests for reduced policing costs under Special Service Agreements.
          The opportunity will be available for Government to change course
          and retaincredibility by complimenting the transformed attitudes and
          strategies in soccer.

16.(3)    The Police
          For the same reasons police forces willwelcome the opportunity to
          reduce manning levels. However, in the interim, the Home Office and
          police must be persuaded to adopt a lower profile policy in and around
          most football stadia. Police should maintain a similar strategy to
          that implemented at Notting Hill Carnival, industrial disputes and
          demonstrations, i.e. more officers on reserve, ready to be deployed
          in the event of trouble.

16.(4)    They are well aware of the dangers of a too high profile operation
          and will accept the resultant resentment caused to law-abiding
          citizens:-
           (a)    The use of mounted officers, wearing anti-riot helmets and
                  visors, to funnel queues into railway stations, on to coaches,
                  into and out of stadia is frightening, intimidating and
                  frustrating.
                   (At one ground recently visited, out of London, perfectly
                  well-behaved supporters were required to walk between a stationary
                   row of tightly packed mounted officers. At the head of the queue
                  ’t'hey were ordered to pass, in single file, through an 18 inch gap
                   formed by a horses head and the wall. Fears and resentment from
                   families and elder citizens were apparent but considerably reduced
                  by one wag's remark - "Your horse obviously counts officer").
                  The anecdote underlines the unnecessarily high profile response
                  too often adopted by many forces.
                                 - 11   -




         (b)   Handlers with dogs are openly deployed outside stadia and
               inside railway stations as crowds gather and disperse. The
               threat of such force is resented by law-abiding citizens and
               seen as unnecessary intimidation. Their use if disorder occurs
               is accepted.
         (c)   The common policy of searching everyone before entry is not
               widely supported. Parents with children producing membership
               cards and senior citizens are dismayed and embarrassed at such
               inflexible procedures, as they seek entry to family areas.
               In reality police officers do not have such wide powers of search.
               They are acting as agents of the club, where under the "Ground
               Rules" admission can be refused to anyone who refuses to be
               searched. Most clubs will support selective searching of the
               suspect groups (14-25 years) outside of family areas, but
               experience great embarrassment and difficulty in endeavouring
               to answer complaints from family members who are furious at such
               beaurocratic measures. (Anyone who disputes this assertion only
               has to ask and we will forward the letters of protest received
               every week).
         (d)   The police have general support from the vast majority whose
               decent fans appreciate their difficult task. However, disgraceful
               attitudes and actions of a few officers seriously diminishes
               normal regard and provokes confrontation incidents.
               The British police are unable to succeed in their important role
               without the assistance of the public at large, combined with
               a multi-agency approach to identify problems and long-term
               solutions.

         (e)   The Commissioner of the Metropolis, all Chief Constables and
               their executive managers will realise that they and their
               respective police forces are currently in serious danger of
               being seen As a political force supportive of Government,
               a police state, with no regard for the wishes of the public at
               large.

16.(5)   Low Profile Policing


                                                             Queens Park Rangers
                                                             1984
                                    - 12 -


SIHMVRY OF STRATEGIC OPTIONS

17.(1)     OPTION 1 - National Identity Card

         (i)   The Minister describes this option as a different issue requiring
               wider debate (Para. 49 - Appendix 'B'). However, disorder in
               society generally is provably the greater problem and demands such
               wider debate urgently, before costly dubious measures are illogically
               introduced for lesser problems in soccer. What next, a progression
               of mandatory national membership schemes for other sports and
               outlets as the pattern of disorder inevitably changes?
     (ii)      A National identity card with photograph, signature and magnetic
               strip, would bring this country into line with E.E.C. countries
               and greatly assist to combat terrorism, drug trafficking and
               crimes of violence at home and abroad. Production of the card should
               be required at designated locations to obtain admission or travel
               facilities.
    (iii)      The British public will support any just measure calculated to have
               beneficial effects. They are also furious at the disgraceful
               antics of a minority and ashamed at our resultant tarnished image
               throughout the world.
     (iv)      Predictably, the N.C.C.L. and other groups will vociferously
               protest that such a measure is an infringement upon civil rights.
               What rights? The right to break the law with anonymity? The
               right to be faceless and unaccountable? Or the right to exploit
               this country's welfare schemes without proper identification?
         (v)   I believe a National referendum would result inamassive "YES"
               to the proposition, provided the problems are properly identified,
               the advantages set out and the questions objectively framed.

17.(2)    OPTION 2 - Mandatory National Membership Scheme
           Politically desired but not a viable option

17.(3)    OPTION 3 - Mandatory National Membership Scheme restricted to Suspect
          Groups and Voluntary Membership Scheme for the Remainder
           Preferable to Option 2

17.(4)     OPTION 4 - Voluntary Membership Scheme with Incentives. Complimented
           by F.A. Code of Conduct for League Clubs and a Co-ordinated Policy
           for Revival
         (i)   There are recent significant signs that this Government, the
               Home Secretary especially, would now prefer a Voluntary Membership
               Scheme.
     (ii)      The Football Association, The Football League and club management
               must seize the opportunity to demonstrate a new commitment and
               revise attitudes, resulting in effective internal strategies and
               tactics which will automatically further reduce unacceptable
               behaviour.

    (iii)      Theimplanentation of a "Code of Conduct" for ALL League Clubs
               (6.(l)(i) - 6.(4) and committed "key responses" (15.(1) -
               15.(2) (i) - (xii) must impress Government, who are desperate to
4




                                    - 13 -


            resolve the problem of violence in society in accordance with
            their declared election promises to maintain "law and order".

    CONCLUSION

    18.    OPTION 4 - Voluntary Membership is the prudent solution. This
           would allow Government time to debate and consider the wider issues
           of a National identity card, without loss of face to Ministers or
           football management.




                               F.R.C. LUFF
    r\

A
