THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - STAGE 2

WORKING PARTY ON THE GREEN GUIDE - IDENTIFICATION OF AREAS

POSSIBLY NEEDING IMPROVEMENT




CHAPTER 6 - EGRESS




Introductory Paragraph needs expanding to require an adequate number and

width of well distributed and unobstructed routes,    to provide safe egres

for spectators from every enclosure,    to a safe place outside the ground,

within a time appropriate to the conditions prevailing during any ground

clearance.                .*/      //




      This chapter deals with normal ground clearance facilities, with

       insufficient emphasis that the same facilities are to be used in

       any emergency evacuation.     This paragraph needs to establish that

      at the offset.




49.   References to other chapters dealing with egress should include

      chapter 11, and it needs to be made clear those are additional

      advice, not in lieu of this chapter.




50.   The advice to hold a crowd at the point of exit applies only to a

      safe densely crowded (terrace) enclosure.      The principle of not

      reducing width is sound,     but utilising the full available width

      from the point of exit from less densely crowded (seated)

      enclosures and from enclosures where spectators may be at risk,

      reduces clearance time.
Involves    the same principle as the last paragraph and is similarly

confused.                                        ^                      <-■*-




'Whilst evacuation onto the pitch may be helpful,    it is only

available to those enclosures abutting onto the pitch.        There ought

to be adequate, well distributed exit routes,    to provide

alternatives to those which may be blocked by any incident, witnout

using the pitch.     This principle should be estaolished here, with

reference to paragraphs    186-188.




The no "funnelling" rule ought to be established at paragraph 50.

This paragraph is really to permit reservoir areas.      Crowds moving

through a reservoir should continue to move,    aloeit at a decreased

rate.   A density of 54/10m2 is too tight for such movement.       I

would suggest a maximum of 35 to 40 persons/10n2 .




This paragraph qualifies the principle accepted by the last.           The

two need redrafting more logically.




This subject matter    is spread between this paragraph and paragraphs

 183-185 (Chapter 11), 229-232 (Chapter 16) and 233-234 (Chapter

 17).   There is a strong case for consolidation of the several

 facets at this point.




 Signposting of ingress needs to be covered in Chapter 5 and exit

 signposting should be dealt with here.     (The need for emergency

 lighting is mentioned at paragraph 166 (Chapter 11) but is a

 requirement in all situations    including ingress and egress,    and

 deserves a chapter of its o w n ) .
                                              -   5   -




         58.   This mentions some of the common causes of obstruction,     to which I

               would add parked vehicles.




         60.   Seems superfluous.




         61.   It perhaps   ought to be clarified that the apportioning of   ; rowd

               flows between bisected routes, mentioned here, does not ap; ly to

               the reduced evacuation times dictated in an emergency.




         66.   This has contradictory requirements which need resolving.

                                          /   7^          '   /




NBAADD
