I N Q U I R Y   I N T O      T H E      H I L L S B O R O U G H


            S T A D I U M           D I S A S T E R




                            Before


                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                     M R . B . JOHNSON
        (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                              and

                    PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                          (ASSESSORS)




                              At

                     The Town Hall,

                          Sheffield,

                              on

                Thursday, 8th June, 1989.




                TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                   (Afternoon Session)



          From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
               Official Shorthand Writers,
           55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                     (Afternoon Session)

                                           Page
P. BURMAN Recalled

     Examined by   Mr. Collins (Cont)       75
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Hytner           79
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Muller           83
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward         85

S. SHEARWOOD Called

     Examined by     Mr. Phillips           86

E. HIGGINS Called

     Examined by   Mr. Collins              91
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Hytner           94

P. CHAPMAN Called

     Examined by   Mr. Phillips             95
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Gibson-Watt     100
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow         101
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward        103
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins            10-4
     By Lord Justice Taylor                106

P. SMITH Called
     Examined by   Mr. Collins             106
     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Hytner       117
     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Jackson      121
     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Glasgow      121
     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Woodward     121

G. FINNEGAN Called

     Examined by   Mr. Phillips            125
     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Hytner       128
     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Glasgow      130
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins            130

D. ILLINGWORTH Called

     Examined by   Mr. Collins             130
     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Hytner       138
     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Muller       140
     Cross-Examined by    Mr. Woodward     142
                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT (Cont)


     F. RICHARDSON Called

             Examined by Mr. Phillips


DISCUSSION
             SEVENTEENTH DAY*S PROCEEDINGS

               THURSDAY. 8th JUNE, 1989

                  (AFTERNOON SESSION)

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Has any consensus been
reached about these photographs or are we just going to
go on as we were?

      MR. COLLINS:   I think, sir, we have decided that
perhaps we would go on as we were, having started that
way.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, very well.

             SERGEANT PAUL BURMAN Recalled

              Re-Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Mr. Burman, I was asking you about time drawing towards
the kick-off and the fullness of the pens.     Let me just
as you this:     by the time the teams came out on to the
pitch, about five minutes    before kick-off? - A. Yes, sir.

Clearly if you thought they were full by two o'clock,
they were more than full by then? - A. Yes, sir.

Could you see whether people appeared to be in discomfort
or whether they appeared to be all right? - A. Up to
kick-off time everybody seemed to be quite happy in the
pens, still singing, still in jovial mood.   I never once
had any complaints that people were being crushed - up to
kick-off time I am talking about.

Having regard to what you could see of the state of those
pens, if you   had realised that gate C was going to be
opened and there was going to be a sudden large influx of
people down that tunnel into pens 3 and 4 - 1 know you
did not realise that, but if you had realised that would
you have thought it necessary to take some steps to deal
with it? - A. I had not realised that, sir, no.     I was
aware the pen was full.    I did not envisage either the
perimeter gate being opened or...

I am sorry, Sergeant, you misunderstand the question.    I
know that you had heard nothing.   What I am asking you
to do is to consider a particular hypothesis, which is
this:  you saw the state of the pens and they were full?
- A. Yes.

If you had realised that a large number of people were
suddenly going to come down the tunnel all at once,
                                       P. BURMAN


rather than just the usual trickle of fans, on to those
terraces, would you have thought it necessary to do
something to stop that happening? - A. With hindsight
everyone with commonsense would have thought it necessary
to do something, yes, sir.

What I am getting at is if you, seeing the state of the
pens in front of you, if you had had the decision whether
or not to let people in, would you have expected whoever
had that decision to have said to himself, "We had better
do something to ensure tftey do not all come down on to
those terraces"? - A. No, sir.    To reiterate what I said
earlier, people were in those pens because they wanted to
be there.   There were open spaces, particularly under
the area in pens 1 and 2, of the Police Room.     There
were acres of space there.    People could see that space,
but they chose to be where they wanted to be.

So effectively what you are saying is this, and I want
you to deal with this, I do not want to be unfair:  if
people want to squashed it is up to them? - A. Well, to a
degree, yes.   I mean, squashed being cramped together.
It is a matter of degree, obviously, as the tragedy
unfolded, sir.

You say up until kick-off you were not aware of any real
problems? - A. No, sir.

When that gate opened at about five minutes to, that is,
roughly when the teams came out for their kick-about,
there was an influx into those pens.   Were you not aware
of that? - A. No, sir.   From the last five minutes or so
prior to the kick-off I was heavily involved in moving up
and down the front row of the stand, stopping people
climbing up.   Now the people who were climbing up,
nobody made any complaint of any form of distress.    My
opinion was that they were climbing up out of there to
gain access to the seated area.

You were not concentrating your attention upon the state
of affairs in the pens themselves for that crucial five
minutes? - A. No, sir, until obviously people from the
west stand from behind me, obviously something happened I
did not see, and people were remonstrating with me then
to do something.

What was it they were telling you about, as far as you
can remember, which led you to have another look in pen
3? - A. They were telling me that something had happened
in there.   I could not get...  They just kept saying,
"Do something.    Do something. People are going to be
killed in there".
s
t   I
                                     77.
                                                       P. BURMAN


        Q. These were the people sitting in the front of the west
           stand? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. Did you then look? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. What did you see? - A. I could see nothing other than
           what I had seen earlier.   The pen was full and I could
           not see what the problem was.

        Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do you mean fans who were
             sitting there who were presumably watching the football
             match? - A. Yes.

        Q. They had noticed something was wrong in the terrace? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. Pointed it out to you but when you looked you could not
           see anything wrong? - A. No, my Lord.   All I could see
           was a mass of heads and shoulders, backs of people, heads

•       Q.
           of people.

                   MR. COLLINS:   Did you not see people trying to
             climb out over the perimeter fence? - A. Not at that
             stage, sir.   I did later.

        Q.   Did you see people trying   to climb out over the side
             fences into pens 2 and 5?   - A. No, sir, I was not aware
             of that.

        Q.   Was the game still going on at this stage? - A. Yes,    sir.

        Q.   Did you see the game stopped? - A. Yes.

        Q. We know that before that happened people were climbing
           out over the perimeter fence? - A. Indeed, sir, yes.

        Q.   Did you see them start to   do that? - A. Yes.

        Q. Did you realise then there was something wrong or not? -
           A. I, like many other Officers, sir, thought initially,
           and I could not understand why at that stage of the game,
           there was a pitch invasion.

        Q. Even then you did not realise there were people who had
           been crushed in those pens? - A. I did not, sir, no.

        Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Did you not wonder why these
             people were saying to you, "People are going to be killed
             in there"? - A. Yes.   I kept asking them, What has
             happened?   What has happened?"   All they kept saying
             was, "Get something done.   Get something done."   I kept
             saying, "With what?"   I never got an answer from anyone
             as to what was the problem.
                             78
                                            P. BURMAN


Q.         MR. COLLINS:   This was not only one person.
     There were a number of people, if I correctly understand
     you? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Did you think to try to communicate with Control, for
   example? - A. I was aware that Inspector Bullas and and a
   PC Frost to my left - not within shouting distance - but
   they were obviously looking down into pens 3 and 4, and
   they were both trying on their radios to get through.

Q. Where actually were you at this stage? - A. Probably just
   right to the front centre of the west stand.

Q. Does that mean just to the right of the tunnel entrance?
   - A. Yes.

Q. So you were directly above pen 3? - A. Roughly yes, sir.

Q. When did you realise that this was not an ordinary pitch
   invasion, but was people being crushed? - A. When bodies
   started being carried out on to the track. After that I
   went to the right hand front corner of the west stand and
   even then I could not see what the problem was because of
   the people there.   It was only when bodies were
   physically being carried out that I realised that there
   were injuries.

Q. You say in your statement - I am looking at the bottom of
   page 8 - that you were getting a certain amount of flak
   from those in the west stand who were saying, among other
   things:

           "Do something for fuck's sake, people are dying in
           there".

     A. Yes.

Q. At what stage was that said to you?   Was that before you
   were aware of bodies or after? - A. That was before, sir.

Q. It would seem they realised there were people dying in
   there but you say you could not spot anything at all? -
   A. I understand from earlier evidence that has been given
   that there was some sort of surge, but that they did not
   come back.  I did not see that, sir.  I can only tell the
   Inquiry what I saw.

Q. I follow that.   What you mean is that people may have
   spotted this surge which you of course did not see
   because you were concentrating on other things? - A. I
   presume that, sir.   Whether it is right or wrong, I
   presume that.
5>
 '



                                79
                                               P. BURMAN


     Q. You certainly could see nothing wrong after that surge,
        assuming it to have existed? - A. Until people started
        climbing over the perimeter fence.

     Q. I suppose in those circumstances fans may have believed
        your inactivity to have been ill-motivated - of course it
        was not, but they may have believed that? - A. I tried on
        several occasions to isolate one person to tell me
        exactly what had happened because I was not aware, even
        at that stage, what had occurred.   I tried to isolate
        people to tell me on a one to one basis, but I was just
        being jostled and pulled about by that stage.

     Q. After this had happened you, of course, had to decide
        what to do about those in the west stand, because
        obviously there was a potential for trouble in the west
        stand itself, was there not? - A. Yes, sir.   I had 4,400
        people to consider in the west stand.

     Q. No-one made any announcement over the tannoy? - A. Not
        that I heard, sir.

     Q. In fact I think you positioned yourself at the exit gate
        to your part of the west stand, is that right? - A. I
        did, sir, for a number of reasons.    I have heard comment
        of a message being passed of "All Officers on to the
        pitch".   I never heard that message.

     Q. I think you were aware too of the point that has been
        made by others about the stewards having taken off their
        jackets? - A. I was, sir.

     Q. I think you spoke to one of the Chief Stewards in the
        stand? - A. I did, sir, after it had cleared, or mainly
        cleared.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:

     Q. Sergeant, have you policed Hillsborough before? - A. Yes,
        sir.

     Q. And many other football games? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. Any other grounds than Hillsborough? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. You have been at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, sir.
        Well, by the Leppings Lane end in the west stand.  I have
        only policed the west stand in the Leppings Lane end.

     Q. You have not been at the Kop or anything like that? - A.
        Yes, I have, sir.

     Q. What I want to investigate, I hope not at length, is your
        understanding of crowd control at football matches.   You
t   I

                                     80
                                                     P. BURMAN


             have rightly said that fans usually want to go to a
             particular spot and if they are left alone they will go
             there?■- A. Yes, sir.

        Q.   You must have been aware before this game, and, indeed,
             for very many years, of previous disasters at football
             grounds?  Burden Park, for example, do you know about
             that? - A. No, sir.

        Q.   With Bolton Wanderers? - A. No, sir.

        Q.   Ibrox Park in Glasgow? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q.   You knew about that? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q.   Were you aware before this semi-final that because of
             problems relating to over-crowding which had caused
             deaths there were now regulations relating to the safe
             capacities of grounds? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. That capacities were now limited? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. If the safe capacity of a ground was reached, that is,
           the total capacity of a ground, however many fans wanted
           to go into the ground they could not? - A. That makes
           commonsense, sir.

        Q. Similarly, were you aware that in each ground there are
           separate safety capacities for sections of the ground? -
           A. I would presume so, sir, yes.

        Q.   Once that capacity has been reached, however many fans
             would like to go into that section, they cannot? - A.
             Again, commonsense, sir.

        Q. You have very openly and frankly given us your own view,
           and I am not so much concerned with that because you are
           a Sergeant, with respect.    I want to know what your
           understanding was of the general Police view of this.
           Did you understand the attitude of those briefing you and
           of those in overall charge of the game to be that fans
           should be allowed to go where they actually wanted to go
           and that when they found things too uncomfortable they
           would make up their own mind not to go into a particular
           section?    Was that the general approach? - A. Well, it
           was never discussed at the briefing in those terms, sir.
           Where they want to go there are obviously certain
           boundaries.    That is, which end of the ground, tickets
           for whatever part of the ground.    Are you saying, sir,
           that...  I think I misunderstand you in this.    Obviously
           someone with a ticket for the north stand could not go in
           the south stand.
                             81
                                            P. BURMAN


Q. No, I do not mean that at all.   The west terraces had an
   overall capacity which was controlled by the turnstiles.
   Did you know that? - A. I did not know that, sir.

Q.   Did you assume it to be so or did you just not think
     about it? - A. I assumed there would be some sort of head
     count.

Q.   Had you ever been given any briefing of any sort, either
     on that day, or before that day, which gave you the
     remotest clue as to who, other than the fans themselves,
     would be controlling the spread of spectators between the
     pens at the Leppings Lane end? - A. No, sir.   I have
     never had responsibility for policing the Leppings Lane
     terraces.   All I have had is responsibility for either
     the Kop or the west stand. What other Officers' duties
     are, I cannot speak as to that.    I cannot speak for
     other Officers' duties.

Q. You are somebody with supervisory duties? - A. Yes.

Q. Over these many years did you have the faintest idea as
   to whether the control of spectators into pens 3 and 4
   was mechanical?   That is, there was some form of
   turnstile operating and computing operating?   Or whether
   it was the stewards, or whether it was the Police, who
   would control the number of fans in the pens? “ A. If you
   are asking for an opinion, sir, I would have said
   stewards.

Q. The term you use in your statement, and I am not going to
   go through your evidence because Mr. Collins has gone
   through it with you, but the term you actually used was
   that at two o'clock pen 3 the fans were cramped.   Did it
   occur to you at all as to what was going to happen when
   they became more cramped? - A. I have read through my
   statement again and I have to concede that that does seem
   an ill-conceived word to use now with hindsight.




                 Q. It may not be
     A
    ^                              82

\                                             P. BURMAN


         Q. Well it may not be, Mr. Burman, it may be accurate? - A.
            No sir. In a general term at 2 o'clock, and I still stick
            by what I say, at 2 o'clock I say that Pen 3 was full but
            later I saw other fans entering Pen 3, so it was not full
            to bursting capacity.
         Q. I am not going to labour this with you, Mr. Burman, it
            is not fair at your level of seniority, but obviously
            however many fans there are in the pen others may well
            join them even though that may not be safe? - A. If there
            is no preventive form that may well be sir.

         Q. And it would follow from what you know basically about
            safety, it is not only with crowds but with everything else,
            that you don't have your safety capacity just at the limife
            beyond which there is disaster looming, do you? - A. No
            sir.
         Q. Whether it is the weight of a crane or whatever it is.
            - A. It might assist, sir, if I say that I don't know what
            the capacity was in the terraces. All I do know that at
            the start of every match at Hillsborough that I have ever
            been to, great emphasis is placed on the evacuation, the
            emergency procedures with a view to safety and senior
            Officers at every briefing put great emphasis on that.

         Q. That is once an emergency has already occurred? - A. No sir,
            that is at the briefing at the start of any match at
            Hillsborough.
         Q. No, I am sorry, you have misunderstood. You are briefed
            as to the procedures to be adopted once an emergency has
            occurred. That is what you are saying? - A. Yes sir,
            if it should arise.
         Q. What I am trying to ask is whether you were aware of any
            briefing of anybody which might prevent an emergency due
            to overcrowding. Have you ever been aware of such? -
            A. Not of anything specific sir, no.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Mr. Hytner, I think we have
            had it a number of times that the Order does not contain
            anything specifically about this beyond referring to
            safety in general.
                  MR. HYTNER: Yes, I think in fairness though, sir,
            the reason I am pursuing it is not completely senseless
            because other Officers of senior rank have said:  "You
            did not put everything in the written orders, you assume
            that people would be sensible and be able to do this".

                  THE WITNESS:   I think that is the crux of the matter,
            sir, commonsense.
Q%>                             83

                                           P. BURMAN


              MR. HYTNER:   Yes, I won't pursue it.

              MR. JACKSON: Sir, I am very conscious over the last
        few days that there has been repetition of points, of
        evidence and questioning on this very point.

              Sir, may I take it that there is sufficient evidence
        on this point before the Tribunal to allow it to come to
        its conclusions, whatever they may be, on this subject?

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well I rather     think so,
        Mr. Jackson, thank you.


                        Cross-Examined by MR. MULLER:

      Q. Sergeant, may I ask you one matter. You mentioned the
         question of the emergency being dealt with fully in the
         briefing? - A. Yes sir.

      Q. So you were conscious when you were there that you might,
         hopefully not, but might have to deal with an emergency?
         - A. Yes, that is a possibility, yes.

      Q. One of the emergencies, for example, that might occur is
         a fire and that would involve getting people out of for
         example Pens 3 and Pen 4 within a certain period of time
         in order to protect their lives? - A. My responsibilities
         were not the pens sir, my responsibility was the 4,400
         in the West Stand.

      Q. That may be so, but if you are a Police Officer you can't
         see something dangerous going on in front of you and ignore
         it, can you? - A. Quite right sir.

      Q. Now just bear with me. Is it not right that one of the
         things you would have in mind would be: "How in the
         event of a fire are people going to get out of Pens 3 and 4
         in sufficient time to save their lives?" - A. Yes sir.

      Q. If you then get a situation in which there are more people
         in the pen than clearly should be, then there is going
         to be problems if there is a fire? - A. That is commonsense
         again sir.
      Q. Can I ask you this then: when you saw the situation at
         2 o'clock, or even after 2 o'clock, did you think the
         number of people that were in there were the number of
         people who were designed to be in there for in the event
         of a fire they could get out safely? - A. As I said
         earlier, sir, at 2 o'clock in general terms I considered
         Pen 3 to be full. By 5-to-3 it was a lot fuller.

      Q. Yes, I follow that, but did you think what you physically
         saw was what it should have looked like? In other words
                          84
                                    P. BURMAN


  if it had been like that and there had been a fire they
  could all have got out in the appropriate period of time?
  - A. People, sir, in those pens could see open space to
  their left and right and if they had wanted to have had
  more room they could have had more room. It was their
  choice.  I stress, it was their choice to be in that
  particular section of the ground at that particular time.

Q. I don't want to be unfair to you, Sergeant, but are you
   saying that they chose to be in that position and if
   there was a fire and they had chosen to put themselves
   in those cramped positions and could not get out as
   quickly as they are supposed to, that was their fault
   and not yours? - A. I am not saying that at all, sir,
   no, not for one minute.

Q. Can I just ask you and I don't mean this in any way
   offensively, do you understand, I just want an answer
   to the question.
         You were looking down on that crowd in Pens 3 and 4
   and at one stage you described them certainly in your
   statement as being "cramped"? - A. Yes.

Q. You could not get in yourself without pushing. Right?
   - A. No, and I was not going to put myself in peril by
   going in alone, sir.

Q. You could not push in? - A. Well I could push in, yes.

Q. You would have to push? - A. I would have to push, yes,
   and shoulder my way through, may be.

Q. So it must have been obvious to you if anybody wanted to
   get out they would have difficulty in getting out? -
   A. Not at that particular time sir, no, at 2 o ’clock.

Q. Can you tell me what symptoms you would have been looking
   for before you thought:  "Right, I have got to do some­
   thing about this"? What would have to happen? - A. When
   it came to such a stage .... I did consider there was
   no room for any more when it was obvious people were
   in distress; when it was obvious people could notgo at
   liberty where they wanted to go.

Q. Does it amount to this, Sergeant, and again I am not
   being offensive, you would have to hear people crying
   out before you actually thought it right or necessary
   to do something else within the course of your general
   duties as a Police Officer? - A. Before that stage I
   think with all the shouting and chanting I would be
   asking or requesting some sort of directive telling
   people in those pens:  "Look, get to your left, get to
   your right, there is open space". No, I think I would
   actually before it got to such stupid proportions.
                            85

                                       P. BURMAN


Q. All I am trying to ascertain is what would have to happen,
   what would you have to see or notice before you would
   have decided to take some initiative? - A. I don't think
   I can answer that in a simple sentence, sir. I would have
   to leave it to my judgment at the time on the day.


                  Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Sergeant, you were there and you saw your role as a policing
   role, did you? - A. Of course sir, yes.

Q.   If something had caught your eye which according to your
     judgment was unsafe, whatever the cause, you would have
     done something about it? - A. I would have acted on it sir.

Q. According to what it was, you would have taken what        you
   considered to be appropriate action? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Now throughout the time that you were up on the West Stand
   you were occasionally looking down on to the terraces? -
   A. Yes sir.
Q. Did it ever strike you when you looked down on to the terraces
   before the tragedy occurred, that a situation of danger or
   peril existed? - A. No sir.  I was responsible for other
   areas of the ground sir besides the front of the West Stand,
   i.e. the stairs leading up into .... Both sections of
   stairs I had Officers from my Serial deployed there.

Q. Sergeant, it is not a criticism it is a question of what
   struck you on those occasions when you looked, do you
   follow, and nothing did? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Did you observe, however, on occasions some antics in
   relation to one of the crash barriers? - A. Yes sir.

Q. What was that? - A. Well as I have already described there
   was two youths ....
           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   He has told us once.

           MR. WOODWARD:   Forgive me, sir.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Didn't he tell us before the
     adjournment?
           MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, my attention must have been
     elsewhere.
           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, very well.

           MR. WOODWARD:   Forgive me, sir, I do apologise.
                                           P. BURMAN


             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    He said:

             "We saw two youths on a barrier. One of them was
             standing on it chanting and the other one was
             jumping 10-20 times as if he was diving into a
             swimming pool on to the people in front."

q   .         MR. WOODWARD: Forgive me, sir, did that lead to a
        fight? - A. No, it did not get to fighting proportions.
        On the last occasion with the youth diving off it he must
        have offended someone and they did square up to one another
        but did not actually get to fighting proportions.

              MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you.   Sir, one's attention can
        be elsewhere.
              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Oh indeed.   Thank you,
        Sergeant.


                 POLICE CONSTABLE STEPHEN SHEARWOOD Called

                         Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

Q. You are Constable Stephen Shearwood, are you? - A. That is
   correct sir.
Q. You were engaged, were you not, on the Serial with Sergeant
   Burman? - A. I was sir, Serial 13.

Q. Serial 13 involved in the West Stand? - A. That is correct.

Q. I think you were allocated the duty of supervising the entrance
   to the West Stand on the stairway? - A. That is right.
   I was at the south entrance to the level of the West Stand.

Q. You were with another Police Officer? - A. W.P.C. Fairclough.

Q. Where did you start your duty, about halfway up the stairs?
   - A. That is right. We were asked by Inspector White to
   remain within the stairwell area, halfway up the stairs.

Q. I think things went reasonably well, did they not, until
   about 2.30? - A. That is right, there were no problems
   whatsoever till about 2.30.

Q. You then got yourselves engaged in dealing with people
   who were urinating against the wall.  Is that right? _ A.
   That is right, we were beckoned to the bottom of the stairs
   by the Stewards.
Q. Was this in the tunnel or was it in the yard? - A. It was
   in the yard to the left-hand side of the tunnel.

Q. I think you in fact arrested one person and took him to
   the Police Room. Is that so? - A. That is correct.
                                  S. SHEARWOOD


How long were you away at the Police Room? - A. I was away
for approximately 10 minutes.  It was decided in the Police
Room that he was to be ejected and therefore I had to
out the necessary forms, which I did. He was ejected by
myself and then I returned to the West Stand area.

Being ejected that was a very much quicker matter, was it,
than if he had been held and charged with an offence?
— A. It was just a simple matter of filling out his details
on a small form and then he was simply ejected. There is
no file to prepare for Court.
Through which entrance did you eject him? - A. I ejected him
out on to the main Penistone Road area.

Then I think you went back, did you not, to the area where
you had previously been? - A. That is right. My intention
was to return to the bottom of the stairs again.

Did you see the gates opening, Gate C opening? - A. Having
returned to the bottom of the stairs, yes, I did see the
gate open briefly.  I saw a mounted Officer outside directing
the crowd, but I was not aware who opened that gate.  I
could only see the top of the gate.

You went back to your station on the staircase to the West
Stand? - A. I did sir, yes.
Did you have any difficulty there? — A. On returning to
the stairs I could see that the Stewards were having great
difficulty.  In actual fact at the bottom of the stairs
there are a double set of metal gates.  In actual fact
they closed one of the gates and five Stewards were standing
behind that gate trying to restrict the flow of fans through
just the right-hand side. They were obviously having diffi­
culties and therefore the two of us, W.P.C. Fairclough and
myself tried to instil some more order.
Were these people who were going into the Stand with Stand
tickets? - A. There were quite a few obviously with Stand
tickets but there were a lot who did not have Stand tickets
and I was quite surprised that rather than arguing with them
the Stewards were allowing them upstairs into the West Stand.
                                              S. SHEARWOOD

Q. Did you see the gates opening again or the results
   of the gates opening again? -A. I only saw the gate
   opened once, sir.

Q. Yes.   Now, did you get approached by somebody when you
   were there at the bottom of the stairs? - A. That is
   right.   As the crowd came in I was pinned against the
   metal £ate which had been closed and I was approached
   by a middle-aged gentleman who came out of the tunnel.
   He was quite hysterical and he was ....

Q. Well aoir* you say the man came out of the tunnel? - A.,
    Well, I am perhaps assuming that.   He came from the
    tunnel area.  He told me that he had come out of the
    West Stand.

Q. Was not there a crowd of people going down the tunnel
   at the time? - A. I did not see a crowd going down
   that tunnel, no.  I was engulfed at the bottom of the
   stairs and I could not see further than two or three
   feet at that point in time.

Q. And what did the man say to you? - A. He was quite
   hysterical.  He told me that people inside the stand
   were shoving and pushing.   In actual fact he said that
   people were dying in there.

Q. Yes.  People were dying in there. - A. That was one of
   the phrases that he used.

Q. What did you do about it? - A. At that particular point
   I could not do much at all because I was pinned against
   the metal gate.   I could not move.  I had got my helmet
   in my right hand.   I could not get to my radio but I
   could see what I thought was a supervisory Officer
   and a group of P.C.s not too far away and I did say
   to them go across to those because they would be in
   a better position to help him as I could not move at
   that point.

Q. What rank was this Officer? - A. I do not know.  All I
   can say is I saw a flat cap so I am assuming it was a
   supervisory Officer.

Q. An Inspector or above? - A. That is right or a Special
   Constable but I did not see any Special Constables
   within the concourse.

Q. Did you release yourself from your position at the
   bottom of these stairs? -A. After two or three minutes
   the number of fans depleted and I was quite free then
   to move away from the stairs.

Q. Yes. - A. So at that particular point I was in a position
   to do something so I went across to the man.
                                                 S. SHEARWOOD

Q. You went to the man? - A. I went to the man who came
   across to me initially and was quite hysterical and
   told him that I was now free, what was his specific
   complaint, could I help him.

Q. What did he tell you? -A. Again he said he was concerned
   about the number of people that were in the tunnel and in
   the stands and pushing and shoving and he had heard that
   children were being flattened.

Q. People in the tunnel?- A. Sorry.     People in the stand.

Q. Yes. - A. I am assuming from what he said he had actually
   come from the front or the centre of the stand.

Q. What did you do? - A. At that point I went down the
   tunnel to see if I could see anybody who was in
   distress.

Q. How far down the tunnel did you go? -A. I went about
   three-quarters of the way.

Q.   Yes.   Beyond the point where it slopes downwards? -A.
     That is right, yes, sir.

Q.   What did you see? - A. To be honest, I saw nothing that
     I thought needed Police attention.  There was nobody in
     distress.

Q. Well, perhaps you can tell   us what you actually saw.
   - A. Sorry.  I did not see   anybody in the tunnel. I
   just saw a group of people   who were on the terraces
   but none actually stood in   the tunnel area.

Q. None in the tunnel itself, just the backs of people in
   the .... - A. Just the backs of people who were actually
   on the stand.

Q. Did you go any further then? -A. I intended to.   I intended
   going into the crowd but at that pc?int perhaps common sense
   prevailed and WPC Fairclough said, "Come back.   Do not go
   down there," and she attempted to get through on the radio
   to control to tell them of the complaint that we had had
   from this gentleman.

Q. Do you know if she succeeded? - A. She did not succeed.

Q. So what did you do in fact? - A. At that particular point
   I saw a number of other Officers who were running on to the
   pitch.

Q. From where? - A. From outside the ground, they had come
   through, say, Gate C, but then we were approached by a
   young man who said that he was injured.
                              90



                                                     S. SHEARWOOD

Q. Can I just get it right? The last time we left you you
   were three-quarters of the way down the tunnel. Did you
   actually come back up the tunnel? - A. Yes.  I beg your
   pardon, sir.  I did, yes.

Q. Yes.  When Constable Fairclough asked you to come back?
   - A. I came back out of the tunnel.  Our intention was
   to try and get through on the airwaves.

Q. You saw these Officers running round towards the South
   Side? - A. That is right.

Q. Then you say you were approached by somebody, by a fan?
   - A. Yes, I was approached by a fan, a young teenage boy.

Q. Where had he come from? -A. He had come out of the tunnel
   area.

Q. On his own? - A. On his own, yes.

Q. Yes. - A. And he complained that he could not breathe
   and he had been crushed and his chest was hurting him.

Q. Yes.  So what did you do? - A. At that point we took him
   round to the first aid point next to the gymnasium.

Q. Both you and Constable Fairclough? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Were there any other people about in the yard at that
   time? - A. There were people coming from Gate C still
   but not seriously congested, the area was not, in my
   opinion.

Q.   Were people coming from Gate C to go downthe tunnel
     at that time? -A. I beg your pardon, sir.

Q. Were there people coming through Gate C going down the
   tunnel at that time? -A. Not that I recollect, no.

Q,    Do you know where they were going to? -A. Some were
     going towards the position I had left amd just generally
     milling about.

Q. Did you see any other people coming out of thetunnel
   apart from this young man you took off to thefirst   aid
   room? -A. Not at that particular point, no.

           MR. PHILLIPS:      Thank you very much.

          MR. HYTNER:      No questions, sir.

          MR. JACKSON:; No questions, sir.

          MRl,MAXWELL:      No questions, thank you.
                              91



                                                   S. SHEARWOOD

          HR. GLASGOW:      No questions.

          MR. KALLIPETIS:      No questions.

          MR. COLLINS:      Sergeant Higgins, please.     Thank you,
     Mr. Shearwood.

             POLICE SERGEANT EDWARD HIGGINS     Called

                     Examined by    MR. COLLINS:

Q. Yes.  Your full name, please, Sergeant? -A. Edward
   Higgins, sir.

Q.   Serial 20, Reserve Serial? - A. That is correct.

Q.   In the gymnasium.  Did you get instructions   to go to the
     Leppings Lane end because of trouble at the turnstiles?
     You have in your statement put that at 2.20.    Is that a
     correct time? ~ A. No, sir.   It is 2.40, that.

Q. 2.40. - A. Yes.

Q. I was going to say I thought it was a bit later.  And by
   the time you got there with your serial, you went, I think,
   to Gate A? -A. That is correct.

Q.   And you found the mass outside and the gate        under pre­
     ssure? - A. That is correct.

Q. Now, did you yourself decide that you should try to
   request some assistance to deal with the situation
   outside? -A. First of all, sir, when we came through
   - I was actually in the ground at the time when we got
   the call - and my unit went the rear of the cantilever
   stand.  I realised something was wrong when we just got
   out ofthe back of the cantilever stand.

Q. Yes. -   A. There must have been in excess of 50/60 youths
   just urinating all the way along from the outside of the
   stand right up to Gate A.

Q. Yes. -   A. So at that I told my unit not to arrest anybody
   for being drunk and having entered.    That was the first
   instruction.    Then we get up to the gate, sir.

Q. Sorry.  Yes. - A. Then we get up to the gate.          That is
   when I can see the problem at A Gate.

Q. Yes.  Well, all I was really asking you, Sergeant, was
   whether you decided to take some action and I think you
   tried to use your radio, did not you? *• A. That is
   correct, y e s .
                          92



                                              E. HIGGINS

Q. And what did you seek to ask for over the radio? -A.
   It was not straightaway, sir, that, after some time
   when we had been ...

Q. I am sorry.  Just answer the questions, would you, because
   I think we will get on a lot quicker if you do. - A. All
   right, sir.  kater on I requested to placate some of the
   fans inside the attendance of some horses if they were
   available.

Q. Yes.  You see, the reason I am taking this quite quickly
   is because we have had other evidence that covers a lot
   of it and I do not want you to deal with matters that
   others have covered.  Do you follow? - A. I think I was
   the only one at A Gate though, sir.

Q. Yes, I know.  That is why I am asking you about it. Now,
   at some stage I think that you made a request, did you not,
   that Gate A be opened because you thought someone might be
   killed outside? - A. I did in fact, yes, sir.

Q. Do you know whether that message was received? -A. It was,
   sir, yes.

Q. And did you hear any requests from outside, particularly
   Superintendent Marshall? -A. I believe when I requested
   Gate A to be opened the answer came back from Superintendent
   Marshall to the effect that I should open that gate.

Q. Was that a specific instruction to you to open that gate
   as you understood it? - A. Yes.

Q. There was reference, was there, to Gate A in the instruction?
   - A. Yes, I believe there was, sir.

Q. Now, did you make any preparations before you actually
   opened the gate .... - A. Yes.

Q ....... to receive the .... - A. I got my unit there and
    I also saw a unit from I think it was Delta Two, so I
    instructed the Sergeant there to line his serial up,
    as you are looking towards the ground from the outside
    on the right-hand side.

Q. Would that, incidentally, be   Sergeanfi Edwards of Serial 11
   or a different Officer? - A.   I think it was Sergeant
   Dempson or Dawson.  Dowson I   think it is, sir. As you
   are looking from the outside   in his line of men were on
   the right-hand side and mine   were on the wall side.

Q   And the purpose of that was - perhaps it is fairly obvious
    but ___ - A. W el l ; ryes, it was just when the gate was
    opened I primed the men that if anybody was running
                                            E. HIGGINS

or rushing to try and intercept them and generally to
shout at the crowd to take it steady, there was plenty
of room.

Now, there was a steward, I imagine, on the gate, a gateman?
- A. That is correct, yes.

Did you give him instructions to open the gate? - A. I did,
yes.

Was he willing to follow those instructions initially? - A.
No, he was not.

Did you explain why you were giving the order? - A. Yes, I
had to remonstrate with him for some time.   Because of it
being a life and death situation, as I saw it, I thought
he was just slow timing so I had to be quite vociferous
with him before he even decided that he would be opening
the gates.

Any way eventually you persuaded him and he and you
shouted, I think, to the fans outside that the gate
was going to be opened? - A. Through the little spyholes.

Through the spyhole a And he even waved his key, did not
he, the steward? - A. Yes.  He had to take it out of his
pocket and I shouted that we were going to open the gates,
yes.

And then I think the gate was opened.    Is that right? - A.
That is correct.

How long was it open for? - A. Having viewed the video,
sir - I had no time actually there.

No, I know. - A. The   gate was opened at 58 or thereabouts.

Yes. - A. I think it would be about four minutes or five
minutes past three when I was outside when at that stage
there would be about 70 people in that little area left.

Was the gate shut when there were still people outside or
did it effectively let everyone who needed to come in come
in? -A. No, what happened was first of all we opened it
as wide as we could to let the sort of first onslaught,
the rush, come through and as they filtered through
steadily we shut the gates so we could get three or four
through at a time.

I see.  Do you remember noticing after the gate had been
shut, by which time I imagine it must have been kick-off
if it was opened at 2.58? - A. I had no idea whether
NT
                                94



                                                        E. HIGGINS

        kick-off had been or not, sir.      Normally about 3 o'clock.

     Q. Yes.  Did you see whether there were still fans or - fans,
        people, outside? - A. Yes.

     Q. In particular on the bridge I think you noticed a number of
        people, did you not? -A. I would estimate probably two,
        three hundred or so on the bridge which is approximately
        50 yards away.

     Q. Yes.  One thing I should have asked you is this.  You Isay
        you got the message as you understood it to you to open
        Gate A.  Did you hear any other messages before that
        generally to open the gates in the plural? - A. No, I
        did not, sir.

     Q. You did not hear that.  Yes.  I know that you assisted
        with the rescue operations later.  The fact that I do not
        ask about them does not mean that we do not recognise your
        actions. - A. Right, sir.

                     Cross-examined by MR. HYTNER:

     Q. Sergeant, you arrived at 2.40 and I think you said you
        requested the mounted Police in order to placate the
        fans inside? - A. I had been there at least about ten
        minutes, sir.  The scene was - as people were coming
        through they were complaining of crush injuries.  Some
        had been fainting.  We were getting verbal and physical
        abuse.

     Q. This is what I am asking.  This started from about 2.40
        onwards? - A. As soon as we landed there, sir.

     Q. One lady, a 50-year-old lady in a red coat, was saying
        someone is going to get killed? - A. That is quite
        correct, sir.

        She was, I think, dragged away by some i
        returned to .... — A. Yes.

             MR. HYTNER:    Thank you.

            MR. JACKSON:     No questions.

            MR. MULLER:     No questions.

            MR. MAXWELL:     No questions, thank

            MR. GLASGOW:     No questions.

            MR. WOODWARD:     N o , thank you , sir

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you.      Thank you v6®y:
A/f

                                    95



                                                         E. HIGGINS

           much, Sergeant.

                THE WITNESS:     Thank you.

                MR. PHILLIPS:     Sergeant Chapman, please.

                    POLICE SERGEANT PETER CHAPMAN Called

                             Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

      Q.   You are Sergeant Peter Chapman, isthat     right? - A.     Yes,
           that is correct, sir.

      Q.   And you were the Sergeant in charge ofPSerial       1on the
           perimeter track? - A. Yes, sir.

      Q. Is that a job you have done before? - A. It is, sir, yes.

      Q.   Had you done that the previous year? -     A. No, sir.

      Q.   But you had done it on other occasions? -     A. At League
           matches, sir, yes.

      Q. Yes.  Can you tell us, please, what instructions you
         yourself were given in relation to the duties of the
         Officers on the perimeter track? What was their duty?
         -A. The instructions I was given by whom, sir?

      Q. By your superior Officers.  Superintendent Greenwood,
         for example? - A. To my knowledge Superintendent Greenwood
         did not speak to the Officers who were round the
         perimeter track.

      Q.   Did he speak to you? - A. No, sir.

      Q.   Well, who did give you     instructions?      -A.    I went tothe
           briefing for supervisory Officers, sir.

      Q. Yes.  What was the job of the people on the perimeter
         track as you understood it? “ A. The job of the people
         on the perimeter track, sir, is up until kick-off to
         stand and face  the crowd paying particular attention
         to people trying to climb over the perimeter fences.

      Q. Now, was it your practice or were you required to have
         an Officer at each of the gates in the perimeter fence
         at either end of the ground? - A. No, that was not the
         practice, sir.  Thirteen of the Officers who worked on
         the track were Officers who work on the track at every
         game and in fact know the evacuation procedure and
         automatically go to the gates at either end of the ground
         if that procedure is in force.  They have done practice runs
         in the past.
                                             P. CHAPMAN

Q. You do not then allocate particular Officers to part­
   icular gates? - A. No, I have never been asked to, sir,
   no.

Q.Does it work out in fact that at each gate there is an
   Officer? - A. Yes, if they do a practicesevacuation
   procedure those Officers work in the same place every
   game and you will find that the Officers go to the same
   gate each time.

Q. Did you give your Officers any particular instructions
   what they should look out for? -A. Yes.  I sent all the
   Officers - that is 19 - the week before the match, I
   sent them a full list of instructions which included
   the evacuation procedure, sir.




                                   / Q. When you say ....
                             97

                                               P. CHAPMAN


Q.   When you say you sent them a full list of instructions, is
     that a copy of what we know to be an instruction for Serial      1?
     - A. That is right, sir.

Q. In that instruction, which you can in the bundle of documents
   from South Yorkshire Police, Volume 1, at Tab 14, towards the
   beginning of that section. Have you got Tab 14? That is the
   full match Order.   If you go along you will find sub-sector 1,
   Serial 1 a few   pages in? -A. Yes.

Q. Is that the order you sent to all themembers ofyourserial?
   - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Do you give them further briefing? - A. The 13 who work on the
   track regularly, sir, no, I don't, because they work every
   game and know exactly what they are doing.  The 6 Officers who
   supplemented the serial I did speak to them, asked them
   whether they had received a copy of the instructions and
   whether in fact they knew what they were doing.  They did,
   because again they had all worked on the track on the odd
   occasion, and I deputed then from those 6 which end and where
   in the ground that they went.

Q. Your duty as Sergeant is to remain in the vicinity of the
   players’ tunnel? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you regard that as meaning that you were not at liberty to
   patrol round the track and see that your men were doing what
   they should be   doing? - A.No, I have always been told that I
   will remain atthe players’ tunnel.

Q. So you did not in fact patrol round the men in your serial? -
   A. No, sir, I have been told that I must stay at the bottom of
   the players’ tunnel.

Q. We heard from one senior Officer that all the men in Serial 1
   should have a radio. Was that in fact the case? - A. No, the
   13 regulars have a radio because they have a radio permanently
   issued to them, period.  The 6 who supplemented the serial I
   do not think had radios.  There would not be enough.

Q.   Were any     of   those 6 at the   Leppings   Lane terraceend ofthe
     pitch? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. How many of them? - A. P.C. Richardson, P.C. Collins and P.C.
   Croot.

Q.   Three of the 6 were at the Leppings Lane terrace end of the
     pitch? - A. Yes, and the other 3 I am almost certain were at
     the Spion Kop end.   I split them in half to mingle them with
     the experienced Officers.

Q. We see in the order:

          "NO-ONE IS TO BE ALLOWED ACCESS TO THE TRACK FROM THE
          TERRACES WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF A SENIOR OFFICER EXCEPT
          TO RECEIVE MEDICAL ATTENTION".
                            98

                                            P. CHAPMAN



     - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was there any discussion between you and your men as to how
   they should interpret that particular instruction? - A. No, I
   would leave that to their judgment, sir.

Q. Particularly, did you regard it as being the duty of Serial 1
   to look out for signs of overcrowding in the pens at the
   Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Yes, I would say that would be a
   normal part to the build up to the football match.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That was not the question.   Would
     you put it again?

          MR. PHILLIPS:   If I can remember it, sir, yes:

Q. Did you regard it as being part of the duty of the Officers in
   Serial 1 to look out for signs of overcrowding at the Leppings
   Lane terrace? - A. Yes, sir, I would expect them to do it at
   either end of the ground.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I may be wrong, but I thought you
     asked whether an instruction had been given about it.

          MR. PHILLIPS:   Sir, that was going to be my next
     question, first whether he regarded it as part of his duty and
     second whether he instructed his men to that effect:

Q. Did you do that? - A. Did I instruct the men to watch out for
   overcrowding?

Q.   Yes? - A. No, Idid not, sir.

Q.   If you regarded it as part of the serial’s duty to look out
     for overcrowding but did not instruct the men on your serial
     to do this, how would they know it was part of their duty? -
     A. Because they are all very, very, very experienced Police
     officers who work the track regularly, long before I did, and
     know exactly what to do.

Q. How do you know they knew exactly what to do? - A. From
   speaking to them in the past. They know exactly what to do.

Q.    But you had, ofcourse, some Officers who   were not long
     experienced Officers doing that duty, did   not you? - A. Yes, I
     did.

Q. You mentioned the names of three Officers who were newcomers
   to that serial? - A. Yes.

Q. How would they know what to look out for? - A. They would use
   their eyes like everybody else, sir.

Q. What would you expect the Officers on duty at the Leppings
   Lane end, and I am particularly concerned with that, of
   course, because that terrace is divided into pens. Do you
                            99

                                             P. CHAPMAN


     follow? - A. Yes.

Q.    What would you expect those Officers to do if they saw that
     one of the pens or two of the pens were becoming full? - A. I
     would expect them to do something about it and inform Police
     control.

Q. To inform Polic.e control? - A. Yes.
                                                            i
Q. By radio? - A. Yes.

Q. If that was an Officer who had a radio? - A. Yes, but there
   are Officers with radios within yards and feet of them.

Q. But again you had given no instruction to the Officers to do
   that? - A. What, to inform control whether the pens got
   overcrowded?

Q. Yes? - A. No.

Q.   You stayed at the tunnel throughout the period before 3
     o ’clock in this particular case, did you? - A. That is right,
     yes, sir.

Q. Because you understood your order to be to do just that? - A.
   That is right.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Can you tell me, what is so
     important about you being at the players’ tunnel all the time?
     - A. I think, my Lord, it is something of a focal point in the
     ground.   The Officers around the perimeter track....

Q. Would know where you were? - A. yes, and if I need them to
   stand and face the crowd at any time during the game, for
   instance if there is a lengthy stoppage in play, they know to
   look there and I step on to the track.

Q.   So it is aquestion of your Officers knowing where you are?       -
     A. That is right.

Q.       MR. PHILLIPS:    What was the first thing you noticed
     which you regarded as being wrong? - A. What do you mean?
     Once things had started to happen, sir?

Q. Yes. - A. It would be after the game had kicked off.

Q. What did you notice? - A. I noticed what I thought to be an
   overspill at the back of the goal at Leppings Lane.

Q. Before you saw that had you been keeping an eye upon the
   quantity of people in pens 3 and 4? - A. No, I would not be
   able to see how many people were in there from where I was.

Q. Had you been looking the ground? - A. I had been looking
   around the ground.  I did notice, and I can be specific, at
   19-minutes-to-3, I was approached by P.C. Finnegan who was
   with me, or very, very close by, who made some comment about
/ j»                                                ■                 '   '
■l~#r       ■
        -       •



                                                                                                 100

                                                                                                                              P. CHAPMAN


                                               __ Liverpool supporters?", simply because
                           w iK A V ix     the
                                            u a c South Stand wwhere
                                                               « i* v a
                                                                u c a c xI  was
                                                                            w o o     'appeared
                                                                                      c*y±*zza.x c s \ a to
                                                                                                         u v  be
                                                                                                              i~*sr

                           totally fu l l . We did look round and we       ■£+>, noticed
                                                                                 •r'k^-
                                                                                      4*4        4 ~V*««4- 4
                                                                                                 that        -W
                                                                                                             there  *
                                                                                                                    ,
                                                       ~                                   the West Stand,
                           and th    appeared to be lots of room
                           terraces

                                . art of the Leppings Lane U                                                                      A. Particularly at
                           the wings, sir, at either end
                    t ’S   V \ -t                             *sl                    4 -^
                                     *#“   £ 5 . v s j* a .                   -v *          1»
                                                                                                       room or plenty of room at the
                           centre pens
                           there


                    G. You say it Was after kick-off that you saw i
                       an overspill on to the track.   What did you
                       happened? - A . At first I thought it was purely an overspi—
                       because Peter Beardsley had just hit the bar for Liverpool,



                    ^ . 1 aa sorry, i d o n ’t quite understand what you mean by an
                        overspill. We must remember there are some fairly high
                        oerimeter fences in front of that terrace. - A. That is right.

                                                                              n by an overspill? - A. Those fairly high
                           perimeter                                          s have in the past been scaled.
                           -,
                                                                                            thought it was a deliberate scaling of the
                                                                                                                 " ■'      I thought
                                                                                                                        le could have
                                                                                                                        « hart nni»npfi
                           the gatess bo
                                                                                                                                                                   :
                    Q. And you did                                                                                      ;he pitch at all? - A . No, I
                       Jid not.
                                                                                                                                                                   ;
                    Q. You stayed at the players' tunnel? - ,                                                                 Yes»   Once M r .
                       Greenwood had run on the field -and st<



                    Q. Thank you very much.'

                                                                    Cross-Ex am:

                    Q . Sergeant,
            •••            you took'the'two 'Siaftagers-', Mr'. ■'Clough, "and'Mr. Dalglish, to
                           the Police control room? - A. I d i d .




                                                                                                   U UC K t S i i l l e i u           filter S i t U d t X U l i
                           —                - A. Yes, sir.  I honestly c a n ’t recall the
                           exact conversation, but I do recall that he mentioned we had
          ySsw"''
■   ■ ■   5                                                                                    .   ..




                                                                                                        P.   CHAPMAN


                         got a serious incident on our hands.
                                                                                   '
                                                                                   ■


                    G. Was Mr. Duckenfield asked Iby either of the managers how the
                       serious incident had cone about, or what had happened or what
                         h a rl   r-a u e e rl   it?    _   A   No      not    +■<-» mv   k n o w le d g e .     W hat   he   d id   Say
                                                              it to deal w i t h . He did
                                                louncement to the crowd simply because
                                        ; people leaving and hindering the emergency
                                 , but to my recollection there was no explanation
                         given as to how or why it had happened,

                                                       Cross-Examined by M R . GLASGOW:

                                                                                                                 on of your 20



                    G.          the Leppings Lane end
                             .d be have been 5 Officers?
                                                    ers? - A. Y e s , 1 am almost certain
            ^            it was
                              is 5, 5,
                                    5; 5 and 4.
                                             4..

                    Q . Of   lose 5, as luck or judgment would h             3 O
                        new? - A . Y e s . When 1 say "new” , they ;
                                                                   l'~ive worked on
                        track before but did not work it regularly like the> o t h e r -13.
                                                                                               ,                 , _
                                                                                                                   for us.


                                      the              or Officers            briefing was it


                                  es? - A, 1 think a lot of Inspectors
                                                            Insp<=     did                                                       *

                         Do yo
                             ou now now think it would have
                         specific briefi.      been given
                                                                                                                              did not

                                                                                                           doubt as to
                                                                     and .had    Inspector briefed the* I
                                                                       would onlyi? have ir>
                                                                                         1   ated what I
                                                                                             •& “t- £s.4ri *.* Jr-, a. *r* T
                                                                                                                             had
                            .ready said to them.                                                                                           :

..............Q.         Those 5 Officers at the'West end of the ground had complete
                         control of •
                                    the
                                    ‘•he perimeter fence, had not they? - A. Yes,
                                    :ajara-t*- ■ n r ' i d
                    Q. That is a t 'least-■      one area rof
                                                            > f +-h
                                                                the e .crr*rtJ
                                                                      ground   md u h o fo
                                                                                  where    T am c ju r e HQ jsytsa
                       in-agreement, There are no stewards for them to help? - A,
                       No.                                                            '........ ...............
                                           .......
                    Q. It is just the Police Officers? - A. That is right.

                            ,/ou aware so far as we know for the first time this year
                       a very emphatic addition had been made to the match day
                       orders, giving I think the only section in capital letters
                     ■ underlined, saying that no-one was to be allowed access to t
                       track without permission of a senior Officer or to rec---—
                       medical attention? - A. Y e s , that was an alteration.
                               102
                                                P.   CHAPMAN




Q.   And that that was something     underlined, put in capitals
     and new? - A. Yes.

Q. Given the apparent emphatic tone of that order, was it
   really fair to leave a quarter of the serial, five men,
   including three men who were not regular, to interpret
   for themselves without guidance and without even a
   Sergeant as to the circumstances in which public safety
   might require people being released from that pen? - A.
   Mo, I do not think so, sir.   Even though they'were not
   regular track workers they were all very, very
   experienced Police Officers.

Q. Forgive me if it sounds unfair with the benefit of
   hindsight, but 1 am sure you agree, Sergeant, that it did
   go terribly wrong? - A. It went appallingly wrong.   The
   whole day went appallingly wrong.

Q.    We are looking at that over the weeks together as
     candidly as we can, but this particular part of the
     operation, those five men trying to assess the situation
     at that perimeter fence, do appear, with respect, to have
     got it terribly wrong, do they not? - A. I would say not,
     sir.    I honestly cannot say what they saw or what they
     felt.    So, 1 do not think they got it wrong on the
     perimeter track.

Q. In the light of all we now know, do you not think that it
   might have been both fairer to them and fairer to the
   public if they had been told in advance that it was
   important to look out for overcrowding, which you
   yourself accept   and knew to be    a prime   responsibility of
   yourself and your serial? - A.      I would   say to you that
   they would know   that anyway as    part of   their normal
   duties.   It is   part of the whole policing package of a
   football match.

Q.
     photograph hangs behind us, the extent to which those
     central pens were overcrowded? - A. It would appear they
     were overcrowded.

            I.   HYTNERs

                               inegan going to be called?

           MR. COLLINS:      Yes, he is the next but one.

                 D JUSTICE TAYLOR;   Yes, Mr. Woodward.
                                               103
                                                                       P. CHAPMAN


                         Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Officer, the Police Officers under you, they were all
   experienced Officers? - A, Yes, sir, they were.

Q. For any of them was this the first time they had been
   engaged on work at a match? - A. No, it was not.

Q. In relation to those at the Leppings Lane end, had they
   ever before done perimeter duty? - A. Yes, sir,

Q. This was a match being put on by the Football
   Association? - A. That is right.

Q.   It was their event? - A. It was.

Q.   It was at Sheffield Wednesday's club?                             They had
     organised it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q, The Police had come along to assist? - A. Yes.

Q. The policing function of your men, your Officers, was
   that to watch out for trouble? - A. Yes,

Q. To be vigilant? - A. Yes,

Q. Do you doubt that any of them failed to carry that out? -
   A, I think not, sir.

Q. If there was peril, if an individual appeared to be in
   difficulty and that had been noticed by any of your
   Officers, would you have expected those Officers to have
   acted on it? - A. I would have expected them to take
   independent action on what they saw, sir.

Q. Was that something you would have needed to give specific
   instruction on every time you sent a Police Officer
   anywhere? - A. Sir, Policemen take independent action and
     mfll fA   ^ A A icifsn e   f nr-   f-'hofisolFPQ   p i ah t h n n r «   A i f AT V   dAV.   T



Q. To
   Ht
   protecting the integrity of the pitch? - A. That is
   correct.   That is part of the job.



     trying to get up on to the fence and on to the pitch? -
     A. I understand that to be the case, sir.

Q. The first you became aware of difficulties at the
   Leppings Lane end was after Mr. Beardsley had hit the
   crossbar? - A. That is right.
                                      104
                                                           P. CHAPMAN


Q. That would seem to coincide with Mr. Grobbelaar's first
   appreciation of any difficulty? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. That would be at about four minutes, nearly five minutes,
   past three? - A. Somewhere In that region.

Q. At that time you were down by the tunnel? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Were there any club officers around?   Had you spoken
   with any of them before this? - A. At that time there was
   not, sir.   1 had spoken to Mr. Lock some time earlier.

Q. Had Mr. Finnegan been around then? - A. Yes, he had.

Q. Where had this conversation occurred? - A. Again, sir,
   that had taken place at the bottom of the player s
   tunnel.   When I talk about nineteen minutes to three
   when PC Finnegan approached and asked where all the
   Liverpool supporters were, Mr. Lock was present at the
   bottom of the tunnel then,

Q. Do you recall whether there was any discussion about the
   situation outside the Leppings Lane entrance? - A. Y e s ,
   sir, there was.   Mr. Lock, whom I have known many years
   and have actually worked with, he told us a figure of how
   many spectators were in the ground.   Now I cannot recall
   that figure, but he did made a comment about it was
   absolute hell on outside in Leppings Lane and our Police
   Control did know about it.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That was also at nineteen
     minutes to three? - A. Myself and PC Finnegan looked at
     the clock on the north stand opposite which showed at
     that time nineteen minutes to three which is why I can be
     so precise.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD:   Mr. Lock was involved in the
     conversation and he gave you some figures or discussed
                   f- h a A   m m a    in?   - A.   Yps.   Ha   crave* Y   mimbpr

     it was hell outside at Leppings Lane.

Q. Now you are quite clear that this conversation took



Q. Was that the first new
   Yes.   When he said it
   it to mean it was extremely busy and nothing more.

                  Re-Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q. Can I just take you back to the instructions to Serial 1?
   Tab 14, about a quarter of the way in.   I am looking at
                        105
                                        P. CHAPMAN


that bit in heavy print, in capitals.    There is
reference to:

      ” ...WITHOUT CONSENT OF A SENIOR OFFICER..."

A. There is, sir.

Who would you categorise as a Senior Officer for that
purpose? - A. I would - well, Senior Officers in the
Police Service are thought to be Inspector and above.

You would not expect an Officer on the perimeter, if he
were following the instructions given in this order, to
open a gate unless an Inspector or above authorised it? -
A. I think again, sir, that depends on why he would have
reason to open the gate.

I want you to be absolutely fair to the Officers actually
on duty because they were put in an impossible position.
If they exercised their discretion to open a gate without
permission and they had made a mistake in so doing, there
was liable to be a come-back? - A. Well, it appears to be
a Catch 22 situation, sir.

That is the point, because here is an Officer who has an
emphatic order which he knows about in the Operation
Order, telling him that he must not open that gate, in
effect, without the consent of a Senior Officer, except
to receive medical attention? - A. That is correct.

If he does that on his own initiative and it turns out he
was wrong, the book might be thrown at him? - A. I do not
know.   It could well be, sir.

Well, he is in breach of the operational order? - A. He
is indeed.

As you say, Catch 22, he is in an impossible situation? -
A. Yes, sir, he is.

Therefore, following up what Mr. Glasgow was putting to
you, it is unfair to those Officers not to have a
specific briefing about opening a gate if there is any
danger of over-crowding? - A. Yes, sir, couched in those
words, it is.   I suppose that really does put them in an
impossible situation.

Had that not occurred to you? - A. No, it had not
occurred to me.   However, as I say, they are all very
experienced Officers and I would expect them to act on
their own initiative, depending on what is seen.

Of course, Sergeant, one would hope that any Officer
would. - A. If I can say something.   When you say the
                             106
                                             P. CHAPMAN


   book would be thrown at them, I would suggest to you that
   had they opened the gates with the best of intentions for
   anything, I would say the book would not be thrown at
   them.   That would be grossly unfair.

Q. They would know that they were doing it in possible
   contravention of a very specific and very emphatic order,
   would they not? - A. Yes, sir, they would.

                  By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

Q. Can I ask you this:   you draw a distinction between over­
   spill and pitch invasion? - A. No, my Lord.    When I say
   "over-spill” , I did not think it was a deliberate pitch
   invasion.

Q. That is what I meant. - A. No, I did not think it was a
   deliberate invasion.

Q. Therefore, from half way down the pitch when you saw what
   was happening your immediate reaction was not "pitch
   invasion" but ’over-spill"? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In that situation - I quite follow your answer to me
   before about being at the focal point - but when
   something like that was actually happening down there was
   that not an appropriate time for you to go down there and
   see what was going on with your men? - A. Yes, it could
   have been.   As I say, by the time I realised it was
   anything like an over-spill, there appeared to be a sea
   of Police Officers already there, my Lord.

Q. There were already Officers there when you saw it? - A.
   Yes, very, very quickly.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes, thank you.

         MR. COLLINS:    Police Constable Peter Smith.

            POLICE CONSTABLE PETER SMITH Called

                  Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q. It is Peter Smith?   - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. We know from the Operational Order that you were on
   Serial 1 on this particular afternoon under Sergeant
   Chapman? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You have done this particular perimeter duty onother
   occasions? - A. Numerous occasions.
                        107
                                       P. SMITH



Are you a Community Officer? - A. I am, sir.

So you had a radio? - A. Yes, sir.

Had you any particular place on the perimeter that you
would normally go to, or does it vary? - A. Normally at
the rear of the goal mouth at the Leppings Lane end.

Were you there in 1987 and 1988? - A. I was, sir.

So far as 1988 is concerned, and that is last year's
match, what was the state of the terracing as far as you
can remember? - A. How many were there or...?

Yes. - A. Well, it was full, sir.

The reason I ask this is that there have been some
complaints of people saying that it was over-crowded -
not that they were injured I hasten to emphasise, but
that it was over-crowded and uncomfortable.   What would
you say about that? - A. I am sure that people were
uncomfortable.

Was it spread out last year over the whole terracing? -
A. Over the whole terracing, yes, sir.

It was not the concentration we know we had this year? -
A. No, sir.

As you understood it from the briefings you had had and
from your experience, what were your duties, and I am now
asking you to concentrate on this year's match, what were
your duties on that perimeter? - A. To monitor the fans
for their behaviour, virtually what was going on in those
terraces, sir.

If, for example, there was fighting started in the
terraces, that was something you would deal with?
Obviously you would not go in yourself - A. No, we would
not go in and deal with it.  That is something I would
pass to the Control.

You would pass it to Control.   What about the question
of over-crowding or potential over-crowding? - A. That is
something that is permanently monitored, sir.   You would
be looking for people in difficulty.

If you saw what you considered to be over-crowding, or
potential over-crowding, what would you do about it? - A.
In the past we have gone through on the radios, or let
people out and moved them to another part of the
terracing should that be necessary.
                           108
                                          P. SMITH


Q. Incidentally, we know that last year, shortly before
   kick-off, there was a message passed somehow to an
   Officer round the back to shut off the tunnel so that no
   more people would come on to those central pens? - A. I
   have no recollection of that.   I have a vague
   recollection that a number of years ago of the gates at
   the rear of that tunnel being closed, but not last year,
   no, sir.

Q. So far as last year is concerned, that wasn't anything to
   do with you if it happened? - A. No, sir.

Q. Were you aware of the Operational Order this year which
   emphasised the need to ensure there were not people
   coming out on to the track? - A. I have seen that order,
   yes, sir.

Q. And the emphasis in it? - A. The emphasis on it had not
   come to my attention until it had been brought out at
   this Inquiry, the fact it was in capitals this year and
   last year it wasn't.

Q. Did you see before the match the Operation Order? - A. I
   photostated the Order, I had seen it and in fact Sergeant
   Chapman had sent us one, sir.

Q. So obviously you were aware of it? - A. I was.

Q. That meant that you were supposed, on the face of it, to
   be careful to ensure there was not a pitch invasion? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. I think there had been one the year before at the end of
   the match? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. A minor one? - A. Yes, there had been one or two people
   who had come over prior to that as well, sir.

Q. In fact despite the height of the perimeter fences, did
   people from time to time try to get over them? - A.
   People frequently at a large match will scale that fence.
   It is not difficult to scale it.

Q. That is something you were keeping a lookout for as well?
   - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I would like you to come to the day in question.   I
   think you were on the track at your position roughly
   behind the goal until about two o'clock when you went to
   have a meal? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. At that stage, two o'clock, can you remember what the
   state was on those terraces? - A. To the best of my
                           109
                                           P. SMITH


   recollection now, sir, there were very few people on the
   terraces at all.

Q. I do not know whether you were here this morning and
   heard Sergeant Burman's evidence? - A. I heard him this
   afternoon when he said it was full at two o'clock.   I
   would dispute that, sir.

Q. You would not agree with that? - A. No, sir.

Q. Anyway, you went with Police Constable Illingworth? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. Who was the Officer next to you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. On roughly gate 4? - A. Gate 4 or 5.   I think initially
   I had actually gone out - we have stools and I think I
   put it at gate 4.

Q. You took gate 4? - A. Well, I put my stool there, not
   particularly took it.   We just generally spread out in
   front of the terracing.

Q. You went to have a meal.   I think there was some slight
   confusion about that because the canteen was closed when
   you got there? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. So it took you rather longer than you anticipated to have
   your meal? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What time was it when you got back to your position? - A.
   About ten to three, sir.

Q. Incidentally, I should make clear,   you did not abandon
   the post when you went for a meal,   someone took over from
   you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you remember who that was? - A. PC Helliwell, and I
   do not know who the other Officer was.

Q. Having come back from your refreshment break, you think
   it was about ten to three? - A. It could have been
   earlier, yes, sir.

Q. When you got back to your post, what was the state of
   pens 3 and 4, as you observed them? - A. Compared to the
   outer two pens they were full.   Having said that, there
   was space in them, sir.   People were surging forward,
   jumping about.

Q. Can I ask you to look at an album of photographs?    It is
   one which will have written    at thetop "Composite Album
   2"? - A. Yes.
                                       P. SMITH


If you would be good enough to look at the first
photograph in that, you can see from where it is taken
because of pen 4.   Now the timing of that photograph is
2.46, which, from what you have told us, was roughly the
time you got back, perhaps a tiny bit before? - A. Yes,
sir.




        Q. Looking at the condition
                                      P. SMITH


Q. Looking at the condition in Pen 4 and next to it Pen 3,
   does that accord with your recollection? - A. Yes sir.

Q. There appears to be some space in fact at the front judging
   by that photograph although it looks pretty full up towards
   the middle and back? - A . Yes sir.

Q. If we look at the next photograph we can see the same sort
   of view although this time someone has got one of those
   inflatable bananas, or whatever they call it? -A. Yes.

Q. And on the next photograph there is a view of the rear of
   an Officer? - A. That is P.C. Helliwell.

Q. Looking at the   state of affairs in the pen at about this
   time, were you   in any way concerned about overcrowding
   at that stage?   - A. No sir.  For the time it was what is
   a normal state   of the two pens, sir.

Q. Although the side pens were comparatively speaking much less
   so? - A. Unusually so.

Q. Did it occur to you then that it looked as if there had
   been a bit of a concentration in the middle and the sides
   should be, people should be directed to the sides? - A.
   Possibly for the time, sir, but having said that I have
   seen a similar situation in the past at large matches.

Q. What normally happens when that occurs.  How are things
   achieved, or is it achieved by fans going round to the
   side pens? - A. The fans would normally climb over the
   railings in the pens and just find their own level.  They
   would climb over them without any hindrance.

Q. It is not an entirely safe way of doing it clitabing over
   those side railings, is it? — A. Well no sir.   I certainly
   would not attempt it but that is what they do usually.
   They are queueing up to do it.  It is not something I would
   attempt.
Q. I think you, as it happens in discussion with Police Constable
   Illingworth, had had some words about the possibility of
   gates in the front of those side pens hadn't you? - A.
   Yes, there were two gates at the top of the railings.  We
   had said something:  "They would perhaps be better at the
   bottom".  It would just save them climbing over.

Q. Was that something that you mentioned on that afternoon?
   - A. It was sir, yes.

Q. Can you remember what led you to refer to that? - A. Not
   at all sir.

Q. Or what stage it was? - A. It was very early on sir.
                                       P. SMITH


Q. Now you are standing before kick-off still looking into
   the pens. Am I right? - A. Yes sir.

Q     in fact you are supposed and no doubt did remain looking at
      the pens until kick-off.  Is that correct? - A. I never
      looked at the pitch at all sir till later.

Q. Were you aware, Mr. Smith, of the teams having come out
   on to the pitch? - A. Purely by the behaviour of the crowd,
   yes sir.
Q. What was the behaviour of the crowd that made you think
   they must have come out on to the pitch? - A. A large cheer
   went up and there was some surging to the front.

Q. Did that surging seem to you, from what you saw, any
   different from normal surging? - A. Certainly not sir.

Q. The reason I ask you that is we have had some suggestions
   that surge did not go back, because the surge normally
   comes forward and goes back again? - A. Sir, the surge
   certainly went back.  I am not sure, at some stage the
   gate actually flew open of its own accord.

Q. Which gate are we talking about?     - A. The gate to Pen 3
   sir.
Q. Now you were aware, were you, of that coming open? - A.
   Yes sir.

Q. You yourself did not open it? — A. No sir.

Q. And no one else would have had authority presumably to
   open it£ - A. There would be no way for that gate t& have
   been opened other than simply the pressure of that surge,
   sir.
Q. Have you ever known that gate or indeed any of the perimeter
   gates to come open of their own accord because of internal
   pressure before? - A. The locking mechanism on those gates
   has been in for approximately about two years sir.  I
   don't think it was there for the Coventry semi-final in
   1987.   I think they were put in after.

 Q. I think you are right. - A. The gates in the past have
    opened from pressure from the crowd.

    Q. They have? - A. Yes sir.
    Q. But since they put the new mechanism on? - A. That is
       while the mechanism has been on. They would not have
       opened under pressure previously.

    Q. I see, so your impression is that this has happened before?
       - A. I would say at this stage that from the design of
       the mechanisms that that is what it is designed to do sir,
       the shapeof it would appear to be.
                            113
                                           P. SMITH


Q. Actually we might, as we raise this, have a quick look at
   it. Can I ask you to look at one which you should have,
   it should have on the front of it "South Yorkshire Police
   Document 10".  Have you got it? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Could you look at number 4   in    that. I am not sure which
     gate this is.  It does not   say    which gate  it is but I
     think it is Gate 3 because   the    photograph at the beginning,
     number 1 is of course Gate   3.     Do you see? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Then we see it open.  Then Photograph number 3 is the mech­
   anism and 4 is perhaps a rather clearer view of the mechanism.
   Is that right? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And 5 we can see   the way in which it is opened from the
   outside by being   pushed down in that way? - A. What I think
   tends to happen,   sir, when the pressure is on because of
   the shape of the   locks, how it curves in, it just slides
   up on it.

Q. it takes, does it not, fairly intense pressure to do that?
   - A. I would not know what pressure it takes.

Q. What I am getting at, it is not something that happens that
   frequently, or does it? - A. It happened last year sir at
   the semi-final and it has happened at other large matches.

Q. Anyway it happened, or you were aware that it had happened.
   Did anyone come out through that gate when it happened the
   first time that you can remember? - A. Not that I can
   remember, sir, but that is not to say that nobody did.

Q.   And what did you do having seen that? - A. I walked back
     to the gate and I closed it. The crowd had gone back and
     they were stood there.

Q. Were there at that stage, as far as you could see, people
   still pressing on that fence and that gate when you closed
   it? - A. Certainly not sir.

Q.    Now what stage have we reached now.  Was this still before
     kick-off? - A. Certainly well before kick-off, yes.

Q.   You describe a surge when you thought that the teams had
     come out on to the pitch.   Was it that surge that appeared
     to cause that gate to open? - A. Possibly sir.

Q.    it came about the same time? - A. About the same time, yes.

Q.    I think a little after that you were aware of some Police
     Constables coming along from the North Stand area? - A. Yes
     sir.

Q. Do you know or was that something usual or unusual that
   there should be Officers coming from there? - A. I can
   just remember recalling they were there and thinkings   "I
   wonder what they are coming to that position for".
                                       P. SMITH


Q. Of course some of the spare Officers, did you know, were in
   the gymnasium which would have been at the other end of the
   North Stand? - A. No, I was not aware of that.

Q. I think you were actually joined by a couple of Officers
   from that Serial. Is that right? * A. Yes sir.

Q. And as they joined you did that gate, Gate 3 open again?
   - A. It did, sir.
Q. Again was this by someone opening it from outside or was
   it from pressure inside? ~ A. The pressure, they had
   surged forward again. The ball, I think they were still
   having the kick-about and the ball had hit near to the
   perimeter fence at Gate 4 and everybody surged forward
   again for some reason.
q   . Had you heard any shouting of any particular sort by now
      from inside that pen? - A. People were shouting and
      screaming as they surged forward which was not unusual
      at all sir.
Q. What were they shouting and screaming. Can you recall
   anything? - A. I can't recall what they were shouting, no.

Q. Did they appear to be shouting and screaming in some form
   of pain or distress? - A.No, not particularly, not at that
   stage sir.
Q. Were you able to tell from the volume of noise generally
   what any individual .... A. No sir.

Q. Now you say that the gate came open again. What did you
   try to do then? - A. We held the gate for a very short
   space of time sir.
Q. When you say "you held the gate" what do you mean? - A. As
   I can recall it, things are very confused sir, we held the
   gate partly to and I don't think it was ever shut again
   sir.
Q. You mean you tried to shut it? - A. Yes sir. I then left
   the other two Officers holding the gate and took a back
   step to get a view of what was happening.

Q. What did you see when you did that? - A. I could see people
   were being pressed up tight against the fence; that they
   had not fallen back as they would normally fall back.

Q. Are we still before kick-off? - A. Yes     sir.

Q. Did you hear anything being said or shouted at this stage?
   - A. I think some people were shouting: "Open the gate,
   we are crushed", something like that.
                                      P. SMITH


What d i d you d e c i d e needed to be done then? - A. As I
stepped back, sir, I looked up to the back and there
appeared to be room at the back for people to have eased
back again. I leapt on the Wednesday advertising hoardings
which are not the ones on the photograph, but they are
actually up on to the perimeter fencing. I climbed on
to those and waved my arms and shouted to people:          Go DacK
I got no response and got down. We opened the gates.

Who had the responsibility to open      the gate as you under­
stood it to let people out? - A. I      did sir.

Did you try to get through on your radio to anyone? - A.
- A. I tried to shouts   "Come and open these gates. People
are dying in here" or something like that. Quite _honestly
from past experience I had no doubt that they would not
have received that at that time due to the noise of the
crowd sir.
 Why were you thinking it necessary to ask whether you could
 open the gate? — A. I have no idea really, sir.

 It is in fact in your Order? - A. It is. That is possibly
 one of the reasons, probably semL-consciously, I don t know
 sir.
 Did you realise by then that people were in trouble? -
 A. Certainly sir.
 So did you in fact open the gate? - A. We opened them,
 yes sir.
 And when you opened the gate of course the problem is it
 is first of all a narrow gate and secondly the gate only
 goes to a right angle, doesn't it, it does not go fully
 back against the fence? - A. No, I think the advertising
 hoarding boards stop it. I am not sure.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Sorry, I have not quite
 followed that. The second time the gate had come open
 you say you had been holding it and trying to close it?
 - A. Yes sir.
 Had it actually been closed you thought? - A.I don't think
 it had sir, no.
. So when you say you opened it, you mean s t o p p e d trying^to
  close it? - A. Well yes sir. I shouted "Open the gate
  to the lads that were there.  I am not sure quite what
  happened. Panic was setting in sir.
       MR. COLLINS:  I am sorry, Mr. Smith, I should have
 asked you this: when the gate opened did some people
 get out of it before you were able to try and push it
 shut it again? - A. Again sir I personally have no
 recollection of that.
                                     P. SMITH


Q. Do you remember at any stage the goal-keeper saying anything?
   - A. No sir.
Q. And again we are, are we still by the time that you have
   allowed or the gate has been opened and you have realised
   the situation, are we still before kick-off or not, or ean t
   you remember? - A. In my own mind, yes sir. I seem to think
   sometime when I picked the radio up hearing something about
   gates being open and I don't know what that was about, I have
   just no idea sir.
Q. I think you attempted to pull people out of the gate but
   being a narrow gate there were difficulties? - A. Yes, I
   think a few people came out and then it just seemed to get
   blocked up.
Q. Did you again try to get the people to go back? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Did anyone appear to realise what you were trying to do?
   - A. No sir. The people that I was trying to attract their
   attention seemed to be watching the pitch.

Q. Did you get any reaction from anyone inside the pen? - A.
   Only abuse sir.
Q. is abuse something that is unknown to perimeter Officers?
    - A. No sir.
Q. is it something you get used to as a perimeter Officer?
   A. Yes.
Q. Things developed from there with you trying to get people
   out and more and more people, I think people began to climb
    over the perimeter fence, did they by then? - A. Eventually
   sir. At that time I could not really understand why they
   were doing that because they were having to climb ©eer the
   people that were being squashed. They seemed to be coming
   from further back.
Q. But even so, of course, the more people that came out the
   less pressure there would be, so I don't suppose you
   objected to that? - A. No, I certainly didn't sir.

Q. we know that after a time a number of Officers arrived,
   including Superintendent Greenwood, and he stopped the match?
   - A. Eventually, yes sir.
Q. Do you remember him coming? - A. I seem to think Mr. Greenwood
   was there very shortly after I had opened the perimeter gate.
   It all seemed to happen so very very quickly up to a certain
   point and then time just ....
 Q. I think you received a number of or an amount of abuse
    specifically because people were saying it was your fault?
    - A. That is what they saying, yes sir.
                            117

                                     P. SMITH


Q. Now at some stage did it occur to you that it might be
   desirable if possible to get the perimeter fencing cut away?
   - A. Yes sir.  I went over on the radio and asked for some
   bolt croppers with the intention perhaps the Club had got
   some, the groundsman or something like Ithat.  I had no idea
   whether that had been received or not sir.

Q. You don't know whether that got through either? - A. No sir.

Q. I think you helped as best you could with the injured and
   the dead? - A. Yes sir. Mr. Greenwood instructed me to
   get the St. John's Ambulance to the gate.

Q. So did you go to find the St. John's Ambulance? - A. It
   had already come round.  It had stopped near Gate 4, I think.

Q. It had already got there and you were instructed by
   Mr. Greenwood to get it outside Gate 3? - A. Yes, to the
   people on the perimeter track.

Q.   That meant, I think, trying to clear a passage to some extent?
     - A. It did sir, yes.

Q.   I think you yourself, Mr. Smith, to be  fair to you were
     hardly surprisingly considerably distressed? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And would you describe yourself as being effectively in a
   state of shock? - A. Very much so, sir.

           MR. COLLINS:  Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Smith.
     I don't think I need ask you anything more.


                   Cross-Examined bv MR. HYTNER:

Q. Mr. Smith, I would like to find out just what information
   you had been given over the years by your superiors or
   other people.  When did you first begin to Police
   Hillsborough about? - A. Well on a regular basis 1982 sir.

Q. We have been given this evidence and I have forgotten it,
   so you will have to help me.   Do you recall when Leppings
   Lane was one entire terrace rather than being cut up into
   pens?  I am told from next to me it was 1981.  Is that
   right? -A. Possibly before I ....

Q. Before you took over? - A. Yes sir.  There has been some
   alterations to those pens while I have been there.

Q. Did you know when you began or subsequent to beginning
   your policing of the ground that there were certain safety
   limit® imposed on first of all the ground itself and then
   on to the separate sections of the ground? - A. I knew
   about the ground limits, sir, but not the pen sections,
   no sir.
                                     P. SMITH


Q. You did not know therefore that for example there was a Safety
   limit imposed on the Spion Kop irrespective of how many were
   in the rest of the ground? - A. The Spion Kop, yes sir,
   because it had just been redone.  I think when they did it
   we mentioned it but I know there are safety limits for the
   Spion Kop, for the Leppings Lane terrace, for the West Stand.

Q. So you knew that? - A. Yes, but not individual pens sir.

Q. That is what I was coming to. You would know therefore,
   for example, that it would not be your responsibility or
   the responsibility of any Police Officer to ensure that
   the total number in the ground did not exceed the safety
   capacity because that would be a matter for as it were the
   mechanical control? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Were you aware of that? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Now we come to the individual pens. Were you in any way
   aware, either because you had been told or because you had
   worked it out for yourself, that there must be a safety
   limit on each individual pen? - A. Not particularly sir, no.

Q. Did you realise that in imposing safety limits on the ground
   and on various sections of the ground, those working out the
   limits would be concerned with what was safe rather than
   how many people could be packed into the section? - A. Yes
   sir.

Q. Because what I want now to deal with you see is this word
   "full" which is used in so many different ways that we are
   in danger of getting confusion and disagreement where there
   need not be any.

         When you talk of a section being "full" it can mean
   either that it has reached its iafety capacity and is
   therefore full, or it is full in the sense that if any more
   people come in somebody is going to get hurt* Do you follow?
   - A. Yes sir.




                        /Q. Did you appreciate
                                          P. SMITH

Did you appreciate then that a pen filled to safety
capacity could of course absorb very many more spec­
tators before there was a disaster? - A. Yes, sir.

But of course if it is full in the sense that it is full
to discomfort if it gets any more in you will get a
disaster? - A. Yes, sir.

You appreciate that? ~ A. Common sense, sir.

Yes.  Had you ever been given the remotest impression
of an order or an order or anything from which you
could gain the view that it was your job to monitor
the pens for their safety capacity? -A. Only from the
fact that I knew that part of my duty was the safety
of people, sir.

But, you see, I do not suppose you had even - well, you
did not know there was a safety capacity on each ind­
ividual pen, did you? - A. No, sir.

So you would not have known the numbers any way? -A.
No, sir.  Having said that, sir, I do not - stood in
front of the Leppings Lane terrace I would doubt whether
I could tell whether there was a difference between
a thousand and two thousand in.

You have just anticipated my next question, Mr. Smith.
You are absolutely right.  You would not be able by
looking at a pen to say whether there were either
2,000 or 1,000 in? - A. No, sir.

So insofar as you understood you were to look out for
overcrowding what you were looking at was not when a
pen had reached a particular safety capacity but when
it had reached such a state of discomfort that any more
inside and there would be a problem relating to safety,
to crushing? - A. I would certainly be - it is a very
difficult question to answer, sir.   What am I looking
for? Over the years at Bramall Lane I have been involved
in surges, etc., that go back.  People do^get crushed up
against barriers.  Basically it is something that you
look at and you decide at the time whether, yes, it is over­
full or it is not so.  I would not necessarily say that
people have got to be screaming out in discomfort before
I would think yes, that pen is full.

You are looking really to see are they jam-packed? - A.
Yes, sir.  Is there any room for them to move? Are
they moving about, sir.

It is only at that stage you would really alert yourself?
That is not a criticism, Officer. - A. No, I know it is not.
Well, no.  That is one of the things I am stood there looking
                          120



                                             P. SMITH

   for, sir.

Q. Yes.  Now, I want to come to this particular day.  You
   must be aware by now that a number of fans feel that the
   Police on the perimeter did not appreciate quickly enough
   that there was trouble in the crowd relating to crushing.
   Do you follow? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. NoWj whether that is ri§ht or wrong, whether those com­
   plaints are justified, is a matter for the Tribunal but
   what I want to do is for the moment just assume that they
   are justified and see if there are reasons for them.  Do
   you follow?  I am not asking you to justify yourself.
   You may say that they are wholly unjustified. - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. Your entire briefing, both from orders that you had in
   writing, from briefing that you had from Officers and
   from your past experience, was that you were policing
   the perimeter fence to guard against a pitch invasion
   and also to make sure that the overcrowding did not
   reach such a limit as to cause danger? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I know it is difficult to answer hypothetical questions.
   Could you just bear with me and try? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Let's suppose that your briefing before this match had,
   been to this effect, there was a minor piteh invasion
   last year.  We do not want that sort of trouble again.
   Now, the other thing you have got to look out for is
   this.  There are safety limits on the Leppings Lane
   end which is your responsibility.  There are no means
   of monitoring the numbers in the pens mechanically.
   We do not want the pens overcrowded.  Because there is
   no means of controlling the crowds mechanically there is
   a very great danger of overcrowding and crushing.   Now,
   you lot must keep your eyes skinned because it is the
   one part of the ground where we must rely on your
   observations to ensure there is not any crushing.
   We do not want another Ibrox on our hands, do we,
   lads?  If that sort of thing had been said do you
   think you would have been a little quicker to have
   in mind crushing when you heard the shouts from pens
   3 and 4? - A. No, sir.

Q. Would not have made any difference? - A. I do not think
   so, sir.

Q. What did you think people were shouting for? -A. People
   have shouted to me in the past, sir, a similar thing.
   The time between them shouting and the gate being j open
   permanent was a very, very short space of time and even
   looking back - it,is something I have gone through in
(3
                              121



                                                   P. SMITH

        my mind - and I cannot say under similar circumstances
        I would open that gate any time previously, sir.

     Q. I know it is difficult to answer this because once the
        emergency occurred you must have been in shock.  Can you
        remember how long it was before any senior Officer came
        on the scene after the shouting started? - A. Sergeant
        Greenwood was there very, very quickly.  I recall seeing
        him very quickly.

             MR. HYTNER:   Yes, thank you, Mr. Smith.

                    Cross-examined by    MR. JACKSON:

     Q. Mr. Smith, I am not going to ask you any questions at all
        about 1989.   I want to just ask you about one aspect of
        crowd control in previous years.   Did I understand you
        correctly to say that when the fans felt they were over­
        crowded in the previous years you saw them queuing up to
        climb over the barrier into pens 2 and 5 and 6? - A.
        Yes, sir.   They also would climb over from the outer - 2
        and 5. Well, 2 into 3.

     Q. Would you agree with me that that is perhaps not the
        best way of allowing fans to regulate the terracing? - A.
        I would agree with that entirely, sir.  We would try to
        stop them.  Unfortunately we were at the other side of
        the fence.

     Q. You could not.  You were well away from it.  I wondered,
        you see, if knowing that crowd regulation meant having
        to climb over a fence with spikes on it any thought was
        given to a different form of crowd control? -A. Not as
        far as I am aware, sir.

                    Cross-examined by    MR. GLASGOW:

     Q. Mr. Smith, only this.  Many of the people in this room
        know of the extent to which you have personally suffered
        as a result of what went wrong on this day and all the
        lawyers sitting in this row want to pay tribute to the
        very considerable courage that you have shown in coming
        forward to help this Inquiry voluntarily and of your own
        accord.  We admire you very much for it.

                    Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

     Q. Mr. Smith, may I ask you just a little bit about 1988
        because I think it was being suggested that in 1988
        there had just been some few people who had come over
        at the end of the game.  Do you follow? - A./ I do, yes.

     Q. You started to give an answer.    It has been suggested in
                            122




                                                    P. SMITH

     the Inquiry - you may not have heard it - that nobody
     would be climbing over the fence at the beginning of a
     game.   Can you tell the Inquiry about any experience of
     that in 1988 that you had, please? - A. I can recall at
     least two people I think it was just after the kick-off
     last year actually came out of the perimeter fence on
     to the pitch.   P.C. Illingworth in fact caught one of
     them and he was ejected.   The other one threw himself
     back over the perimeter fence and I later let him out
     of one of the perimeter gates to go for medical att­
     ention.

Q. Those were people climbing up to go over the fence
   before the game started? - A. Yes, sir.  Continually
   last year we were telling people to get off the top
   of the perimeter fences.

Q. So in addition to those two that you speak of having
   climbed up to come over and one going over there were
   a number of individuals who during the game climbed up
   on to the fence? - A. Yes.  It is not unusual at a large
   match for people to climb the fence.

Q. And of course they did climb over.  Did any come over at
   half-time, do you recall? - A. I cannot recall, sir, off­
   hand.

Q. And of the Policeman's task at the perimeter fence is one
   that is emphasised constantly, the preserving of the
   integrity of the pitch? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. So you have to exercise judgment? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. While you are there.     And that is not always easy? - A.
   No, sir.

Q. When you came back from having your lunch in 1989 and
   saw the state of the pens did it cause you any concern
   or anxiety for the people in there at that time? - A.
   No, sir. More puzzlement.

Q. The puzzlement being because? - A. There were so few
   people in the ground at that time, sir.

Q.   You are referring to the wings .... - A.     Yes.

Q ..... of   the terrace? - A.    To that end of the ground, y e s f*

Q. And one can look and everybody can make their own judgment
   about those photographs taken at 2.46 which I think you
   have seen blckim up in the montage .... - A. Yes, sir.

Q ..... at   the corner there.     And that is a fair representation
t
                                 123



                                                         P. SMITH

         of what you saw? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You have been asked a number of questions about people in
       pens by Mr. Hytner and numbers have been referred to. - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. As a Policeman when you are watching people is your concern
       for the people or for some numbers in a book somewhere? -
       A. It is for the people, sir.

    Q. So even if there had been half the quantity that should
       be prescribed in the pen but they had all been down in a
       particular corner oppressing each other what would you
       have done? - A. Not a great deal, sir.  I do not think
       there would have been much I could have done.

    Q. Would you have tried to help? -A. If they were being
       crushed?

    Q. Yes. - A. Yes, if they were actually being crushed, yes,
       sir.  Sorry.  I misunderstood your question.

    Q. Yes.  If they were all for some strange reason intent on
       being in a particular corner crushing each other .... - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q         you would not have had regard to numbers in a book;
         you would have looked at them? -A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Now, the part that you played in this was in relation to
       certain of the gates and certain times have been put to
       you and you have been asked about something, whether the
       goalkeeper said anything to you? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. We know from Mr. Grobbelaar's statement that he    did not
       talk to anybody concerning the safety of people    in the
       pen until after Mr. Beardsley had hit the bar -    do you
       follow - and that is at five minutes past three    that
       that happened? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Would you have a look at some photographs, please? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q.   Would you have a look, please, at the Composite Album 2,
         the photographs in that bundle PR 1/9A and 10A? - A,
         Yes, sir.

    Q. And 11A.  Now,: those are taken at two-minutes-past-three,
       some two or three minutes before the goalkeeper's attention
       is drawn to anything in the terraces? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Do you follow? And I think in photograph 11A, 10A, we can
       see Gate No. 3? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.   And   that is already open? - A. Yes, sir.
                                           P. SMITH

And one can see in that photograph by 15.02 not only is
that gate open but there are a number of Officers round
about? - A. Yes, sir.

Not just you alone there but a number of Officers.  Are
you able to see yourself on any of those pictures?  It
may be difficult. If not .... - A. I think possibly I am
on every one of them, sir.  It is difficult to ....

Are you able to pick yourself out or not? - A. Bottom
right-hand corner of 1/9A.  Actually in the gate on 1/10A

Yes. - A. And in the centre of Gate 3 on 11/A, I think,
possibly.

By that time the gate is open, people are climbing over
and there also appears to be an Officer with you? - A.
Yes, sir.

If you are looking at 11A, just to the left above the
word "Stanley", the "n" of Stanley"? - A. Yes, sir.

Is that Mr. Greenwood there? - A. I believe it is, sir,
yes.

So he has already come upon the scene? - A. Yes.     He
was ....

So by two-minutes-past-three considerable Police activity
and attention is being given to helping those people? - A
Yes, sir.




                            / Q. Some memory plays
                           125




Q. Some memory plays tricks.  Is your recollection clear now
   about times and quite what you did? - A. In my own mind it is,
   but whether that recollection is correct, I don't know, sir.

Q. In your own mind it is clear, but when you have looked at
   videos and other evidence have you been surprised at the speed
   in which things happened? - A. yes, sir.

              POLICE CONSTABLE GERRARD FINNEGAN Called

                      Examined bv MR. PHILLIPS:

Q. Constable Gerrard Finnegan, is that right? - A. I am, my Lord.

Q. And you were on Serial 1 with Sergeant Chapman on this day? -
   A. That is correct, my Lord.

Q. And was your station with Sergeant Chapman at the players'
   tunnel? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you go to that position at about 1 o'clock? - A. I went
   there initially at 11 o'clock.

Q. You went for a meal? - A. After I had had the meal then we
   returned.

Q. Did you notice something at about 2.30? - A. Yes, I was
   looking up towards the Leppings Lane end, the centre pen, and
   I saw one bloke standing on one of the barriers throwing
   himself into the crowd, who were all then streaming down the
   terraces towards the front of the main barrier.

Q. Can you help us.    Which pen was this in? - A. The centre pen.

Q. There are two centre pens, 3 and 4. - A. I beg your pardon.
   3.

Q. Can yousay whether the barrier he stood on was near to the
   front or to theback or somewhere else? - A. Near to the back.

Q. And he was throwing himself which way? Forwards, backwards,
   sideways? - A. The way I was looking at it he was throwing
   himself to his right.

Q. Towards pen No. 2? - A. That is correct.

Q. How often did he do this? - A. Two or three times while I was
   watching him.

Q. He would have to get back again from where he landed on to the
   barrier to do that. Is that so? - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you be sure it was the same person doing this each time? -
     A. From where I was standing it seemed to be the same person,
     my Lord.

Q. What were the numbers like in that pen at the time? - A. It
>.
                                  126




          was not full.   It was reasonably full.

     Q.   Did you draw this to the attention of anybody? - A. Not   at
          half-past-2 I did not, no.

     Q.   Why not?   Was not Sergeant Chapman with you? - A. That is
          correct.

     Q.   Did you not think that this might be a matter which would
          cause some danger to the rest of the crowd? - A. No, this is
          what often happens.

     Q. It often happens? - A. Yes.

     Q.   That a person stands on a barrier and launches himselfinto a
          crowd? - A. Yes, I have seen it many times, my Lord.

     Q. Do you not think that is something which could be dangerous to
        those who are on the receiving end? - A. It could possibly be,
        yes, but they were all part of the team who were jumping up
        and down and then pushing towards the front of the terraces.

     Q. Could you see that from where you were at the players' tunnel?
        - A . Yes.

     Q. You could see that those who were on the receiving end were
        participating in the activity? - A. It appeared that way, yes.

     Q. You did not tell Sergeant Chapman about this? - A. No.

     Q. You then looked again at the Leppings Lane terrace at about
        19-minutes-to-3? - A. It was 19-minutes-to-3.

     Q.   What did you notice? - A. What happened, I was facing the
          players' tunnel, I turned round to look at the clock, the
          time, and I scanned all the North Stand, the West Stand and
          the terraces. I turned to Sergeant Chapman and said, "Where
          are all the Liverpool supporters?".

     Q. That is why I asked you what you noticed at the West end.
        what had you noticed? - A. I noticed that the centre pen was
        filling up, fuller than what it was at half-past-2, but the
        either side pens....

     Q. The corner pens you mean?       - A. They appeared to be reasonably
        empty.

     Q.   What about the West Stand  and the North Stand, how did they
          seem to you to be? - A. Again they appeared to be reasonably
          empty. That is why I made the comment to Sergeant Chapman.

     Q. Was that when Mr. Lock was with you and Sergeant Chapman? - A.
        That is correct, my Lord.

     Q. And you had some comment from him, I understand, about what
        was going on in Leppings Lane? - A . Ye s , he mentioned the
        numbers in the ground, which I can't remember, but he said
                            127




     words to the effect, "It is hell out there at Leppings Lane
     end".

Q. What did you understand by that? - A. That there was a big
   build up.

Q. Did you look again towards the terraces at Leppings Lane after
   19-minutes-to-3? - A. No, not until after the kick-off.

Q.   How long after the   kick-off did you look? - A. A coupleof
     minutes. Two to three minutes.

Q.   What did you see? - A. The centre pen seemed full and people
     were climbing over the perimeter fence trying to get on to the
     track.

Q. You said in your statement you saw that there was what
   appeared to be an overspill? - A. That is correct.

Q. What do you understand by the word "overspill"? - A. Not a
   pitch invasion.  People were obviously or possibly in distress
   and wanted to get on to the track out of the way into the side
   pens.

Q. People climbing over voluntarily, though? - A. That is what I
   would have thought.  That is what appeared to me.

Q. To get out of the ways because they were in distress? - A. I
   would not say they were in distress.  They were climbing over
   the fences, and I thought they were trying to get on to the
   track, but not a pitch invasion.

Q. Did you think that pen was overcrowded at the time? - A. I
   could not really tell.

Q. Had you at any stage thought it was overcrowded? - A. No, not
   really.

Q. Had you previously had experience of this overspill where
   people climb out because there are toomany in thepen?   - A. I
   have seen it before, yes.

Q. When had you seen it before? - A. I know it has beenmentioned
   in the media, the Spurs-Wolves match.

Q. Were you there at that match? - A. I was at the Leppings Lane
   end at that time.

Q.   That was in 1981? - A. Yes.

Q.   What happened then? - A. I certainly saw people in distress
     that day, and in actual factI opened one of the gates.

Q.   When you saw the events here on 15th April, 1989, did it
     remind you of that? - A. No, it did not, not from where I was
     standing.
f   ‘   t
                                        128




            Q. What was different about it then? - A. i could not see what
               was happening at the front.  I saw the Police Officers move
               over from the South Stand towards the back of the goal, so I
               could not see what was happening then.

            Q. You had earlier described what you said was an overspill? - A.
               Yes.

            Q. Had that occurred in 1981? - A. Yes, it did.

                                Cross-Examined bv MR. HYTNER:

            Q. Mr. Finnegan, you have worked Sheffield Wednesday's ground for
               23 years? - A. Yes, my Lord, I have.

            Q. And every Semi-Final during that period? - A. Yes.

            Q. So you have seen the development of safety measures at the
               ground? - A. Yes, I have.

            Q.    Were you at the ground before there was any safety limit at
                 all on the capacity of Hillsborough? - A. Yes, but I can't
                 remember when.

            Q.   I am not asking you about the year.   - A. Yes, I was.

            Q.    So the first development you have seen or known of is there is
                 now an overall capacity for Hillsborough.   You can't just let
                 anyone in until it is crammed full? - A. That is right.

            Q. Did you then know that each section had its own individual
               safety capacity? - A. I am aware of it, yes.

            Q. You were during this period?    You became aware of it? - A.
               Yes.

            Q. Were you made aware that the safety limits were monitored
               mechanically through the turnstiles and by computer? - A.
               Through the turnstiles, yes.

            Q. So when the limit was known to be reached that was it, nobody
               else came into the ground? - A. One would assume it shut down,
               yes.

            Q. You recall the radial fences being put in at the Leppings Lane
               end? - A. Yes, but I don’t know what year.

            Q. That does not matter.   You usually worked at the Leppings Lane
               end? - A. Yes, but not on the track.

            Q. Outside in the     Lane? - A. Yes.

            Q.   Were you aware that when the radial fences were put in each
                 individual pen was then given a separate safety capacity? - A.
                 I did not know, no.

            Q. Obviously if you saw that any sector of the ground or any part
\*
                                 129




          of a sector of the ground was so jammed that you thought that
          there was danger of crushing you would have done something
          about it? - A. I certainly would, yes.

     Q. When you looked across that the Leppings Lane end, when the
        trouble started, when the overspill occurred, what was your
        impression then of the crowding in pens 3 and 4? That it was
        dangerous or uncomfortable or just normal? - A. Bearing in
        mind I did not know the gates had been opened at the rear of
        Leppings Lane end, I knew nothing about that, to me it did not
        mean anything.

     Q. Of course you did not know about the gates being opened.    That
        is not what I am asking about.   If you had been asked just
        before the overspill, in other words just before somebody
        actually got on to the pitch, "Finnegan, what do you think
        about pens 3 and 4? Do you think we should do something about
        them?", do I take it your answer would have been, "No, they
        seem to be perfectly normal.   That is how they often are"? -
        A. If nobody appeared in distress, my Lord, I would not have
        done anything about it.

     Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   People have actually got to be in
          distress before it is thought appropriate to direct
          freshcomers elsewhere? - A. Well, no.    I would have thought
          that would have been controlled from behind.

     Q.        MR. HYTNER:   The next thing is this.  Iappreciate you
          can't remember now, and nobody could expect you to, the
          numbers that were given to you by Mr. Lock, but I would like
          to ask you a little more about that conversation.   Your
          comment, which was a very intelligent one, was that by 19
          minutes before the kick-off you would have expected far more
          supporters within the ground? - A. Yes, I would, my Lord, a
          lot more.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     By how long before kick-off?

               MR. HYTNER:     19 minutes.   I think it was 2.41 was the
          conversation:

     Q. It would follow, obviously, if they were not in the ground
        they would be either outside the ground or yet to arrive? - A.
        Correct.

     Q. Because not many people with tickets for the mach would fail
        to turn up.  When Mr. Lock gave you the figures for those
        inside the ground was not it your impression that whatever
        they were he was giving you figures for those already in the
        ground which were surprisingly light, surprisingly few? - A. I
        did not take much notice.  I didn't even think about it when
        he said the numbers.  My main concern was still the lack of
        Liverpool supporters, and I was still looking round the
        ground. I never gave it any thought.

     Q. This is what I amreally coming to.  The whole tenor of the
        conversation between yourself and Mr. Lock was that both from
6
♦   r
                                    130




             your observations and his numbers there were an awful lot of
             supporters still to come? - A. Obviously there were, but I
             can't remember the numbers.  That is the point I am making.

        Q. I am not pressing that. - A. I know you are not. All I am
           saying, my concern was the lack of Liverpool supporters.

        Q.   And it was part and parcel of that conversation that caused
             him to say that there was all hell let loose on Leppings Lane,
             or there was hell outside on Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, that is
             correct.

        Q. At that stage - I know it was not your responsibility, and i
           am not suggesting remotely that it was - did it occur to you,
           ’’Well', are we going to reach capacity by the time of the kick-
           off?”? - A. I thought they might have been struggling reaching
           capacity before the kick-off, yes.

                           Cross-Examined bv MR. GLASGOW:

        Q.   Mr.Finnegan, there is one matter you might be able to help us
             on.   Does your memory stretch back to the days when they first
             divided the terrace into separate pens? - A. No, I can't
             remember.

        Q. I won't trouble you then.      Thank you.

                             Re-Examined bv MR. COLLINS:

        Q. There is one thing you could help on, last year.     Was any of
           the perimeter fencing torn down at any stage last year? - a.
           If there was I d o n ’t know. There could have been.   I was not
           at that end.

        Q. I just wondered if you could help.      You can't.

                     POLICE CONSTABLE DAVID ILLINGWORTH Called:

                              Examined bv MR. COLLINS:

        Q. David Illingworth? - A. That is correct, sir.

        Q. As we know you were on Serial 1, Mr. Illingworth? - A. Yes.

        Q. I think your position was to be about gate 5? - A. To the
           right of the goal when looking at it.

        Q.   Would that effectively be between 4 and 5? - A.Yes, sir.

        Q.   That is the gates I am talking about. Was  that     a position you
             were familiar with? - A. Very familiar, sir.

        Q.    You are     one who has    done this duty ona     number of occasions
             A. Week in and week out, sir.

        Q. That is your standard position? - A. Yes.
r

                                131

                                               D. ILLINGWORTH


    Q. It follows that you had been there last year as well? - A. At
       the Semi-Final?

    Q. Yes. - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. The same place? - A. Yes.

    Q.   How would you describe last year, the state of affairs on the
         Leppings Lane terrace? - A. The terraces were full, sir.

    Q.   But were they evenly full? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.   There was, we know, a pitch invasion at the end of thematch?
         - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. In the course of that was any fencing torn down? - A. It was,
       sir, yes.

    Q. Do you remember where that was? - A. I think it was
       predominantly directly behind the goal.

    Q. The same as was deliberately torn down this year? - A.
       Approximately.

    Q. But that was deliberately done from inside out last year, was
       it, rather than from outside in, if you see what I mean? - A.
       It was torn down from the inside and pulled inwards.

    Q. To assist those who wanted to invade the pitch to get in? - A.
       I got the impression last year it was just wilful damage.

    Q.   This occurred at the end of the match? - A. Yes.

    Q. As far as your briefing was concerned, we know you were not
       specifically given instructions to monitor the state of
       crowding on the terraces? - A. Not specifically, sir, no.

    Q. Is this something which you consider to be part of your
       duties? - A. I think crowd safety is paramount.

    Q. Of course, that must be right, but if you see an uneven fill
       and the crowd developing in pens 3 and 4, do you consider you
       have to do something about it? - A. If the fans are
       comfortable, not at that stage, no.

    Q. It is only when fans become uncomfortable that anything has to
       be done? - A. from my viewpoint, yes.

    Q.   It might be suggested there should be some anticipation, that
         is to say if it is full you stop it becoming uncomfortably
         full by taking some steps to stop more coming in? - A. Yes, I
         agree.

    Q.   But that has never been part of the philosophy of the   policing
         at Hillsborough? - A. I would suggest those decisions   are made
         by people at a higher level.
2   #   i


                                        132

                                                          D. ILLINGWORTH


            Q. Indeed. You certainly would not regard it as one of your
               responsibilities to keep an eye on a general build up, only if
               you were aware of any specific trouble? - A. I agree.

            Q.   That is a fair way of putting it, is it? - A. Yes.

            Q.   Were you aware   of the    requirement which is underlinedand put
                 in capitals this year, effectively, let no-one on to the pitch
                 side except for medical attention, without a senior Officer’s
                 permission? - A. Yes, I am well aware of it.




                                              /Q. Now, you, we heard from.
                             133
                                            D. ILLINGWORTH



Q. Now you, we heard from Police Constable Smith, went with
   him at about two o'clock to have a meal? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   When you left at two o'clock how would you describe the
     situation in those two centre pens? - A. I was surprised
     overall how few fans were in the terracing.

Q. Does it follow that you disagree with Sergeant Burman's
   evidence this morning that they were full by two o'clock?
   - A. I did not hear his evidence this morning.

Q.   Well, he did say they were full at two o'clock.    Would
     you agree or disagree with that? - A. I would disagree,
     sir.

Q.   There were obviously, I think, more people in them   than
     there were in the rest of the terracing? - A.
     Percentagewise, yes, sir.

Q. We know you got some delay in having your meal and what
   time is your recollection that you got back to your post?
   - A. I would suggest it was between 2.45 and 2.50.

Q. You relieved Police Constable Helliwell? - A. Yes.

Q.   When you got back what was the state of affairs in the
     centre pens? - A. I formed the opinion that the centre
     pen was full and the outer pens were well below capacity.

Q. Well below capacity? - A. Yes.

Q. So on the face of it there was an uneven distribution? -
   A. Certainly compared with last year, yes.

Q. Did this worry you at all? - A. I was concerned because I
   had never seen the fans so badly distributed.

Q. Did you consider it was your duty to do anything about
   it? - A. I did not consider it my duty, no.

Q. You had a radio, I take it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I imagine, of course, you knew that Control could see
   what you could see? - A. I do not know what Control could
   see because I have never been in the Control Box.   I
   know they have got monitors and they can look out of the
   window, and obviously had been doing since two o'clock
   when I was not there.

Q. You were looking specifically where?   Where were you
   positioned at this stage? - A. I initially went to PC
   Helliwell who was directly behind the goal.   On my
   arrival I had a short conversation with him.   There was
'5L
  t
                                 134

                                                D. ILLINGWORTH


         no problem and PC Helliwell walked away towards the
         players' tunnel as PC Smith approached from my right.

      Q. We know from PC Smith he positioned himself roughly
         outside gate 3? - A. To the left of the goal, yes.

      Q. Where did you position yourself? - A. I positioned myself
         to the right of the goal towards gates 4 and 5.

      Q. Were you then between gates 4 and 5? - A. Yes.

      Q. So you were looking effectively into pen 4? - A. Yes.
         You must appreciate, sir, I was not completely
         stationary.

      Q. No, I follow that.   I ask you to look at these
         photographs in "Composite Album 2". - A. Yes, sir.

      Q. The first photograph is, of course, a photograph angled
         towards pen 3, but looking at gate 4? - A. Yes, sir.

      Q. It shows, of course, pen 3 rather than pen 4.   Perhaps
         then we can look over then to the next photograph which
         is I think slightly more towards...   Perhaps the next
         one, 31, is a better one.   Is that you? - A. No, that is
         PC Helliwell.

      Q. That is obviously just before you returned? - A. Yes.

      Q. Which puts your return probably nearer ten to than
         quarter to? - A. Possibly.

      Q. Does that bring back the picture of the state of the pens
         as you saw it when you arrived? - A. Yes, I agree.

      Q. It is obviously full, but it does not look as if anyone
         is in any great distress at that stage? - A. I would
         suggest it is full but not over full.

      Q. That is the state of affairs as you see it when you get
         back.   Did the pen continue to receive people into it as
       . far as you could see? - A. I was not aware of that.   I
         could not see into the tunnel.   I could not see people
         coming in.

      Q. Did it appear to get fuller? - A. It immediately all went
         wrong at the front.

      Q. What happened at the front? - A. People suddenly became
         distressed and were obviously heading towards pain.

      Q. When were you aware of that? - A. A few moments after my
         arrival on the track.
                           135
                                          D. ILLINGWORTH


Q. Do you know whether the teams had come out on to the
   pitch when that happened? - A. I was not aware of that.
   I was not aware of ever seeing a footballer throughout
   the day.

Q. Obviously you had your back to it, but did you hear
   anything which led you to understand whether or not the
   players had come out?   A cheer usually goes up, does it
   not? - A. Yes, there was a great amount of cheering and I
   do remember one specific loud cheer.

Q. Was that before, or about the time, or after this
   situation had developed? - A. Simultaneously.

Q. What, if anything, did you do when this situation
   developed? - A. I was positioned at that time between
   gates 4 and 5.   As people became distressed and I
   realised they were in pain, I put a radio message over to
   say that there was a serious situation at the front.

Q. Apart from seeing people in distress, could you hear
   whether they were in distress? - A. Yes.

Q. In what way?   What were they shouting or...? - A. Words
   to the effect of "Help", "I'm hurt",  I'm being crushed".

Q. It was obvious to you that people were being crushed I
   take it? - A. Blatantly obvious, yes.

Q. The only thing I suppose that you could do at that stage
   was in relation to the gate? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you do anything in relation to that gate, pen 4? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. What did you do? - A. I opened the gate, sir.

Q. Did people come out? - A. Flooded out, sir.

Q. What about people getting over the perimeter fence,
   climbing over, did any of that happen? - A. At that stage
   they were not climbing over the fence.

Q. Did they begin to shortly afterwards? - A. My intention
   in opening no. 4 gate was to get them into gate no. 5
   where they would have been safe.

Q. Do you mean 5 or do you mean 6? - A. No, if they go in 5,
   the radial fences form a corridor but nobody usually
   stands in there.   They can go into the corridor, or
   through the rear gate at the end of the corridor into the
   outer pen.
                            136
                                             D. ILLINGWORTH


Q. I suppose even more ideally they could go in through gate
   6, could they, or is that too far? - A. It meant my
   taking them further along the track.

Q. Did you in fact open gate 5? - A. I did, sir.

Q. Before you opened gate 4? - A. After.      I tried to
   shepherd them from 4 to 5.

Q. Was there any other Officer with you when you decided to
   open the gate, and did open the gate? - A. No, sir.

Q. Did the gate remain open? -    A. I left it open.

Q. Do you know whether or not it remained open? - A. I
   assume it must have remained open because there was
   nobody else there to shut it, only the fans.

Q. We know that other Officers arrived on the scene at about
   the time the gates began to be opened, and people were
   coming out. - A. Well, I got the impression that I was
   there for quite some considerable time before anybody got
   there.

Q. Did you see what was happening in relation to  pen 3? - A.
   No, because as the fans came out of 4 I tried to get them
   to 5.   My view was obviously blocked towards pen 3.

Q. I think I ought to ask you to deal with this: do you
   know a Police Constable Philip Houson? - A. I do not,
   sir, no.

Q. Who in fact was on a D Division Serial which came on the
   scene at roundabout three o'clock? - A. I do not know
   him, sir.

Q. What he says is this, that gate 4 when he arrived was
   still closed and there were people screaming from the
   terraces, obviously in distress.    He, as he put it,
   grabbed the Officer on the track, asked that Officer to
   get help and it was he who opened the gate or   caused the
   gate to be opened, that is, gate 4. - A. I totally
   disagree with that, sir.

Q. That means either he is wholly wrong or that somehow gate
   4 had got closed after you had originally opened it and
   he had to cause it to be re-opened? - A. Yes, sir.  If I
   could possibly clarify this point.   On one Friday
   afternoon, there was a video shown in the other room, the
   one that was brought up from West Midlands, which clearly
   shows gate 4.   It clearly shows me in it and it clearly
   shows the gate open and nobody else there.
                             137
                                           D. ILLINGWORTH


Q. Yes.   At what stage was this?     Ithought this was a
   little later, but you may well be right. - A. Later than
   what, sir?

Q. Later than the time you have indicated.    I think you are
   putting the time that this happened at - or perhaps you
   are not putting it at any particular time.    Can you help
   about the time? - A. As I suggested, I think I returned
   to the track about ten to and released the gate a few
   moments after.

Q. So this would put it at shortly after ten to, which is
   what I thought you were telling us.    I may be wholly
   wrong and you will correct me if   Iam, but I do not think
   the video we saw was that early.    I think it started
   rather later and in fact started at three o'clock? - A.
   Possibly it does, sir, but it does show the gate wide
   open and only me there.

Q. I entirely accept that, but that, of course, was some
   minutes after, if you are right, the time at which you
   first opened the gate. - A. I agree, sir.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You are saying you had gate
     4 open shortly after ten to three? - A. I would suggest
     somewhere between ten to three and five to three, my
     Lord.

Q.         MR. COLLINS:   It is your clear recollection that
     whatever time it may have been, it was you and you alone
     who opened gate 4? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And kept it open? - A. Yes, sir, and left it open.

Q. People came flooding out, as you put it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In fact they did not actually go into gate 5, did they,
   they remained on the perimeter? - A. I could not get them
   into gate 5 because there were some people up against the
   gates who would not move back.  I tried to push them back
   but they would not move.

Q. Was it obvious   too therewere some people who were in no
   condition to go back into the terraces? - A. At gate 5,
   sir?

Q. At any gate, who were in distress, who were obviously
   short of breath? - A. They could easily move back from
   gate 5.   There was ample room behind them.

Q. I do not doubt that but what  I am getting at is: were
   there some people coming out of pen 4 who were in such a
   condition, that is to say, breathless, that they would
                           138
                                          D. ILLINGWORTH


   not have been able to go back through any gate - 4, 5, 6,
   7, 8, 9, 10? - A. Some of them, yes, sir.

Q. Therefore, they remained on the side of the pitch? - A.
   Yes, and some I managed to get towards the St. John's
   Ambulance.

Q. Was it you who went to summon the St. John's Ambulance
   then? - A. The first man on to the track had a leg
   injury.   He sat himself on the wall while the rest of
   the fans came out.    I tried to get them into gates 5 and
   6.   I ended up back at 4.   The man was still on the
   wall with a leg injury.   I assisted him to the
   St. John's Ambulance.   He was the first injured person I
   saw.

Q. From the description you have given it would seem that
   perhaps even then initially you did not appreciate quite
   how bad it was in pen 4? - A. I appreciated how bad it
   was, I did not appreciate how bad it was going to get.

Q. So you think it got worse after you had opened the gate?
   - A. I am sure it did, sir.

Q. As more people came in from the back? - A. Well, I did
   not realise anybody was coming in from the back.   I could
   not understand it.   Every time I went back to gate 4 the
   crush was getting worse.   I thought if I could relieve a
   couple of hundred people the problem would resolve
   itself.

Q. Do you know whether your message over the radio got
   through? - A. I do not know, sir.

Q. Did you repeat it? - A. No, sir.

Q. I think you then helped as best you could with individual
   fans and individual people who were injured or worse? -
   A. Yes, sir.

                Cross-Examined by MR.HYTNER:

Q. There is one matter I ought to put to you because
   otherwise things may be said afterwards behind your back
   which you have no opportunity of considering.    We have
   had evidence before you gave evidence.    We have had
   Mr. Grobbelaar, the Liverpool goalkeeper.    We have had
   Mr. Smith who was on gate 3.   Now I may have the wrong
   recollection, in which case somebody will correct me, but
   it seems at the moment that the situation is this:
   Mr. Smith has just told us that he left the gate open.
   My recollection is that it was before the kick-off.    He
   allowed the gate to remain open once it had been pushed
   open for the second time - gate 3.   It seems I am not
                        139
                                       D. ILLINGWORTH


the only one who thinks that that is what was said.   You
have indicated that you opened gate 4 as early as 2.55? -
A. Yes, sir.




      Q. Yet something like three minutes
                                   D. ILLINGWORTH



Yet something like 3-m±nufces-past-3 after the kick-off, I
think, Mr. Grobbelaar was urgently and with some force of
language asking some Police Officers, is that not right?

      MR. WOODWARD: Sir, I hesitate to interrupt. According
to Mr. Grobbelaar's statement it was after Mr. Beardsley
failed to score the goal and that is not at 3-minutes past
sir, that is nearly 5-minutes-past.
      MR. HYTNER:  I am sorry, it reinforces the point I
am making.  I thought I was being fairly moderate about the
time.
Five-minutes-past-3, that is something like 10 minutes after
you say Gate 4 was open and over five minutes after Mr. Smith
says Gate 3 was open, we have the goal-keeper saying that
with forceful language and at the urgent request of fans
he was telling Policemen to open the gates. Now can you
just consider this because there plainly is some very stark
difference of recollection. Are you on reflection so sure
that those gates, or your gate, was open that early?   A. I
am very clear about that sir, yes.
I have to put another question to you because it is my duty
to do and if I don't as I say it will simply mean that things
are said without you having an opportunity to answer.

      If in fact those gates were not open until 5-past-3,
it rather looks, sounds from your evidence of the obvious
nature of the shouts of the fans and the obvious nature
of what was happening, that somebody, yourself included,
had failed to react quickly enough by opening the gates.
Do you follow the question? - A. I do indeed, yes sir.

What it really comes to is this: that from your evidence
it was clear from about 5-to-3 onwards that there was a
crushing situation which called for urgent action.  Is
that a fair reflection of your evidence? - A. It required
immediate action in Pen 4. That was the only area that
I could see.
 From 5-to-3 onwards? - A. If not before.

 I have deliberately said 5-to because I don't want to pin
 you to a minute or two but that is right, is it, tha
 from that time 5-to-3 onwards, it was certainly obvious
 in Pen 4 that urgent action needed to be taken to save
 people from injury or death? - A. Immediate action.

       MR. HYTNER:   Yes, thank you.


                Cross-Examined by MR. MULLER:

 Officer, can I ask you, no matter when it was, when you
 opened the gate people came s p i l l i n g out? - A. Yes.
                                  D. ILLINGWORTH


You said at one stage you thought if you could let out about
200 that would solve the problem? - A. Yes.

Can we have some idea as to the numbers that you saw coming
or spilling out of Gate 4 when you first opened it? - A.
As I have previously said I tried to get them into Pen 5.
I thought the majority were following me.

What sort of numbers^ are we talking about coming through
Gate 4? - A. It is difficult to say. Rather than tens,
hundreds or thousands I would have to put it towards hundreds.

Hundreds came out. Were they coming out from what you saw
in a constant stream? - A. Well you must appreciate that
they can't come out in a constant stream because of the step,
they have got to negotiate the step.

I follow that. - A. And it does take some difficulty getting
over it whether you are being crushed or not, but they could
pour out in a constant stream.

What you are saying is taking account of them having to go
up the step they were nevertheless coming out one after the
other without a break? - A. Yes.

Just long enough to negotiate the step? - A. Yes.

So it was not a break, there was not any break in it while
people on the ground or anything like that? - A. N&, I did
not notice any but I moved away from Gate 4 to shepherd them
further down the track.

So if you are talking in terms of something like 200 or
whatever the figure is, are you able to put any time on
how long it took for those 200 people to get out? — A. I
am unable to give a time.
And the problem was every time you came back there was an
aggravating problem because more people were pressing in
from behind? - A. I did not realise it at that time.

All you saw was the problem getting worse because more and
more people were coming forward.  Is that right? — A. I
could not understand it every time I went back to number *
gate they were being crushed more. I would have thought
the more that got out they would have been crushed less.

Was that because you could see as time went on more
expressions of discomfort on the faces of the people
near the gate? - A. Certainly.

So that just to get it absolutely clear, when you first
opened the gate there were signs of distress? - A. Yes.

That is why you opened the gate? - A. Obviously yes.
                           142

                                     D. ILLINGWORTH


Q. So the gates opened and those people got out?   - A. Yes.

Q. You then thought to move them on? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you saying that when you went back again having gone
   to Gate 5 you saw more people than you had previously
   seen with distress on their faces or what? - A. Yes, that
   would be correct sir.

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Illingworth, may I ask you a little about the timings,
   but before going into the detail of that given the speed
   with which things happened and your experience on that
   day, may it be that your clear recollection now as to the
   sequence of events or the times could be out? - A. It could
   be out, sir, I am not infallible.

Q. You have been asked about the situation at the pens when
   you came back from having had your break for lunch? - A. Yes
   sir.
Q. Would you have a look please at the Composite Bundle of
    photographs, Album 2? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Now it is not easily telear from the photographs, perhaps
  you would be patient, but would you have a look please at
   Photograph DB17/14? - A. Yes, I have got it sir.

Q. In that photograph one can see the advertising boards for
   the motor car, for the timber firm and the building company?
   - A. Yes sir.
Q. So we are looking in that photograph towards the North End
   of the West Stand and terrace? - A. Yes sir.

Q. One can see at the North End there where Henry Boot's section
   is, it stands out a little, a sort of balcony that projects?
   - A. That is right, yes sir, I understand.


Q. Because the photograph is taken at an angle it is may be
   not easy to relate the perimeter fence to those boards?
   - A. Yes.
Q. But one can see clearly there a gate that is open? - A.
   Yes sir.
 Q. Are you able to help us as to which gate that is? - A. That
    is Gate 4 sir.
 Q. And that gate is open at 3 o'clock? - A. I don't know what
    time the photograph was taken sir.
                                       D. ILLINGWORTH


Q. Well the photograph is timed at 3. The bundle of photographs
   that you have does not contain all the photographs that
   were taken on that day. Those have all been handed over
   but some copies have been kept. May I show you a photograph,
   which you won't have seen sir, but it has certainly been in
   the hands of the Inquiry, the team. Would you have a look
   please, Mr. Illingworth, at this one in a bundle which is
   entitled DB17.  Sir, it would appear to have been taken by
   the same cameraman as that which I have just aske dyou about
   and it is Photograph 15 in that bundle. Detective Bond is
   the photographer.
            MR. COLLINS: Sir, if it helps my learned friend, it
     is perfectly plain that by 3 o'clock Gate 4 was open because
     if ofiS has that photograph and if you look at DB17/17 you
     can see what clearly is Gate 4 open and that is one-minute-
     past-three.   I say it is Gate 4 because if one looks at the
     forward advertising hoardings one can see that it clearly
     is by comparison with other photographs.

           Sir, there is no question but that at 3 o'clock Gate 4
     was open.
           MR. HYTNER: Sir, one of the problems that we clearly
     are up against is there is ample evidence from these
     Officers that the gates were being opened, shut and then
     reopened and we don't really know when we freeze a photograph
     in time, whether the gate was then permanently open or whether
     it was shut again.
           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Well so far the evidence was
     that Gate 3 opened and shut and opened and shut. So far
     the evidence has been that Gate 4 was opened and as far as
     this witness knows left open.
           MR. HYTNER: Yes, it was. As Mr. Collins has pointed
     out there are two people now saying they opened Gate 4
     which postulates, if both are right, that at somestage it
     was shut again.   This is the problem.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD: The photograph that I have shown you,
     Officer, 15 in that bundle of DB17? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Is according to the camera time taken at14.59.    Sir, I
   apologise that we have not had the foresight to bring
   every photograph copied? - A. Yes sir.

Q. That photograph shows a view to the northern end of the
   perimeter fencing, does it not. Can you tell the Inquiry
   which gates those are that you see open there? - A. The
   gate that is open that is clearly visible directly behind
   the goal must be Gate 4 from that angle. Gate 3 would be
   to the left.
                             144

                                       D. ILLINGWORTH


Q. Can you see Gate 5 on that photograph.    There seem to be
   two on it? - A. Yes.
Q. It would appear, Officer, that that is Gate 4 andGate 5
   at least? - A. It may be Gate 4 and 5, thereagain  itcould
   be Gate 3 and 4.
Q. That is 14.59. Does it show a crowd of people between
   the gate? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And the pitch? - A. Yes sir, spilling out.

Q. And a St. John's man? - A. Yes sir.

Q. S© by that time there are a number of Officers there and
   a number of spectators have already come out and the St.
   John's man is also there? - A. Yes.
Q. That is according to the camera time 14.59, so It could be a
   minute wrong either way? - A. Yes.

Q.    Gate 4when it was opened remained open? - A. I left it
      open. Whether or not somebody else closed it sir I am
      unable to say.
Q. But a number of people came out and kept coming out? - A.
   Yes sir.
Q. So you did not  see an opportunity for it to be closed, did
   you? - A. At that stage the only person who could have closed
   it would have been the fans themselves, sir.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: The timing is not on the photo­
      graph itself. You have got that from the statement, have
      you, or what?
            MR. COLLINS: I think it is sir but it is invisible
      because of the netting of the goal•
            MR. WOODWARD:  It is in the bottom right-hand corner
      but it is somewhat difficult to discern.  Sir, there is
      the date, which would be the 15th, sir I have not got the
      photograph in front of me and then 14.59.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: The one immediately before is
      the one we have already got in the composite?

            MR. COLLINS: That is right and the one after, I think,
      is timed, they are in sequence.
 Q.         MR. WOODWARD:  So plainly, according to that camera
      timing, the events have moved on a long way? - A. From the
      initial opening of the gates to 14.59?

 Q. Yes? - A. Yes sir.
                              D. ILLINGWORTH


MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you, Mr. Illingworth.

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you very much.




                /P.C. Richardson Called
                            146

                                                    F. RICHARDSON


              POLICE CONSTABLE FIONNA RICHARDSON Called

                      Examined bv MR. PHILLIPS:

Q. You are Police Constable Fionna Richardson, is that so? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q.   And you were on duty on this day on Serial 1? - A. Yes,    sir.

Q.   And you I think were posted to the Leppings Lane end of    the
     perimeter track? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. I can't see the back of your head now, but did you have a pony
   tail at the time? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   We have seen you onthe video? -A. Yes, sir.

Q.   On gate 1 I think it is? - A. That is right.

Q.   I am concerned about the time from about 2.35 onwards when you
     were in that position.   What did the terrace behind you seem
     to be like at that time.   Were there many people on it? - A.
     There was-hardly anybody there.   There were the St. John's
     Ambulance next to me and I made a comment to them, saying, "I
     wonder where all the Liverpool fans are?".

Q. Were you able to look over towards the terraces 3 and 4? - A.
   I could see from the side view, yes.

Q. What did you see? - A. They were a lot busier thanmy terraces
   that I was looking at,but I have seen them fuller.   They were
   not to capacity.

Q. Had you been on this duty before? - A. I have done the
   perimeter track about 5 or 6 times before.

Q. Were you a Community Constable? - A. No, I am not, I am a beat
   Officer.

Q. You did not have a radio? - A. No, I work on a group at the
   Police station.  I did not have a radio, sir.

Q. Did you have some people that came out out into the perimeter
   track at about 2.45? - A. Some people had climbed over from
   gate 1 into the seating area, and they had gone over. We
   chased them up a small wall, but they disappeared into the
   crowd.  Within a few minutes they came back down and asked to
   go back into the pen, and showed me their tickets. They had
   ticket for that pen so I let them in. They were the ones we
   chased over.  Either a bobby had sent them back or they came
   back of their own accord because they couldn't find a seat.

Q. You were in control, were you, of the gate into pen 1? - A.
   yes.

Q. When you say they had tickets for that pen you mean, of
   course, standing tickets for the terrace? - A. Yes.
»r   •*



                                       147

                                                            F. RICHARDSON



          Q. Did you hear something about the delay of the match or the
             delay of the start of the match? - A. I didn’t have a radio.
             There were about 5 St. John's Ambulance men stood near me. he
             said, "I think they are going to delay the   match” , and that is
             when I said, "I should think sobecause there is hardly
             anybody from Liverpool here".

          Q. Later, at about   2.53,   did you have some dealings with other
             people who came   on to   the perimeter track? - A. To the right
             of me there was   a few   people on the pitch by the side of the
             gate where P.C.   Smith   was.

          Q. That is gate 3? - A. Yes.  I went over to see what was
             happening.  There was a man and about 5 children, about 12 to
             14 year olds, young lads, all stood round. They were
             sweating, a bit distressed, and there were   about three 20
             year olds as well stood by him.  I took the man and the
             children down to gate 1 to sit with the St.John'sAmbulance
             men so they could get a breath of fresh air.

          Q. Did you put them into your part of the terrace? - A. I didn't
             at first.    With them I sat them down.   I just left them there.
             They werenot causing any trouble.    They   were only young
             children.

          Q. They seemed to be in distress, did they? - A. They were
             sweating.   They werenot complaining to me of anything.  They
             didn't say anything.  They were sweating and pulling at their
             clothing round their neck and that.

          Q. They had come out of pen 3, had they? -     A. Yes.

          Q.   And they had been let out by Constable Smith?   - A. Yes.

          Q. Did you seewhat was in that pen at the time? - A. No, I did
             not look directly into the pen.I was looking round the   gate
             area, and then took my attention up with getting these people
             off the pitch back down to gate 1.

          Q.   Did you see any more people come from gate 3? - A. The stem
               stopped for a while.   I was talking to this man making sure he
               was all right.  It was only a few moments, I looked round to
               my right again and there were a lot of people coming out of
               gate 3.

          Q.   Now, it was said in evidence that you were unaware of people
               coming from gate 3, and that you were looking away from that
               area down towards the South Stand and that youhad to be
               informed by Chief Inspector McRobie that people were
               approaching? - A. Nobody spoke to me at all.

          Q. Do you know Chief    Inspector     McRobie? - A. No, Ihave not seen
             him before.

          Q. You were aware that people were approaching your gate from
             gate 3? - A. Yes. My gate was closed at the time. The man
                             148

                                                     F. RICHARDSON


     and the children were sat down in front of the gate.  I looked
     to my right and saw some more people coming and there was a
     lot coming towards me. At that point I opened the gate and
     they started going in.

Q. We see that very clearly on the video? - A. Yes.

Q. You ushering them into pen 1 from the track? - A. Yes.

Q. What sort*of state were these people in? - A. They were
   happy to go in pen 1. Nobody was complaining.   They were just
   coming down in a steady stream and were just going into pen 1.

Q. Did they seemed to be distressed? - A. Not the ones that were
   coming down, no.

Q.    Did you move from your position outside gate 1? - A. Yes.
     After a while, because of the amount of people that were
     coming down, I went up towards gate 3 to see what was
     happening.   By that time more Officers had arrived in that
     area. I wanted to see what was happening.

Q. Was the game still going on on the pitch? - A. I can't
   remember the game starting. All this happened before the game
   started.  I never turned round to look at the pitch once. I
   was looking at the crowd and the stem ofpeople.

Q. You went to gate 3.     Was     the gate open then?- A. Yes, the
   gate was open.

Q.    And I think you helped to pull people out of the pen, did
     notyou? - A. I started pulling people out.     I don't know
     why I was pulling them out.    I couldn't see any reason for
     why they were coming out at the time.    I was just starting
     pulling them out.

Q. Were these people who were upright and able to walk? - A. Yes,
   but I remember looking in the crowd and just picking out one
   m a n ’s face, and it was sheer terror.   It was not frustration
   about him wanting to get     out of the pen. It was sheer terror,
   and I started pulling them out fast. At that point I remember
   shouting at the top of my voice, "Get back. Get back.
   There's room", and they did. They stopped for a couple of
   seconds and they got back, because they were falling at the
   beginning of the gate and the crush as they couldn't get
   through, but they stood back for a brief second.      There was
   room to move back.

Q.   There was room to move back? - A. In the middle.  They had
     room to take a brief step backwards, but because of the panic
     that was happening they were trying to get out the gate.

Q.   Were you aware    of bodies below gate 3? - A. Not at that point.
     I was aware at the gate.   They were coming through the gate.
     I saw people stumbling at the gate, and I was trying to pull
     them out.
                             149

                                                   F. RICHARDSON


Q. Were there other Constables with you at this gate? - A. There
   was another Police Officer I didn't recognise, and there were
   some around me. There were two of us at the gate pulling them
   out.

Q. I think you mentioned something in your statement about a club
   official in a suit. Could you tell us about that? - A. Yes,
   he was not a club official.  That was before when the crowd
   first started coming down.

Q.        LORD   JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What do you mean, "Coming down"? -
     A. Coming   from gate 3.

Q.    Trying to get out? - A. No, when they were first comi«g down,
     when the stream first started coming down, just before I
     opened gate 1.

Q. You mean along the track? - A. Yes, before I opened gate 1.
   They were arguing with a man in a suit.

Q.        MR. PHILLIPS:   Who was? - A. The fans were arguing. He
     was arguing back. They were pushing and shoving.   With me
     they were being very pleasant.  They were saying, "Who's that?
     Who's that?", and I said, "I am sorry, I don't know".  They
     were swearing, and I said, "I don't know who it is", but there
     was a bit of a scuffle going on between him and some of the
     fans.

Q. Was this actually on the perimeter track itself? - A. Yes.

Q. You say he was a club official.  Did you know who he was at
   all? - A. I didn't know who he was at the time.  I d o n ’t
   know.

Q. Was he a club official? - A. No, Chief Inspector McSloy, I
   think.  I think it was the reason, because he was in a suit,
   they were arguing with him, because he was pushing and pulling
   as much as I w a s.

Q. What was he trying to do with these people? - A. I don't know.
   I think it was because he was in a suit.  I didn't know who he
   was.  The fans didn’t know who he was, and they were arguing
   with him and they wouldn't argue with me because I had got the
   uniform on.

Q. But that was before you went across to gate 3, was not it? -
   A. Yes, it was well before.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What was he doing, this man? - A.
     I don't know.  They were just arguing.   There was a bit of a
     scuffle, pushing, shoving.  They were pushing him and he was
     pushing them.  They were arguing. Swear words were used.    It
     was the amount of people coming out.   I believe he was trying
     to direct them down towards me. Some of them who didn't want
     to go or didn’t want to go under his direction because they
     didn't know who he was.
                             150

                                                  F. RICHARDSON


Q.        MR. PHILLIPS:   I thought you said they were coming
     towards you anyway? - A. He was may be trying to move them
     faster.

Q. He was not trying to stop them going out on to the pitch or
   anything? - A. Yes, he could have been. There were that many
   coming down, they were spilling out towards the goalpost.

Q. You left your gate open, did you, when you went to gate 3? -
   A. Yes, I just left it open.

Q. After you had been at gate 3 for a while, and we have already
   dealt with the time you spent there, I think you moved further
   along towards the north? - A. Yes, I moved on to the fencing
   itself, away from the gate.

Q. What did you do there? - A.    Isaw in the middle of the crowd
   there was a P.C. from the C    &V Division was right in the
   middle shouting, "Get him out. Get him out", and he was
   trying to hold a boy up.   Ijumped on to the fence itself,
   trying to lift him up. There was a pile of bodies where he
   was picking this one up, this young young up from.

Q.   Can    you tell us whether that was pen 3 orpen 4? -A. I
     believe it was pen 3.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   There is an Officer inside the pen
     at this stage? - A. There was an Officer     inside     the pen.He
     was  the only Officer I saw. There could have been more.   He
     was  the one I saw. He was avery big lad, this P.C., and he
     was  the one I recognised and saw.

Q.        MR.   PHILLIPS:   Did you know his name? - A. I know he is
     on the C   & V, F Division.   Iknow his name is Dean.  I don't
     know his   second name.

Q. You say he was in pen 3? - A. Yes.

Q.     Lifted a boy up. Did he manage to pass him out to you on the
     fence? - A. he lifted him upand passed him to me on the
     fence.   At that time I was the only one on the fence.  I
     didn’t have the strength to pick him up. He was a lad of
     about 12 years old.   I didn't have the strength to pull him
     up. Another fan was climbing out at that time and I hit him
     and told him to help me, and he helped me to get the lad out.

Q.   You hit him? - A. I hit his arm to take his attention.   He was
     not taking attention to me shouting.

Q. Did you help to take out another man? - A. After I had given
   first-aid to this lad, which was quite some time, I went back.
   The pen was clearing slightly.  I went slightly into pen 3,
   into the gate, and there were some bodies there, and I just
   dragged one out.

Q. Was that this man of 40? - A. Yes.
                          151

                                                 F. RICHARDSON


Q. I think you tried to revive him? - A. That is right.

Q. Can I ask you if you can be quite clear about this, because
   you did make two statements, in the second one of which you
   corrected, I think, some of the numbers you had givenin the
   first statement? - A. That is right.

Q. In your first statement you talked about taking this boy and
   subsequently the man out of terrace 3. In your second
   statement you talked about going up to get 4 and taking the
   boy from the central north pen, which would be pen 4, would
   not it? - A . Yes.

Q. Can you help us about that?    It may be important. -A.    I think
   he came from behind gate 3.

Q. You think you were right the first time? - A. Yes, I have
   since seen thevideo, and I have seen the same lad's face
   against the fence, and he was definitely in pen 3.

Q. So do you think you went as far as gate 4  at all? -A. Iwent
   just past the dividing mark.  I didn't go up to the gate.  I
   went just past the dividing mark and looked inside the pen
   there.

Q. When was that?   When did you do that? - A. Itwas all in the
   same instance.   It was happening so quickly.

Q. Did you help take anybody at all out of pen 4? -A. Not that I
   can remember.

Q. But the two people you were concerned with and about which
   you told us came out of pen 3? - A. Yes.

Q. And you are clear about that now, are you? -    A. Yes.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I think we will break now:

Q. May I just ask you this before we do. Was there any other
   Policewoman about this time on the terrace, or were you the
   only one? - A. I was the only one on the perimeter track apart
   from one right at the other side.  Some other Policewomen came
   on to the track from off the seating area. That was after it
   first started.

        MR. COLLINS:   Sir, may I raise one matter before we do
   adjourn, and it is this. There are a number of other Officers
   who are on the list for Serial 1 to be called.  Some of them
   in fact are not available because they are on leave, but it
   did occur to me having regard to the evidence we have heard
   that none of them would actually add anything to the Inquiry.
   I would therefore propose that we did not call any more Serial
   1 Officers unless anyone specifically requires me to do so
   because there is something material to be brought out from
   that Officer.  We have all seen the statements, and I don't
   think any of the other Serial 1 Officers add anything in the
   light of the evidence we have heard particularly from Police
                                            DISCUSSION


Constable Smith.

     MR. HYTNER:    The only observation I make, sir, I don't
want anyone else, but I don't want as it were people to
misunderstand the point that is being made.   I have just
refreshed my memory of Mr. Grobbelaar's statement, and from
that statement it is clear if he is right one of the gates was
shut at 4 or 5 minutes-past-3, because he refers to it being
opened and people coming out as though you had drawn a cork
from a bottle.   The only conclusion i would be drawing in due
course is that whether the gates were opened or not, and they
clearly were, they were clearly being shut again and at least
one gate was shut at 5-minutes-past.

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, as to that, my friend has seen the
statements, and they don't help on that point, and that is why
I would not seek to call them.  I am bound to say in due
course I might be suggesting that M r . Grobbelaar is somewhat
out on his timing, but may be that is what there will be
between u s .
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   on the other hand, we did have
evidence right at the early stage of gates being opened and
shut and opened and shut.

     MR. COLLINS:   The fans' evidence as I recall it was that
gate 3 was opened and shut on a number of occasions, and P.C.
Smith's evidence confirms that.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Accepting that there was some
evidence of what was said to be a disagreement.

     MR. COLLINS:   Yes, there was some evidence about that.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Which is why I asked the question
I just did.

     MR. COLLINS:   So far as gate 4 is concerned my
recollection of the fans' evidence is that there was no
specific evidence as to gate 4 being shut once it was opened.
There was evidence it was not opened when it ought to have
been opened, but not that it was actually shut again having
been opened.  That as far as I can recall is the state of the
evidence, but the evidence timing is very much in the air.
Sir, all I can say is I don't think the other Officers on
Serial 1 are able to help on that key matter, and therefore I
would not propose to call them unless anyone specifically
wants any of them.

     MR. HYTNER:   I think I have made my position clear.  I
didn't want a decision made not to call them without it being
known what point I would ultimately make on the evidence.  I
agree with Mr. Collins as to the usefulness of the further
witnesses.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.   Does anybody else have
anything to say on that?
                                               DISCUSSION



       MR. WOODWARD:    Sir, if we have, may we say it tomorrow?

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, I think SO.

       Mr. Collins, can you give an indication as to where we
  are likely to get to tomorrow?

       MR. COLLINS:   Yes, sir. Subject to the end of Serial 1
  we then have the Officers who were in the control room. We
  have the P.C. Guest. We have three other Officers, two of
  whom are Officers who will be short but necessary who were one
  of the first into the pens and helping getting bodies out, and
  one deals with some liaison with the Ambulance Service. We
  are not able, unfortunately, to call the communications man
  who mended the radio because he won’t be available until I
  think next week because of annual leave. There are a couple
  of other officers who dOeil Wit-h last- year out in Leppings Lane
  who will be very short.

       Subject to that, I think that is effectively the end of
  the Police evidence, and I would hope - this may be over-
  optimistic - that should be completed within tomorrow, but I
  am always an optimist.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I just wanted an indication.

        MR. COLLINS:   Certainly I would have hoped we would
   finish or all but finish the Police evidence tomorrow.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.   We will break now.   10
o'clock tomorrow.

            (The Inquiry was adjourned until 10 a.m.
                     the following morning)
