                THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
               Room 1106
               50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
               Direct Line 01712732512 Fax 2007



        >dliS nu
  Solicitor, Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                   Yourreference:



  LIVERPOOL L2 2NS                                                            <7 * -   >T
                                                                  Date.                November 1997




  Thank you for your letter of 11 November about South Yorkshire police policy in relation to the
  ie a s e of documents. I apologise for the delay in replying


  Body files

  2
  Smith.^We




 show that they                                                    ‘        “ J0” d f ‘ Wh°




Other material

5.
^body                               YOrkShi?e P° liCe Hillsboro“8l> »=hive is outwith the
coveLd by C t r n s                 ™ t T PUt to eVidenCe’ durin8 the Inquests and is not
                                                    P°l*ce have told us that they nevertheless


        a)   if a person asks for his or her own statement - they release

        b)   if a person asks for someone else’s statement - they release if the person who
G:\HiLLSBOR\MAIN\HFSG. 181
            made the statement agrees

        c) if a person asks for a photograph or video still - they release it, except that

                *       mortuary, post-mortem or other pictures of the dead are not released
                        except to family and legal representatives

                *      they only release material which belongs to the police

       d) if a ‘properly interested’ person asks for a post-mortem report, they release it

        e) if a person asks for other material then

                *      they release it if it was submitted to the Taylor Inquiry or belongs to
                        South Yorkshire police

                *      if neither of these things applies, they seek the advice of the owner of
                        the item, and act on it.


Photographs and video stills

6.     I think it might be helpful to clear up the position, as I understand it to be, in respect of
photographs and video stills which show the bodies of people who died in the disaster. South
Yorkshire police have told us that if a photograph or a video still is contained in the body file
they will release a full copy of it, uncut, to a ‘properly interested person’ in just the same way as
they would release to them copies of other material from the file.

7.       They say that they will also release copies of photographs and video stills which are
not contained in the body files. They will where possible edit stills from the video which was
taken in the temporary mortuary so that only one body is visible - that is, the body of the person
whose family or legal representative is seeking the picture. But this does not apply to stills
from the temporary mortuary video which form part of a body file on a Hillsborough victim and
which the police release under the Coroners Rules to a relative of that person or to somebody
else with a proper interest. In these circumstances they release the still uncut, and it may show
more than one body.

8.     Saouth Yorkshire police say they will not release copies of the temporary mortuary
video itself to anyone.

9.     I hope this is helpful. I am sending a copy of this letter to Superintendent Hepworth in
Sheffield.




C F BONE

G:\HILLSBOR\MAIMHFSG. 181
