INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH      The Rt Hon L ordjustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                   50 Queen Anne s Gate
                                   London SW1H 9AT
                                   01-2732577/3602/2370




Stephen R Forster Esq
London Borough of Brent
Dept of Law & Administration
Health, Safety & Licensing Division
Brent Town Hall
Forty Lane                          27 July 1989
Wembley
Middlesex HA9 9EX




                      /

Thank you for your letter of 19 July regarding
the submission by Mr 6 D Clarkson, Chief Fire
Officer and Chief Executive of the London Fire
and Civil Defence Authority.
The contents of your letter have been noted and
will be taken into account when Mr Clarkson's
submission is considered in Part II of the
Inquiry.                  y
                              /OKw>




                               R M WHALLEY
                                       le y          vjr
                          Secretary to the Inquiry
                                            .   .I



Union
Borough of                                           DEPARTMENT OF LAW AND
                                                     ADMINISTRATION
Brant                                                Health, Safety & Licensing
                                                                          Division

                                                     Brent Town Hall
                                                     Forty Lane, Wembley, Middlesex
                                                     HA9 9EZ
STEPHEN R FORSTER LLB, Director                      Tel: 01 904 1244 Ext 7033

GEOFFREY A.R. GALILEE Assistant Director
                                                     This matter is being dealt with by
Your Ref:     My Ref:           LA/SRF/OP            Mr S R Forster
                                                     [Direct Line 01 908 7112]
                                                     19 July 1989

The Secretary to the Inquiry into the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
50 Queen Annes Gate
LONDON
SWIH 9AT
Dear Sir
FORMAL SUBMISSION TO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY BY
MR G D CLARKSON CHIEF FIRE OFFICER AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF THE
LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY

I have received a letter dated 29th June 1989 from Mr C D Clarkson (copy enclosed)
sending me a copy of evidence submitted to your inquiry which I understand you
invited him to provide. As a matter of accuracy, I write to correct a number of
factual mistakes in the submission and to draw your attention to certain important
omissions.
The London Borough of Brent is responsible for the Wembley Stadium Complex in
respect of the enforcement of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1985 and the London
Government Act 1963, which relates to Entertainments Licensing (including indoor
Sports Licensing).
I am principally concerned that the impression given by the submission is one of
unco-operative and unwilling Local Authorities, who are not committed to achieving
high standards of Public Safety within their area of responsibility. This is not the
case so far as Brent is concerned and in order to qualify this statement I would ask
you to take into account the following points listed in their order of importance as I
see things
1.         (Reference 4.4.2) The submission states that officers of the Local Authority
           will not necessarily be in attendance at sporting events held at the weekend
           or evenings . In our case this is simply not true. Item 2.11 states that
           L.F.C.D.A Officers attended all major events at Wembley Stadium and this
           amounted to 20 During Performance Inspections. There were in fact 33 major
           events at Wembley Stadium during 1988. I am in possession of this
           information because my team of Safety Officers attended on each and every
           occasion.
                                                                           Cont'd .
The Secretary to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

2.     (Reference 6.3.5) I think the suggestion that the LFCDA and Police be given
       duplicate powers to issue prohibition notices to be quite unnecessary and also
        itself dangerous. In my view it is imperative that agencies involved with
        safety work together. At present this happens. If agencies can issue
       prohibition notices in the absence of 'the local authority' this could well be a
       recipe for anarchy. It would certainly remove one of the main planks which
        at present makes close liaison between different agencies necessary.
        Duplicated powers can also give rise to responsibility being avoided by 'buck
       passing' between the agencies having the same power. The Stadium operator
        also needs to know exactly the responsibilities and powers of the different
        agencies involved.
3.     (Reference 5.1.4) It is alleged that a "Police Exercise" took place at Wembley
        concerned only with Police reactions to Public Order situations. This is
        untrue. In 1987 a major incident exercise was arranged to test the reaction
        times of Fire, Police, Ambulance and Medical Services. I enclose the list of
        co-ordinating authorities present at the four meetings prior to the exercise,
        together with a list of the dates of the meetings when a divisional Fire
        Brigade Officer was in attendance. I further enclose a press cutting showing
        a Fire Officer at the scene of the "incident"
        It has been decided to test again the response times of emergency services
        because of changes in the roadways around the Stadium. In this respect I
        enclose a note of the minutes of the last meeting showing an LFCDA
        Divisional Officer in attendance. I am informed that two previous meetings
        have taken place 31 January 1989 and 11 April 1989 when Divisional Officer
        Sillitoe was also in attendance. The Fire Brigade will be sending a number of
        appliances on this exercise, as indeed they did on the last one.
        Since Brent became the enforcing authority, after abolition of the Greater
        London Council there have been two instances of a "major exercise" and the
        LFCDA have been fully involved in both the planning and execution of the
        same.
4.     (Reference 4.1.7) It is stated that during a major refurbishment this
        Authority did not consult with the Fire Brigade on means of escape in respect
        of seating upperbays. My records show, that the m atter was discussed at the
        Brent Safety Team with two Divisional Officers together with the Station
        Officer responsible for the Stadium. There was a joint inspection made with
        the Licensing Officer by the LFCDA. Fire Officers hold no suitable
        qualification to adjudicate on structural matters. However, it is not my view
        that they should be excluded from an opinion and that is why the matter of
        seating the upper (previously) standing bays at Wembley, was raised at the
        proper forum of the Safety Team.
                                               -   3-
The Secretary to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

               I am surprised that Mr Clarkson raises this particular issue, since by seating
               bays which were previously standing accommodation, the capacity of the bays
               was cut by approximately 50 per cent, whilst almost double the necessary
               escape capacity remains available. In this particular instance additional exits
               were provided in certain bays and travel distances reduced considerably. At
               the same time a review of overall capacities took place and reductions were
               also made in the lower bays.
5.             (Reference 2.3.1) It is stated that Wembley Stadium apply for "at least" 12
               occasional music licences in respect of large outdoor pop concerts per year.
               This is simply not true. Since the Stadium was built in 1923, there has only
               been one year when so many concerts have taken place and that was 1988.
               The average (from GLC records) is 3 major concerts annually since 1970 with
               only 2 to date this year with 2 more planned.
6.            (Reference 1.1.14) It is stated that under the 1987 Act the term "sports
               ground" is replaced by the term "sports stadia", In fact the Act did exactly
               the opposite and replaced the term "sports stadium" with the term "sports
               ground". The same reference to "sports stadia", where in fact Mr Clarkson is
               clearly referring to "sports grounds", appears throughout his submission.
7.            There are also factual inaccuracies in the Appendices section of Mr
               Clarkson's submission but I do not think them to be of sufficient import to
               ment detailed corrections.
The purpose of this letter is to correct certain factual inaccuracies that are
immediately apparent to me. There are many other opinions and value judgements
made in the submissions, about which I am very uncomfortable.
In general terms since the abolition of the G.L.C. this Council has found working
relations to be excellent with our counterparts in the Fire Service. This good working
relationship has been forged, together with the Police Authority and Fire Brigade,
under the auspices of the Brent Safety Team. It is unfortunate that such good work
should be prejudiced by a Chief Officer's submission prepared on the basis of
inaccuracies and misinformation.
I find it regrettable and inexplicable that Mr Clarkson should make a submission to
youcontaining such material inaccuracies. We have taken the view, since GLC
abolition, that full consultation between all agencies concerned with safety is vital.
We have never sought to limit any of those involved to the confines of their
professional disciplines and have welcomed all contributions. Personally I have found
LFCDA officers to be substantial contributors to consideration of all safety matters
concerning the Wembley Stadium complex. My staff have enjoyed a similar
experience.
 I know that my Members regard it as essential that the Council fully co-operates with
 all other agencies concerned with safety matters, especially the Police and the
 LFCDA. This has been and will continue to be so in Brent.
 I can only assume Mr Clarkson prepared his submission in haste.

 Yours fait!


 Director \if taw and AHministration
 C « /^ 1 /* \c n rQ c
                          n ‘I'D                      London Fire Brigade


LFCDA
                                                      Fire Prevention Branch
                           |7L,    -rr               Queensborough House
                           f t '   _Li               1 2 -1 8 Albert Embankn
                                                                      Embankment London SE1 7TJ

LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY              Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
                                                     G D Clarkson QFSM BA (Hons)

                                                     Telephone 01-587 4000
The Secretary to the                                 Telex
  Inquiry into the Hillsborough                      My extension
  Stadium Disaster                                   My reference       IF S /ADV /8 /2
50 Queen Annes Gate                       S 1 1G i   Your reference
London     SW1H 9AT                           /»     Date          ju f A ugust 1989




Dear

THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY - FORMAL SUBMISSION BY THE
LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY

I refer to the letter, dated 19 July 1989, from S.R. Forster, Esq, LLB,
Director of Law and Administration, London Borough of Brent, in which he
writes to 'correct a number of factual mistakes in the submission (from the
LFCDA) and to draw your attention to certain important omissions'.

I have given careful consideration to the points made by Mr Forster.
Whilst acknowledging some points which could have been open to
misinterpretation, I must standby the majority of the points made in our
submission as matters which give rise to serious concern. I do not propose
to repeat them at length in this letter but would draw your attention to
the contents of the enclosed correspondence to Mr Forster.

I hope that this will assist in resolving any misunderstandings which may
have arisen from our submission and the subsequent correspondence from the
London Borough of Brent.

Yours sincerely,




G.D. CLARKSON
Chief Fire Officer and Chief Executive
                                                London Fire Brigade
                                                Fire Prevention Branch
                                                Queensborough House
                                                12 -1 8 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7TJ

LONDON FIRE AN D C IVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY       Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
                                                G D Clarkson QFSM BA (Hons)

 Mr Steven R Forster                            Telephone 01-587 4000
 Director of Law and Administration             Telex
 Health & Safety Licensing Division             My extension
 London Borough of Brent                        My reference    IFS/ADV/8/2/TJL
 The Town Hall                                  Your reference  LA/SRF/OP/C.754/9
 Forty Lane                                     Date            August 1989
 Wembley                         _
 Middlesex      HA9 9EZ


Dear    A ‘.i
THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

Thank you for your letter dated 19 July 1989 and for the copy of the letter of
the same date to the Secretary to the aforementioned Inquiry. I have to advise
you that, in respect of most of the matters which are addressed in the latter
correspondence, I stand by the points made in this Authority's submission to
the Inquiry.

The submission was not intended to create the impression of 'unco-operative and
unwilling local authorities who are not committed to achieving high standards
of public safety within their area of responsibility'. I can only report
however on the situation as it is perceived by the officers of this Authority.
It is our view that only by luck have situations comparable to Hillsborough and
other disasters been avoided in sports grounds in this metropolis and that it
would have been irresponsible to understate the many shortcomings we have noted
for the sake ~oT public relations.

It is my hope and intention that the contents of the Authority's submission
will not prejudice the future working relationships between the Authority and
its counterparts but will rather provide a basis for full and frank discussion
and formal consultation in the future to ensure that the highest possible
levels of public safety are achieved and maintained.

I am obliged to respond to the criticisms which you made in respect of the
Authority's submission and will do so in the order in which they were raised in
your correspondence:-

1.     With regard to paragraph 4.4.2. our observation that local authority
       officers may be off duty at weekends and in the evenings and consequently
       not in attendance at some events reflects the experiences of the officers
       engaged in such duties. It was clearly a general statement however and
       not directed against your officers. I am delighted to read that all the
       Wembley events are and will continue to be covered by your officers.
In response to your comments concerning attendance at events at Wembley,
it is our policy to have an officer present at all major events.
Our recorcls indicate 20 such events in 1988, on the following dates:

12   March   17 April   25 June     27 July
19   March    7 May     14 July     31 July
23   March   14 May     16 July      5 August
27   March   21 May     22 July     20 August
16   April   11 June    23 July      2 September

It is probable that some of the events which form your list of "major
events" are counted in our "Specific Inspections" which relate to
occasional licences, inspection of special effects, etc. to which
reference is made in paragraph 2.3.1 of the submission. There were 69
such inspections in 1988. I think the fact that Brigade officers were
therefore present on 89 occasions in 1988 provides ample evidence of
our concern for public safety.                                    __

I view with great concern your comment "that the LFCDA and police be given
duplicate powers to issue prohibition notices to be quite unnecessary and
also itself dangerous" (Ref 6.3.5).

Fire Officers have long experience in using powers of prohibition by
virtue of the responsibility for the enforcement of the Fire Precautions
Act 1971 and have, it is generally acknowledged, used those powers
sensitively and with discretion.

Furthermore, we are in no way seeking to usurp the powers of the local
authority officers who may be present at a major event but merely to
ensure that in the absence of such officers, a responsible person is in a
position to act in the interest of public safety. Whether that person is
a police^-er fire officer is immaterial. The point is that someone is in S '
position to act immediately.

Such arrangements should not give rise to "buck passing" to use your
phraseology. It would be clearly understood that the police or fire
officer present would act only in the absence of an officer from the
licensing authority. London Fire Brigade officers would, of course, use
the powers available to them under the Fire Precautions Act 1971 (Section
10) if they considered that the situation represented a serious risk to
public safety from fire. This would, however, be the exception and not
the rule.

Finally, on this issue, I can s e e no reason whatever why stadium operators
should be unaware of the powers and responsibilities of the various
authorities. These are already defined and would remain unaltered apart
from the extension of this one power, which would not be difficult to
comprehend. Furthermore, I have no doubt that they would, as interested
parties, be consulted by the appropriate government department responsible
for framing amendments to the relevant legislation before the legislation
was modified.
In respect of our comments (paragraph 5.1.4) regarding the exercise which
was held at Wembley Stadium it is not denied that the London Fire Brigade
participated in the exercise. It was nevertheless the view of the
entertainments licensing officer from the Brigade who observed the
exercise that it became primarily a police exercise in public order,
involving the use of police cadets from the Metropolitan Police Training
College, Hendon, in the role of unruly spectators. The officer noted that
the police did not appear to take the opportunity to test emergency
evacuation procedures in addition to public order training. That being
said officers from the North West Area Command who were engaged in or
observed the exercise professed their satisfaction with the results.
Similar positive comments have been made in respect of 'Exercise Bravo'
which was held at the Wembley Stadium on 6 August last. I hope that
future exercises will continue in the same vein.

The example was used to give emphasis to the view that police training
should make provision for an understanding of emergency evacuation
procedures and, where perimeter fences are installed, the correct methods
and procedures for the opening of gates in the fence. Indeed the whole
thrust of that section of the submission was concerned with police
training and not the adequacy or otherwise of one exercise at the Wembley
Stadium.

With regard to our statement (paragraph 4.1.7) that Brent "did not consult
with the Brigade on the alteration to means of escape within the stadium"
our records confirm this to be the case. I agree that fire officers were
included in preliminary discussions as part of the safety team
deliberations but the Authority was never formally consulted on the matter
in accordance with the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 as amended by the
Local Government Act 1985 (Schedule 8). I do not regard informal
discussions at safety team meetings, which have no statutory force, as an
acceptable- substitute for formal consultation under that legislation.
The Authority was not given the opportunity to comment in detail on the
plans for the alterations to the means of escape. The fact that the
resulting improvements were to the satisfaction of the Authority does not
detract from my point in the slightest degree.

I was somewhat taken aback by your comment in this context that fire
officers hold no suitable qualifications to adjudicate on structural
matters. I do not propose to provide detail as to the range and depth of
training which is mandatory upon fire officers before they are regarded as
qualified to express professional judgements on such matters. Suffice to
say that the prime legislation for which fire authorities are responsible,
namely the Fire Precautions Act 1971 provides that 'means of escape' is
the responsibility of the fire authorities nationally. Consequently many
fire officers are more highly qualified than their counterparts in local
authorities. Their actual experience of fire has yet to be matched by any
theoretical formulae which can be studied in the abstract when means of
escape is being considered. This is why this, and indeed all fire
authorities, lay great emphasis on the opinion of officers with
operational experience.
      I am sure you will agree that it is in the interests of all the
      authorities concerned to ensure that the tenets of the appropriate
      legislation are fully complied with and that any future proposals for
      changes to means of escape will be subject to full and proper consultation
      with this Authority.

     Lord Justice Taylor has made reference, in his recently published
     interim report, to the "casual and unbusinesslike" way in which the
     Safety at Sports Ground Advisory Group established by the Sheffield
     City Council conducted its affairs (Paragraph 286, page 51 and
     paragraph 314, page 56). I am therefore very pleased to note the
     positive reports which my officers have made with regard to the
     safety team meetings organised under your auspices and that their
     deliberations are fully minuted. I maintain, however, that further
     advantage would accrue if the role of the safety team was enshrined
     in the relevant legislation. Their deliberations would then be part
     of the consultation process.

5.   In respect of occasional music licences for large outdoor pop concerts I
      would confirm that the year 1988 saw the largest number of concerts to
      date (i.e 12). My officers have indicated however that they were advised
      that a similar number were expected to be held in 1989. Unfortunately
      this advice was verbal and not confirmed in writing but was received in
      good faith. I understand that a number of concerts anticipated earlier
      this year were subsequently cancelled. The comments in paragraph 2.3.1 of
      our submission were made on this basis and were intended to reflect the
      present position and possibly the future rather than the past.

6.   Your point regarding the use of the term "sports stadium" instead of the
      correct "sports grounds" is acknowledged. Please accept my thanks for
      drawing my attention to this error.

7.   The appendices to the Authority's submission only make reference to the ~
      London Borough of Brent in-so-far as Appendix A lists the sports grounds
      in Brent falling within the scope of the 1975 legislation. I am therefore
     unable to identify the "factual inaccuracies" to which you refer.

     With regard to the "opinions and value judgements" which cause you..
     discomfort I would refer to them rather as the professional assessments of
     experienced fire officers engaged in ensuring the safety of members of the
     public resorting to sports grounds, and I do not offer any apology for
     bringing them to the attention of Lord Justice Taylor and his Inquiry.
     Considerable thought went into the preparation of the submission.

I hope you will recognise that this Authority had no motive other than concern
for public safety at sports grounds in making its submission to the Inquiry and
wishes that the Brent Safety Team should continue to build upon the good work
it has carried out up to the present.

Yours sincerely,




Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
