                                                                                   in n ■ » ■?,
                                                                                   w n r
                                                                                    ■ ■■■,»



                S il verman •Livermore
                                                                                   42JJL tf.
                                                                                                                                                                                              ©
                S           O            L J_- C j I _T • O                                                                                                        R ;S
                                          1 1 / I ' V u l.i f l: ! S l l C i ' l . I IVCIJHHil I 2 $ ( } l )
                I -   1., 1». |. : HIM             I h/ l                                   I              14190                               Imx (II S 1-255 0. Ift


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,                                                                                            Our ref-                          DRF.JW.HfLLSBOROUGH
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
                                                                                                                       Y o ur tel
Room 1106,
50 Queen Anne’s Gate,                                                                                                  W h r n <:.illm£ p lf ( i:,c ; i \ k to r.

London,
SW1II 9AT.
                                                                                                                                                        MR FRASER

8 December 1997




I must open by apologising for the delay in responding fully to your letters of the 3rd and
21st November but I have now been able to consider all the issues you have raised in
detail and hope that you find this response of some assistance.

May 1 firstly clarify my own position as a member o f the Steering Committee in relat ion
to the Taylor Inquiry, the mini Inquests and the main Inquest Hearing itself.

As I am sure you a e aware the six members of the Steering Committee were elected from
a group of about eighty Solicitors who attended a meeting at the Liverpool Law Society
Library within days of the Hillsborough Disaster occurring... our brief was to represent
Solicitors who had themselves been instructed by people directly affected by the Disaster
.. we did not directly represent any clients as such.

The Committee elected Liz Steele as she then was (now H.H.J. Steele) as our Chair
Person and I am sure you have been in touch with her as she can give you much more
information about representation at the Taylor Inquiry than 1 can and as she was much
more directly involved in this aspect than I. It was Liz Steele (through her former
practice) who was responsible for briefing Mr Benett Hytner Q.C. and Mr T.R.A. King
(as he (hen was) to represent the Solicitors acting for those who had been bereaved or
injured and as such she had a much closer working knowledge than I did of the
documents which were made available for the Inquiiy.

I was the member of the Committee delegated to deal with the Inquests and when Dr.
Popper indicated that he intended holding ninety-five “mini inquests” with a view to

                                         . i * H             I I to        » M \ -.1 U            M        'A A l K I . k     J I     I* , h           V k l S H AM I I I                 I
                                              \          M-v          I      K I N ' 1; I I        H I        k       M AVtrtK               • 1 It

                                          mu i ,        ii                 i p.    */           . . t,                      rd.                        .'Uij;        i .i,
                                                   II        I-                I                    1. 1    I'Ml            r't i t      '     »          i l l \ | *|rw.        . •> i
                                         .< » * M l k l |< I . .                   IV «M          II N ll | «)(<) I <• 4                       I *» .It* I »* h i - .             U ft .
                                          •                  t I . *           | ....   V   . i, . 4- . . I | l , «             * '• »       l«.   .    I . . . i:» H i , * t i n -

                                                                          •» \ ! ! ' • )        S..      Ki l I • I ' " [
    giving each bereaved family as much individual information as was available it was 1 who
    had direct contact with Dr. Popper and Mr Mervyn Jones and I conducted the vast
    majority of those mini inquests before Dr. Popper in Sheffield but again as a member ot
    the Steering Committee representing Solicitors (in effect acting as their Agent) save that
    I did have about fifteen bereaved families as direct clients but for the purpose of
    representation at the mini inquest I wore my Steering Committee members hat for the
    sake of continuity.

    Finally, in relation to the main Inquest it was I who instructed Mr T.R.A. King (junior
    Counsel as he then was) again acing as a Steering Committee member effectively as
    Agent for all those Solicitors who had bereaved families as clients.

    I anticipate that you are already aware of much of this background but 1 have set it out
    again as it is important when you consider some of the rather limited answers which I am
^   able to give below.

    I propose adopting the numbering sequence contained in your letters for the sake of
    convenience and trust this is in order thus:-

    V1DEO EVIDENCE

    3.     Noted.

    4.     Noted.

    5.     Some of the material used at the Taylor Inquiry was not used at either the mini
    Inquests or the main Inquest hearing, similarly a great deal ot the evidence given at both
    forms of the Inquests had not been before the previous Inquiry.

    I clearly remember viewing the compilation tape on a number of occasions and recall it
    being played to the main Inquest Jury.

    6.     1 do not recall watching tapes TB1 or TB2 before or during cither the Taylor
    Inquiry or either form of Inquests but this should not surprise you in view of my
    comments above in relation to my involvement with the Taylor Inquiry. 1 may have seen
    the tapes in relation to either form of Inquest but 1 can not now be certain ... I do recall
    watching many hours of video footage but if you would like me to try and clarify my
    memory then 1would be perfectly happy to view the tapes now and let you know whether
 I recall having seen either of them before.

 7.     Noted.

 8      Noted.

  9.     I entirely agree with your impression. It was never my understanding that any
  Officer said that he could not see the general situation in Pen 3 or 4 from the elevated
  position of the Control Box. I had the opportunity to visit the Box myself shortly after
  the formation of the Steering Committee as part of a background fact finding visit to the
  ground and my clear recollcction is that the large windows of the Box gave an excellent
  view over the terraces at the Leppings Lane end and the only advantage which a camera
  fitted with a “zoom” facility might have given over the naked eye would have been to
  identify an isolated incident in close up. I seem to recall noticing several pairs of
  binoculars in the Control Box at the time of my visit. 1 am sure that you have already
  seen evidence from Mr Trevor Hicks in which he refers to his conversations with at least
  two Senior Officers who were standing on the steps leading to the Control Box but for
« the sake of completeness 1 enclose a copy of a Statement which 1 have. It seems clear
  from this evidence that the Officers to whom he refers seem to have an excellent view of
  the events unfolding in Pens 3 and 4 at the times referred to in the Statement.


 THE AFTERMATH

 10.    Noted.

 11     Noted. 1 agree with your preliminary conclusions.

 12.    The 3.15 p.m. “cut o ff’ set by Dr. Popper caused much anxiety amongst the
 bereaved families but it was made perfectly clear to them both by Dr. Popper and myself
 and subsequently by Mr T.R.A. King that this was done because of the limited terms of
 reference of a Coroner’s Inquest. The four issues to be determined wcre:-

 (1)    Who died.

 (2)    When they died.

 (3)    Where they died.
      The coronal system is no! concerned with the reasons WHY a person dies and Dr Popper
      iniuiVfrom whf h fT " 'f    h "1"   * ' med‘Cal evide,,Ce thos' who died had stained the
     XZnZ          his purposed     ^       '°3 '5Pm        *h“S e ™ " S      « * '™<= - , e no,


      t v w i T 1M5diCil1 dcfi" itiom of ,he words “d' * h” and “died” were the subject of much
      !Tf5w   .1       SU,nlma'y ™y undcrstand»ng was that where a person had been crushed
      tn tii u ” ^ fevele ^ a      ®r a sufficiently long time so as to cause irreversible damage
^           e ram ten even though the heart and other bodily functions may have continued for
      hom* ™ nule* 01 cven hours afterwards the true cause o f death was the crushing which
     as a the evidence tended to show, was considerably cased by 3.15 p.m. It is therefore
     perfectly possible (as I understand it) for someone to be severely crushed and lose
     consciousness but for that crashing not to be of such an intensity to cause oxygen
         »va ion to the biam (even though there is a loss of consciousness) and for a full
     recovery to then be possible.

     PRIVILEGE

    1 share your view that non of the information you have asked me for is privileged. 1 note
    that in any event, “the families” have waived privilege and insofar as you may require
           i     I T!ialion fr0ITI me which is a,refldy in (he public domain f would have no
    difficulty responding but should specific questions arise about a specific individual then
      would need an assurance from his or her family that they were one of “the families” to
    whom you refer ... I am acutely aware that there are a large number of people directly
    affected by this Disaster one way or the other who want no further involvement in any
     nquiry o t any sort and I must respect those wishes and I ain sure you will appreciate mv
    position in this respect.



    1 now turn to your subsequent letter of 21st November.


           Tregret 1 have no recollection of questioning Mr Taylor at the main Inquest... if
 you would care to let me have copies of pages 78 and 79 I will see if these refresh my
 memory hut was it not Mr T.R.A. King who questioned Mr Taylor rather than myself?

3.     f regret I can not now recall the detail of my instructions at this stage but if you
can cJanfy the position concerning the questioning of Mr Taylor by cither myself or Mr
T.R.A. King I will happily give this matter further thought.

 •1.     Copies of the diaft Summaries relating to Sarah and Victoria were seen by myself
 and Mi and Mrs Hicks prior to the mini Inquests and I have had the opportunity to refresh
 my memory by looking again at the Sutnmaty relating to Victoria. These Summaries are,
 as their title implies, merely a summary of the evidence available to the Coroner and I
legiet I do not recall having seen any evidence from Paul Taylor prior to the mini Inquest
hearings so I can not comment on what relevance (or otherwise) it might have had nor do
I know whether the Coroner had received evidence from Mr Taylor via any of his
investigating officers and if he had then why it might have been excluded from the
Summary. I do not recall Mr Hicks raising any queries on the accuracy of the Summaiy
insofar as it related to any attempt by P.C. Marshall to resuscitate Victoria in the
Ambulance on the way to Hospital.


I hope that, where 1 have been able to help, my observations 'are'of some assistance but
should you wish me to consider any further aspects of this matter or view the tapes
referred to please do not hesitate to contact me.
