INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370
P G Wall Esq                                 Your Ref:        PGW/WAC
Chief Superintendent
Assistant Secretary
The Police Superintendents' Association
 of England & Wales
67A Reading Road
Pangbourne
Berkshire RG8 7JD                            £ January 1990




       Ck- Swyt. W c kAJL'

POLICE CONTROL ROOM FACILITIES


Thank you for your letter of 20 December with the results of your
circular to branches seeking comment upon the adequacy or
otherwise of police control rooms. I will show this to Lord
Justice Taylor and his Assessors. I know that they will be very
grateful to you and your colleagues for taking the trouble to
assemble so much detailed information, which will be very
valuable. Many thanks indeed.


                                                          /




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                       THE POLICE SUPERINTENDENTS' ASSOCIATION
     men.                        OF ENGLAND AND WALES

                                                                      6 7 A Reading Road
                                                                      Pangbourne
                                                                      Berkshire
                                                                      R Q 8 7JD

                                                                      Tel: 0734 844005
                                                                      Fax: 0734 845642
Our Ref:    PGW/WAC
Your Ref:

   December 20, 1989


  Mr S. Whalley
  The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
 ^Kpme Office
 ^Rieen Anne's Gate
   London.  SW1H 9AT


   Dear Mr Whalley,

   POLICE CONTROL ROOM FACILITIES

   As requested, I circulated all our Branches to seek comment upon the
   adequacy or otherwise of Police Control Rooms.          Almost all have now
   responded.   It is fair to say that some Control Rooms, which had formally
   been regarded as adequate, were not subject of criticism until recently. It
   is also true that the nature of some grounds makes satisfactory provision
   more difficult.   However, the responses I have received confirm our view
   given in oral evidence that many Control Rooms are primitive, poorly
   equipped and inadequate.    These problems are not confined to the smaller
   clubs, some of which have excellent facilities.    The letters and reports I
   have to hand can be briefly summarised by Branches as follows

   Avon & Somerset - Grounds at Bristol City and Bristol Rovers have Control
   Rooms which are small, poorly equipped, have no sound insulation and are
   described as totally inadequate to police high attendance matches.

   Bedfordshire - Luton ground control meets all requirements.

   Cambridgeshire - No adverse comments have been made with regard to Cambridge
   United.   Peterborough United's Control Room is too small and has no sound
   proofing.   Police have requested improvements, but there may be structural
   problems.

   Cheshire - None of the 8 grounds in the force area provides adequate control
   facilities. None meet the requirements of the Interim Report. The problem
   is being addressed as a matter of urgency.

                                                                                   . . . •/




                       Secretary: Chief Superintendent T. Q. Hewitt
                  A ssistant Secretary: Chief Superintendent P. Q. Wall
                                   -    2   -




Cleveland - Both Middlesborough and Hartlepool football grounds                 lack
facilities, but both are making progress for improvement.

Derbyshire - Facilities at      Derby       are   described   as   adequate   and   at
Chesterfield Town, excellent.

Devon & Cornwall - Plymouth Argyle has excellent CCTV equipment, but           there
are problems with crowd noise.    Exeter City has no Police Control            Room.
fcpTV equipment is controlled from a small box at the back of the               main
Twooden) stand and would need to be promptly evacuated in the event             of a
fire. Torquay United have no Control Room.

Dorset - Facilities at Bournemouth are excellent.

Durham - Some problems reported, but these are being dealt with.

Essex - Southend has no sound proofing and no telephone.         Colchester's
facilities are described as just adequate for gates under 2,000.

Hampshire - Southampton and Portsmouth Rooms are adequate, but lack CCTV
facilities outside the ground.   Neither room is large enough to operate as
a major incident control.   Aldershot's facilities are poor, but gates are
very low.

Hertfordshire - The control is described as adequate, but its location gives
no view of the field or terracing.    The Directors of the club agreed the
need for a new Control Room four years ago.

Humberside - The facilities at the three football league grounds are felt to
be adequate, although all have minor problems and should a team gain
promotion, enhancement would be essential. Of the two Rugby League grounds,
one has good facilities, the other has not. No CCTV, poor visibility, poor
communications.   This club has refused to consider improvements, stating
that the Rugby League do not consider Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations
has relevance other than for Association Football grounds.

Kent - Facilities are adequate, but it is noted that the capacity at
Gillingham has been reduced from 21,000 to 10,000 following the Interim
Report.

Lancashire - Blackpool's Control Room is too small.       Burnley's facilities do
not meet the recommendations in the Interim Report.

Leicester - The Control Room is totally inadequate.   The box is too small
for the recommended equipment and staffing.   We are informed that the room
has a high fire risk and inadequate escape facility.
                                       -   3   -




 Lincolnshire - Lincoln City's room is satisfactory and there are long term
 plans for major improvement.        Boston's ground is subject to a safety
 certificate, but has no facilities.

 Me t r o p o l i t a n - Generally Divisional     Commanders are satisfied   with
 facilities at grounds in the London               area, although there are   some
 inadequacies at the smaller clubs.

^ fcrseyside - A satisfactory position is reported.        The requirements set out
  in the Interim Report have been met.

 North Wales - Facilities at Wrexham are said to be poor. The box measures
 9' x 6' and is so situated that crowd noise makes radio communication
 impossible at times.

 North Yorkshire - York and Scarborough require sound proofing, telephone,
 tannoy and CCTV improvements.    Branch officers report that the clubs are
 reluctant to carry out any work recommended by the safety teams until Lord
 Justice Taylor's Final Report is to hand.

 Norfolk - An agreement has been reached with the Norwich City Club that the
 Police Control Room should be doubled in size and needs other major
 improvements. Although the club indicates total support, no start date for
 the work has yet been set.

 Northamptonshire - Northampton Town, a Division Three club, has a purpose
 built, fully equipped Control Room.

 Northumbria - Improvements are planned at both Newcastle and Sunderland.

 Nottinghamshire - Nottingham Forest has an excellent, purpose built Control
 Room (cost £50,000 approximately).       Notts County has a room totally
 inadequate in terms of size, location and technology.     Mansfield Town is
 little better.

 South Yorkshire - The room at Sheffield Wednesday's ground does not meet the
 requirements of the Interim Report.     With the exception of Barnsley and
 Doncaster, other grounds have poor facilities.        Sheffield United have
 undertaken to provide a new Control Room "as soon as possible".

 Staffordshire - Facilities at Port Vale do not meet the requirements of the
 Interim Report. A new room is planned and the club appear to appreciate the
 need for urgency, but finance is a problem and it is not likely that
 improvements will be possible with any speed.

 Suffolk - The facilities at Ipswich are satisfactory.

 Sussex - A new Control Room was installed at Brighton in July 1989 and
 whilst some improvements in communication facilities are necessary, the
 position is generally satisfactory.
                                         -   4   -




 Thames Valley - Oxford United are seeking relocation of the ground. The
 Police Control Room is well equipped, but has no view of the pitch or
 terracing.

 West Mercia - There are five grounds within the force area. All locations
 need control enhancement under a variety of headings including telephone,
 radio, tannoy etc.

^fcpst Midlands     - Of   the   six   grounds       in   the   area,   three   are   seeking
i mprovement.

 West Yorkshire - You will recollect Chief Superintendent Clarkson's remarks
 concerning Leeds United.      His view that the Control facilities are
 inadequate is supported by other officers.

 More detailed reports from individual Branches can be obtained if you wish,
 but I hope I have set out sufficient comment for your purpose.

 The recommendations number 30 - 34 of the Interim Report have been most
 helpful in setting some common needs and standards, but it is disturbing to
 note that many clubs cannot yet meet those basic requirements.

 Clubs are already beginning to complain bitterly about reduced capacities
 and increased costs. We fear that strong resistance will be offered to any
 attempt to make them pay the cost of making their grounds safe for the
 public.  The clubs seek to compare facilities and costs between forces and
 between clubs. Common national recommendations and standards are therefore
 of increased importance.

 Yours sincerely,




 P. G. Wall
 Chief Superintendent
 Assistant Secretary
