INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                       [V/s. ^WiAPlp        London SW1H 9AT
                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370


Dr C E Nicholson
Deputy Director                       |V/<s
Safety Engineering Laboratory 1         fy
Health & Safety Executive               L
Research & Laboratory Services Division
Broad Lane                                    te
SHEFFIELD
S3 7HQ                          J        5 September 1989




              ;
Thank you for your letter of 4 September. You also copied to me
your letter to Professor Maunder of 10 August.

We discussed a day or so ago the immediate future of the remains
of barrier 124A which you currently retain. I discussed this
with Lord Justice Taylor yesterday. He takes the view that it
would not be appropriate to give interested parties samples of
the barrier or loan the samples used by HSE. Nor would he think
it appropriate that other parties should be present when you
carry out your own tests, or have access to any further results
which you yourselves might produce, either from tests carried out
to date or from further tests. He would be particularly
concerned about the distribution of any further material beyond
that on which he based his Interim Report.

That suggests that, for the present, it would probably be right,
as you indicate, for all pieces to be retained by HSE in the
condition they are now. This may sound unduly restrictive, but
the point is that the publication of the Interim Report is not
the end of the story. It may well be that Professor Maunder will
want further tests carried out which bear upon questions to be
considered in Part 2 of the Inquiry. And police inquiries will
continue for some time to come, focussing first on any question
of the commission of criminal offences, and then on the inquest
by HM Coroner.
It may well be that we should keep to this position, so far as
Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry is concerned, until after the Final
Report is published. But if you come under constant pressure, or
if our stipulation seems oppressive, perhaps you could let me
know. On the timescale, it seems likely that Lord Justice Taylor
will have completedlhis Final Report before the police inquiries
are complete. It would then be for Mervyn to say what the ground
rules should be thereafter.



                                                  )



                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                                                       Research and Laboratory
                                     Health &          Services Division
                                                       Broad Lane
                                     Safety            Sheffield S3 7HQ


                                     Executive         Telephone 0742 768141
                                                       ext
                                                       Telex 54556 (HSE RLS G)
                                                       Facsimile 0742 755792




   Mr R Whalley                                        Your reference
   Home Office
   Rocm 661                                            Our reference    SMFV343/235/01
   50 Queen Anne's Gate
   LONDON                                              Date             4 September 1989
   SW1H 9AT


   Dear Mr Whalley
   HILLSBOROUGH INVESTIGAirrCN - C IV IL CASE

  ^^resentatives of the five parties involved in the case of Chapman versus the
   Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
   Sheffield City Council and Eastwood & Partners visited this Laboratory on
   15 August 1989 in order to examine the broken barrier. This visit was agreed
   by the Inquiry via Treasury Solicitors.
   Several parties have now requested samples of the barrier for their own tests,
   or loan of the samples used by HSE. Since our work on the failed barrier was
   completed some time ago, it would be simpler from our point of view, and
   considerably less time consuming, if the pieces of this barrier were returned
   to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. However, in view of the fact that a
   criminal inquiry is now underway, it may be advisable for all pieces to be
   retained by HSE in the condition they are now. I would welcome your views, and
   also those of Mr J M Jones and Professor Maunder to whom this letter is
   copied.
   In addition, several parties have expressed the desire to witness any further
   tests that HSE may carry cut. The need for tests on the other barriers in our
   possession is currently under discussion with Professor Maunder but it would be
   helpful, at this stage, to have your views on whether such tests should be
   witnessed. Incidentally, iny previous request for assistance in purchasing
   hydraulic rams for further testing should also be held in abeyance until our
   technical discussions are complete. Should they be required, the rams will
   cost approximately £1600.
   Yours sincerely




£p C E NICHOISON
X\ Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1
   cc Dr A Jones
      Mr J M Jones
      Professor L Maunder
A}




     #
                                                         f*
                                                   Research anc L a o o ra io 'y
                                   Health &        Services Division
                                                   Broac Lane
                                   Safety          Sne“ ieic S3 7HQ


                                   Executive       T e ie o n o 'e 0742 7 6 6 * 4 '
                                                   ex;
                                                   Teiex 54556 (HSE RLS G)
                                                   Facsimile 0742 7557S2




  Professor L Maunder                                Dur re'fcrenc(
  Dean of Faculty of Applied Science
  Stephenson Building                              0 j r '•e-ere ncf         SMEV343/235/01
  The University
  NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE                                                        10 August 1989
  NE1 7KU


   Dear Professor Maunder
   HIUjSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY
  ^ow that the Interim Report has been issued I would like to describe how the
  Retails of HSE's contribution will be reported and invite you to consider
   requirements for additional work.
   It is my intention to produce a compilation report, similar in style and format
   to the first HSE report, covering the following areas: testing of turnstiles;
   metallurgical assessment of barrier 124A; strength of crush barrier
   calculations; finite element stress analysis of barrier 124A; calculation of
   crowd capacity in Pens 3 and 4; further crowd density estimates in Pens 3 and 4
   (including the 1988 semi-final); noise level measurements.
   A length of wrought iron tube, from barrier 129, will be tested to establish
   the flow stress but, since the calculations explain adequately the collapse of
   barrier 124A, it does not at this stage seem necessary to commit further
   resources to the testing of a complete barrier. I would welcome your views on
   this matter and on any further work which may be required from HSE _in the
   second phase of the Inquiry. For example, do you foresee any HSE involvement
   in the revision of the Green Guide?
   In our internal discussions, a number of relevant areas in which information
   appears to be lacking have been identified. These include: the relationship
   between crowd density and surges; stresses induced in crush barriers by crcwd
   pressure; the height of crush barriers; methods of testing crush barriers.
   Staff in HSE could, if required, be involved in the discussion of these topics
   and it may be appropriate for research to be commissioned by the Home Office.
   I am now on leave until 29 August. Please contact Mr Waterhouse or Mr Heyes if
   any urgent matters arise before then.
   Yours sincerely



   DR C E NICHOLSON
f f Deputy Director - Safety Engineering laboratory 1
   cc Mr R Whalley, Home Office
      Dr A Jones, D/SEL
      Mr J Anderson, TD3
