 J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                       FURNIVAL HOUSE               \
                                                                                                            v /|
 ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                Furnival Gate
  H IL L S B O R O U G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M                            Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
 WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                  SMITHDOWN LANE POLICE STATION
 PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                   Liverpool L7 3PR
 Colmore Circus Queensway                                                 Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 7 5
 Birmingham B4 6NQ
 Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                                          Your Ref:
 NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
 Fowler Street                                                            Our Ref:          JMJ/DH
 Birmingham B7 5DA
 Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                          Date:             12 July 1989




R M Whalley Esq
Room 662
Home Office
50 Queen Anne Gate
LONDON




Dear Bob

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - FUTURE LINES OF INQUIRY

You will no doubt recall I                     have hada number of discussions with you and
Sir Peter Taylor about the                     progress of the investigation and how it relates
to the forthcoming Interim                     Report. It has become particularly relevant in
the light of Mr Woodward's                     comments in his proposed submission for Friday
before Sir Peter.  I refer                    particularly to his second paragraph which
reads

                       "The actual investigation of those events has been
                       in the hands of the West Midlands Police.  It continues
                       so to be and it is no secret that their enquiries are
                       not complete, nor as it is understood, are they expected
                       to be until some weeks or months hence. They have a
                       formidable task. However, material in their possession
                       from days in May was being disclosed even only at the
                       end of June. As Counsel for the Inquiry indicated in
                       his opening, it must be obvious to everyone that the
                       investigation is still continuing and all the evidence
                       has not yet been assembled."

I would comment as follows:-

We began our enquiries proper on Tuesday, 25 April 1989 in Sheffield,
Liverpool and elsewhere throughout the Country.  From the outset we were told
that the time available to gather evidence was extremely limited and for that
reason a deliberate decision was made to deploy a considerable number of
police resources. At its height we deployed nearly five hundred police

                                                                                  Cont



    PLEASE REPLY T O T H E OFFICE A T                  Sheffield
officers.  That deployment will reduce to fifty-nine police officers with
effect from Monday, 17 July.  These remaining officers will then concentrate
on the fine detail of many of the issues already raised at the oral hearings.

With regard to the comment on police resources I would like to add, not only
were there significant numbers of officers, but also their hours of duty and
the number of days they worked were not insignificant.  All the police
officers worked twelve hours a day and in the early stages none had days off.
At present they are permitted to have one day off per week and as from Monday
their hours will reduce to ten per day.

These manpower statistics illustrate the tremendous amount of energy which has
been devoted to the Inquiry to gather as much evidence as possible and as
quickly as possible.  This has been achieved and the product of our labours
has been made available to Treasury Solicitors for Counsel to illustrate how
much has been achieved.  This is shown in the following statistics, which are
current as from 12 noon to da y :-

              Names registered in system       -   10,463
              Questionnaires registered        -    7,516
              Actions allocated/undertaken     -    6,137
              Statements registered            -    3,086

These figures must be considered conservative because they refer only to those
so far registered although the bulk of the work has now been entered.  As you
know all the results of our enquiries have been made available to Counsel and
they have chosen from the statements supplied those witnesses who have
something pertinent to say to the Inquiry.  Having read many of the statements
originally supplied, contrasted with the evidence presented at the hearings,
as well as having read many of the transcripts of evidence, I am quite
satisfied that all the issues relevant to the findings at Hillsborough on 15
April have been raised.  To qualify this I would say that these issues have
given a general understanding of what occurred, rather than the specific
detail which will be ultimately required to meet the needs of the Coroner.
Obviously his concern will be how precisely did the ninety-five deceased meet
their deaths and the attendant circumstances.

Dealing now with Mr Woodward's submission.     He says that our "enquiries are
not complete, nor as it is understood, are they expected    to be until some
weeks or months hence".  If he is referring to our enquiries in connection
with Sir Peter Taylor's Inquiry then he is not correct for we have completed
those enquiries and presented our results to Counsel.     That was the limit of
our responsibility as I understand it, as it was never our role to write a
complete report having analysed all the information ourselves with the
assistance of the computer.

Our purpose was restricted to making the enquiries, completing the
questionnaires, in appropriate cases taking statements and making all
that information available to the Inquiry.    That we have done to my
satisfaction and also, I believe, to Mr Collins'.



                                                             Cont.
                                        -   3 -



   When Mr Woodward refers to incomplete enquiries and evidence not yet being
   assembled, then he can only be accurate if he is referring to our other role
   as Coroner's Officers.  In this context it is true that we are continuing
   enquiries, analysing information, and assembling the evidence in the detail
   required to satisfy the needs of the Coroner.  Attached is a letter and some
   notes of what the Coroner requires, albeit he does recognise that there is
   likely to be an overlap with the general findings of the Judicial Inquiry.
   Our continued investigation, therefore, has not concentrated on those issues
   in the specific detail required.  However, I would say that I do not believe
   that our further enquiries are likely to alter in any significant way Sir
   Peter's general understanding of what occurred at Hillsborough.   Rather our
   enquiries will provide more detail on the aspects already raised.   Of course,
   it could be argued that at the eleventh hour something significantly new could
   emerge.  Whilst one could never dismiss that possibility, in my professional
   judgement, that is highly unlikely.

^ ^ 1 do hope this letter is of some assistance to you and Sir Peter Taylor as you
     complete the Interim Report.  If you feel that you would like further
     clarification on how the investigation will now proceed, please do not
     hesitate to contact me.

   Yours sincerely




   J M Jones
   Assistant Chief Constable
   (Hillsborough Inquiry)

   (Dictated over the telephone by Mr J M Jones on 12 July 1989.)
