                                             Our Ref:     FEP/89
                                                          35/48/131




                                              5 January 1990




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY - PART II
TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY ON THE GREEN GUIDE

I am writing to thank you for your co-operation and assistance
during the preparation of the Working Party Report since I am
very conscious of the burdens that the timetable for delivery
imposed on individual members.


I am aware, too, that members had to accept on trust last-minute
redrafting which resulted from individual comment on the
circulated copy.   I hope that the final revised version now
attached is an accurate reflection of individual views.


There are, perhaps, two particular points to note.   Paragraphs 5
and 6 of the Report have been amended to acknowledge the
existence of a body of knowledge within the Sports Council on
design and planning issues.   Sadly, the Technical Working Party
was only made aware of the existence of this work at a very late
stage, but I do not think, in any event, that it invalidates the
argument for a body such as the Advisory Council.    Indeed,
ignorance of its existence perhaps reinforces the Working Party's
case.   The amended version of paragraph 14 of the Report and
Recommendation 4 will, I hope, still be acceptable to all
members.   I know that Professor Maunder discussed the Report with
Lord Justice Taylor over the Christmas period.


The covering letter to Lord Justice Taylor indicated that the
Report was an agreed one.   If, in the light of amendments made,
there are any points with which you are in fundamental
disagreement, please let me know as soon as possible.


Those members to whom I mentioned it, supported the idea of a
further meeting to discuss the detailed supplementary notes which
are to be submitted in due course.    Professor Maunder also
favours such a meeting and I shall therefore be in touch shortly
to make the necessary arrangements.


In the meantime, my best wishes for the New Year.


                                          Yours sincerely




                                          JONATHAN SWEET
                                     Secretary to the Working Party
