  INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                  The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
  STADIUM DISASTER
                                                 50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                 London SW1H 9AT
                                               01-273 2577/3602/2370


M A Sheppard                             Your ref: R&D/EA30/763
Business Development Manager                       (0123)
NNC Limited
Engineering Development Centre
Warrington Road
Risley Warrington                              Date
Cheshire WA3 6BZ
                                               9 February 1990




         fW.
SYSTEM FOR MONITORING CROWD PRESSURES IN AND AROUND SPORTS STADIA

Thank you for your letter of 8 February.        The Hillsborough
stadium disaster office is closing today, so I have passed your
letter and its enclosures on to Peter Bolton, Head of G2 Division
in the Home Office, who has the main responsibility for safety
at sports grounds.

                                            Yc
                                             O U A j,   ^ v w C tv O L ^
                                                                       /

                                                    RHWutu,
                                              R M WHALLEY      ^
                                         Secretary to the Inquiry
             R&D/EA30/763(0123)
O ur Ref:


Your Ref:


             8th February 1990


                                                                         NNC LIMITED
                                                                         ENGINEERING
                                                                         DEVELOPMENT CENTRE
             Mr R Whalley
                                                                         WARRINGTON ROAD
             Hillsborough Enquiry
                                                                         RISLEY WARRINGTON
             50 Queen Anne's Gate
                                                                         CHESHIRE WA3 6BZ
             London SW1 H9AT
                                                                         ENGLAND

             Dear Mr Whalley,


             System for Monitoring Crowd Pressures in and around Sports Stadia

             I have, this morning, spoken to Dr. Chris Nicholson of the Health & Safety
             Executive in respect of our idea which we believe could assist the police in
             their duties regarding crowd safety at football stadia. He advised that I
             should communicate some details of the scheme to you.

             To introduce ourselves, NNC Ltd., a member of the GEC Group of Companies, is
             an engineering project management organisation with a background in nuclear
             power station design and construction. The company has the capability to
             handle engineering projects from initial feasibility studies through to
             construction and commissioning. In particular, as you might expect, we have a
             very large division of staff concerned solely with matters of safety, and
             recognise the importance of providing sound information to plant operators
             which allows them to take decisions armed with real data which can be
             referenced to specific mandatory safety rules.

             We believe that information of the type referred to above could also be
             provided to control room staff at sports stadia in order to relieve them of
             the responsibility of taking decisions based solely on opinionative and visual
             information.

             Information on crowd pressure, whether inside or outside of the ground or in
             tunnels, exit ways or entrances, could be obtained from simple sensing devices
             installed in crash barriers, fences, perimeter walls etc. The information
             would be presented on a TV style monitor in such a way that the responsible
             officer would be aware of developing situations, in particular to the onset of
             undesirable pressures. For example a simple system of colour changes could be
             provided on the screen denoting the fraction of that level which personal
             injury could arise. Thus armed with operating rules which relate directly to
             such simple information, the operator could make early totally objective
             decisions to take remedial action.

             I attach, in the form of diagrams, more information relating to our ideas.
             The technology is very well established; merely the application is new. To
             develop the system to a stage at which it could be readily installed at a
             football ground would still require some simple development work, well within
             the capability of NNC Ltd.
                                                                      /continued.........




            TELEPHONE: 0925 51291 -TELEFAX: 0925 811001 -TELEX: 629177   AmemberoftheOEcaroupofcompantes
                                                                         Registered Office: Booths Hall, Knutstord WA1B6QZ
                                                                         Registered No: 1120437England
We have received favourable reactions from a group of people concerned with
the safety and licensing of football stadia in the North-West, and are
intending to speak with the Football League and the Police in order to sound
out their views on our suggestion.

I enclose a brochure which describes the work at the Engineering Development
Centre which will give you a better appreciation of the breadth of our
capabilities in the research and development areas.

Should you find our proposal to.be of interest, we should be most happy to
make a formal presentation on the subject at your convenience.




Your sincerely,




M A Sheppard
Business Development Manager
Engineering Development Centre
