f




                                                       QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT




    Maria Eagle M P
    House of Commons
    LONDON
    S W 1 A 0A A




              x                                                               i? dec vm


    Thank you for your letter of 18 November, in which you raise two separate issues
    about Hillsborough.

    First, I can confirm that officials are currently obtaining copies of those documents
    which you say are not in the House Library. I will write further once these copies
    have been sent to the Library. I should point out, however, that Lord Justice Stuart-
    Smith did not meet Dr David Slater, and that there is consequently no transcript of a
    meeting between them. Dr Slater has also previously indicated that he does not wish
    his correspondence with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be released, and I am sure you
    will appreciate we must respect his wishes.

    On a related issue, you may recall that in the debate following my oral answer to
    your question on 26 October, I indicated in a reply to Frank Field that the material
    had been or was being sent to the Liverpool Central Library (Official Report, 26
    October 1998, vol 318, col3). This was incorrect, and I am sorry for the
    misunderstanding. Of course, it remains open to individual Members to arrange for
    their constituents to view the material in the House of Commons Library.

    As you will recall, I originally undertook to ensure that as much material as possible
    considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith not already in the public domain would be
    published, and, apart from the few items you have raised which we are seeking to
    locate and some, such as Dr Slater’s correspondence, where the originator has
    specifically refused permission for the material to be published, this has now been
    done.
The second part of your letter concerns the decision of South Yorkshire
Police Authority to fund the defence costs of the former Chief Superintendent
David Duckenfield and former Superintendent Bernard Murray. This decision is
entirely one for South Yorkshire Police Authority, and is not a matter on which it
would be appropriate for me to comment, or intervene.




                                 \/
                                                  /




                                      JACK STRAW
