     tmm a

        Paul Pugh                            cc: Mr Michael
        Head of Operational Policing             Mr O’Brien
         Policy Unit                             Lord Williams
        Room 539                                 Mr Howarth
        Queen Anne’s Gate                        Sir Richard Wilson
        S 273 3141                               HMCIC
         26 June 1997                            Miss Weldon
                                                 Mr Halliday
                                                 Mr Boys Smith
                                                 Mr Granatt
                                                 Mr Middlettfn
                                                 Miss Loudon
                                                 Mr R Evans
                                                 Mr Edmundson
                                                 Ms Walker
                                                 Ms Clifford
                                                 Mr Warner
                                                 Mr Owen



Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH: ORAL STATEMENT, MONDAY 30 JUNE


Here are the draft oral statement and supporting briefing for the Hillsborough
announcement on Monday.

2.    We have taken forward the handling arrangements which you agreed in Peter
Edmundson’s submission of 24 June. When I explained the position to Richard
Wells, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, he said that, while he remained of the
view that there was no new evidence, he fully understood the reasons for
commissioning a further judicial examination. When the announcement is made he
will make clear that South Yorkshire Police will give the fullest possible co-operation
to Lord Justice Stuart Smith. He will reflect over the next few days on what else he
might say publicly, but he may go so far as to welcome the examination as a means
of resolving matters conclusively.

3.    I attach:

       A      Draft oral statement. Lord Justice Stuart Smith has seen and is
              happy with the draft. He asked for only one change from the previous
              draft: in paragraph 20 he did not want to give any commitment at this
              stage to hearing oral representations.




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA.DOC
       B      Chronology of events.


       C      Question and Answer briefing on:

              i.     The new judicial examination and why it is being established.

              ii.    Inquests.

              iii.    Police disciplinary issues.

              iv.    The role of the CPS.

              v.     The role of the Attorney General. £r» f*»»Uw


       D      Background on the issues covered in the Question and Answer
              briefing.


       E      Draft letters for you to send on Monday after the announcement to

                      Relatives who have written in the past.

                      Other interested parties.


              slet us know if you require anything further before the weekend.




                                                     PAUL PUGH




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA.DOC
DRAFT:              26 JUNE 1997



DRAFT ORAL STATEMENT FOR THE HOME SECRETARY



With permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


2.        96 people lost their lives as a result of the Hillsborough disaster which
happened on 15 April 1989. That was more than eight years ago but no one who
saw the news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have forgotten those terrible
events. For those who lost loved members of their family, the pain is ever-present.
Following Hillsborough, members of this House were united in our determination to
do all in our power to prevent anything like that ever happening again.


(i)       Public Inquiry


3.        Madam Speaker, following theHillsborough disaster a number of inquiries
and investigations took place, looking at aspects of the tragedy. Perhaps the most
thorough and wide-ranging was the Public Inquiry led by Lord Taylor. The terms of
reference of that Inquiry encompassed not only inquiring into the events but also
making recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events.


4.        Lord Taylor’s inquiry took oral evidence from over 170 witnesses at public
hearings during May and June 1989 and considered many hours of video evidence
from different sources. In his interim report in August 1989, Lord Taylor found that
the disaster had a number of causes. He did not attribute all the blame to a single
cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made clear that:


           “The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”




f:\oppu\hou\drafts\pp0232pddoc
5.        Lord Taylor made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January
1990 made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which have taken
place since then in safety at football grounds and in the policing of football matches
have been based largely on those recommendations. Football in this country has
been transformed since the Taylor Report. To a large extent that is due to his wide-
reaching and soundly based conclusions.


(ii)      Coroner’s Inquest


6.        The deaths which occurred on 15 April 1989 were the subject of inquests
conducted by the Coroner of the western district of South Yorkshire.


7.        Madam Speaker, as hon Members will know, an inquest is a fact-finding
inquiry, conducted by a Coroner in front of a jury, and aimed at establishing the
answers to four important questions, namely:


           The identity of the deceased


           The place of death


           The time and the date of death and


           How the deceased came by his or her death.


8.        The Coroner’s rules require proceedings and evidence to be directed    solely at
finding answers to those questions.


9.        The jury at the Coroner’s inquest after   examining the evidence, found in
March 1991 that the cause of death of those who died at Hillsborough was
accidental death.




f:\oppu\hou\diafts\pp0232pddoc
(iii)      West Midlands Police Investigation


10.        A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands Police,
supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any
grounds for criminal proceedings and to consider whether any police officer should
be subject to disciplinary proceedings.


11.        That investigation involved the taking of over 5000 statements and the
scrutiny of all the material which had previously been examined by the Taylor
Inquiry. After that investigation the evidence was sent to the Director of Public
Prosecutions, who concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
proceedings.


12.        The Police Complaints Authority decided that the chief superintendent and
superintendent in charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of
duty. In the event, the chief superintendent retired due to ill health in advance of a
ruling by a disciplinary tribunal. A disciplinary hearing cannot proceed when a police
officer retires before the hearing takes place. The Police Complaints Authority later
decided that disciplinary proceedings against the superintendent should be
withdrawn because the retirement of the chief superintendent meant that what, in
effect, was a joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the
absence of the more senior officer.


(iv)       Continued calls for further investigations


13.        Madam Speaker, hon Members will know that some of the families of those
who died were unhappy with the verdict of the inquest.             They later applied for
judicial review of the coroner’s proceedings. During the judicial review proceedings
the conduct of the inquest was subjected to close and detailed examination. In
November 1993 the Divisional Court ruled that none of the matters raised in the
judicial review proceedings justified intervention by the court in the verdict of the
inquest jury.             The court also expressed strong doubts as to whether a further


f:\oppu\hou\diafts\pp0232pddoc
inquest, if ordered, would result in anything further being learned and observed that
the process would be very harrowing.


14.        The events surrounding the disaster have therefore been subject to
exceptionally thorough investigation on several occasions.          But concerns have
remained about whether the full facts have yet emerged. I have met relatives of the
Hillsborough victims whose suffering is exacerbated by their belief that there are
unresolved issues which should be investigated further.


15.        Representations were made to my predecessor and have been made to me,
to the Attorney General and to the Director of Public Prosecutions. A Granada
television programme in December last year dramatised the disaster and raised a
number of issues which, in the view of the programme makers, represented new
evidence.            Since then further material has been submitted on behalf of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group.            Those representations have related in
particular to video evidence of the disaster and medical evidence about the time of
death of the victims.


16.        Madam Speaker, my Department, the office of the Attorney General and the
Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully all the evidence which
has been put forward in recent months.


17.        I have, however, to tell the House that I have not so far identified evidence
which would lead me to conclude that a new public inquiry should be established.
Similarly, the Director of Public Prosecutions takes the review that the material so far
presented to her would not justify fresh criminal investigations.         The Attorney
General also takes the view that, again on the material so far presented to him, any
application to the High Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect
of succeeding.


18.        Nonetheless, I am acutely conscious that the families of some of those who
died at Hillsborough and many others are very concerned that unresolved issues


f:\oppu\hou\drafts\pp0232pAdoc
remain.           I am determined to go as far as I can to ensure that no matter of
significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a final conclusion without a full
and independent examination of the evidence.


19.         I can therefore tell the House today that the Attorney General, the Director of
Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that there should be an independent scrutiny
to ascertain whether there now exists any new evidence relating to the disaster
which was not previously available. We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a
senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that purpose.                      His full terms of
reference are:


           To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
           Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


                       (a)       To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


                       (b)       To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General
                                 for the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
                                 responsibilities; or


                       (c)       To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                                 police disciplinary matters;


           And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
           is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for
           the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
           (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
           which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there
           is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.


I am today placing a copy of these terms of reference in the Library.




f:\oppu\hou\drafts\pp0232pAdoc
20.         We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other
evidence which has been submitted. He will also consider any further material
which interested parties wish to submit.


21.         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s task will be twofold. First to advise me whether
any evidence not previously available is of such significance as to justify a further full
public inquiry. His advice to me will be available to the House and the public.
Secondly, he will identify for the Attorney General and the Director of Public
Prosecutions and the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police any evidence which
might be relevant to their decisions which has not previously been considered.


22.         I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively that no
material evidence about the causes of the Hillsborough disaster has been
overlooked and to take action if it has.         For the families of those who died at
Hillsborough the grief will never end. I hope that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s work
will help to allay some of their grief by removing any remaining doubts about the
circumstances in which their loved ones died so tragically.




f:\oppu\hou\diafts\pp0232pddoc
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: CHRONOLOGY


15 April 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough resulting in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans

17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor appointed to carry out a public inquiry

24 April 1989: West Midlands Police Investigation began

I August 1989: Interim Report} Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
January 1990: Final Report }

April - May 1990: Coroner’s Inquest opens - min-inquests to identify each of the
deceased and when and where they died - adjourned on 4 May 1990 so as not to risk
prejudicing police inquiries

15 May - 29 June 1989: oral evidence presented to the Taylor Inquiry by 174
witnesses at a public hearing

15 August 1990: PCA confirm that the investigation carried out (under their
supervision) by West Midlands Police is satisfactory. Copy of report subsequently
passed to DPP

September 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
proceedings

November 1990 - March 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence relating
to the incident as a whole was heard - verdict of “accidental death” reached

II July 1991: PCA directed that charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief
Supt. Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: Chief Supt Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no
longer subject to the Police Discipline Code

13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been
dropped because the joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be heard in the
absence of the more senior officer

November 1993: Application refused for Judicial Review of the Coroner’s
proceedings

5 December 1996: Granada Television Drama

17 December 1996: House of Commons Adjournment Debate - Michael Howard
promised to consider any “new” evidence

7 March 1997: Dossier of evidence from Families presented to the Home Office
                       HILLSBOROUGH Q & A BRIEFING


The independent scrutiny

Did the Taylor inquiry get it wrong?

I don’t believe so. LJ Taylor carried out a full and through inquiry which identified
the causes of the disaster at Hillsborough and made important recommendations to
prevent such a tragedy happening again.


Why have you ordered this independent scrutiny if you are not prepared to
order a new inquiry?

As I explained in my statement, we need to establish conclusively that no material
evidence has been overlooked in establishing the causes of the Hillsborough disaster.
This is what LJ Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny will do.


What are your reasons for not ordering a public inquiry?

We have examined closely the material submitted to us but we have been unable to
identify any significant new evidence which was not available to LJ Taylor’s original
inquiry.


What about the new evidence uncovered by the Granada
programme/Hillsborough Family Support Group?

LJ Stuart-Smith will be examining the material submitted to determine whether it
constitutes new and significant evidence.


Why have you selected LJ Stuart-Smith?

LJ Stuart-Smith is a senior and respected figure from the Court of Appeal whose
experience will be invaluable in assessing the evidence presented.


When will the LJ Stuart-Smith begin work?

I expect LJ Stuart-Smith to begin work in September when he has fulfilled his current
commitments. This will allow those who wish to make representations time to prepare
them.
How long will the scrutiny last?

I hope LJ Stuart-Smith will report by the end of the year.


What will the scrutiny be examining?

LJ Stuart-Smith will look at all the written evidence and other material which has
been submitted to us. He will also be able to consider further material which
interested parties wish to submit.


Will the scrutiny take evidence in person?

That will be for LJ Stuart-Smith to decide.


Will former Ch Supt Duckenfield or any other officers be required to give
evidence?

This is not an investigative body. No-one will be required to give evidence.


Further action

What action will you take if the review finds that there is new and significant
evidence?

If LJ Stuart-Smith finds that there is new and significant evidence not available to LJ
Taylor’s inquiry which brings the findings of the original inquiry into question, I shall
order a new public inquiry. The Attorney-General and the Director of Public
Prosecutions will consider the relevance of that evidence to their statutory
responsibilities.


Could Duckenfield or any other police officers face prosecution?

That will be a decision for the Director of Public Prosecutions in the light of LJ
Stuart-Smith’s findings.
Disciplinary action

Why was no disciplinary action taken against two senior officers, as
recommended by the PCA?

Charges of neglect of duty were preferred, on the direction of the PCA, against two
officers [Ch. Supt. Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray] in respect of their
handling of police operations at Hillsborough.

The senior of the two officers retired from the force on medical grounds on 10
November 1991 with the consequence that he was no longer subject to police
discipline.

In January 1992, the PCA agreed to an application from the force to withdraw the
charge against the other officer because the case against him was dependent on their
being jointly neglectful.


Do you think it is fair that an officer can avoid discipline by obtaining medical
retirement?

Home Office guidance to Chief Constables is clear that every effort should be made to
determine the disciplinary charges before medical retirement.

If discipline action is to be taken, medical retirement may be deferred until it has been
concluded. However, if an individual is so ill, and likely to remain so, that he is
unable to attend a discipline hearing, the Chief Constable may conclude that there is
little choice but to abandon the proceedings. This is a decision for the force
concerned.


Will any officers be disciplined now?

That is a matter for the Chief Constable in the light of the evidence found. Action can
only be taken against officers still serving in the force.
The inquest

Do you believe a fresh inquest should be held

That is a matter for the Attorney General. As I have explained, the Attorney General
takes the view that, on the material so far presented, any application to the High Court
for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding.


What about the recent medical evidence that victims were alive after 3.15?

Whether it was appropriate to regard 3.15 as the point at which all victims were likely
to have died was an issue thoroughly examined during the judicial review of the
inquest. The Divisional Court was satisfied that there were insufficient grounds to
reopen the inquest.


Was it right for the coroner to select witnesses, with the help of the police, when
the police were so closely involved with the disaster?

A coroner is the independent investigator into the circumstances of a death. An
inquest is his inquiry and it is for him to decide what evidence to admit and which
witnesses to call. He must discharge his responsibilities judicially and at no time show
bias towards any of those involved with the death.


Inquests: general

What are the procedures for coroners’ inquests?

An inquest is a judicial inquiry conducted by a coroner in order to establish the
answers to a limited range of questions surrounding a death which has been reported
to him. It is normally held in public according to procedures set down in the Coroners
Act 1988 and the Coroners Rules 1984.


What is the role of the jury?

The role of the jury at an inquest is to determine the verdict. In most cases, a jury is
not required, but in certain circumstances, such as a death in custody, a jury is
mandatory. A coroner may decide to convene a jury in other cases if he considers it
appropriate to do so.
Inquests: verdicts

Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

It is not the function of a coroner’s inquest to determine questions of blame. An
accidental death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blame for it, and the
inquest verdict does not deprive any person of any civil remedy which otherwise
might be available.


Why do inquests not return more verdicts of unlawful killing?

The verdict of unlawful killing is reserved for cases of homicide (except where the
killing was justified). To return such a verdict, the court must be satisfied to the
criminal standard of proof.

The normal standard of proof in the coroner’s court is on the balance of probabilities.

There were 169 verdicts of unlawful killing returned in 1996 out of a total of nearly
20,000 inquests.[19,855 inquests]


What about lack of care?

Lack of care in the coroner’s court has nothing to do with civil negligence and does
not indicate a breach of duty. To return such a verdict there must be a clear casual
connection between a failure to provide physical care and the death.


Inquests and disasters

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

On the whole the existing arrangements work well. However, where a public inquiry
has been established by the Government, there can be an overlap between the inquest
and the inquiry. In these circumstances, the Report of the Working Party on Disasters
and Inquests, which was published earlier this year, recommended that the inquest
should normally be adjourned pending the conclusion of the inquiry, and should not
normally be resumed. This would relieve relatives from the need to give evidence
twice over.


What action is being taken to implement these recommendations?

The main change proposed is to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest
after the inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect of a suitable
legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends
to pursue the matter when such an opportunity arises.
It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it
appropriate to do so.


What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the
time of the Hillsborough disaster?

Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been no need to
resume the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional
reason for doing so.

The families of those who died would have been spared some additional distress.
QUESTION AND ANSWER BRIEFING FOR HOME OFFICE

LINE TO TAKE:

The CPS considers that the material so far presented to it would not justify fresh criminal
investigation. However the CPS will reconsider the position if the scrutiny identifies any
evidence that might be relevant which has not previously been considered.

Question
Will the independent scrutiny be able to advise the CPS to commence criminal proceedings?

Answer
No, decisions on criminal proceedings are matters for the CPS. The scrutiny will draw to
the attention of the CPS any evidence not previously considered which may be relevant to
their duties.

Question
What will the CPS do if the scrutiny identifies relevant material?

Answer
That is a matter for the CPS, and it would be wrong to speculate at this stage.

Question
Will you tell the CPS to prosecute?

Answer
No. Decisions on prosecutions are entirely for the prosecuting authorities. It would be quite
improper for the Home Secretary to try to influence prosecution decisions in individual cases.

Question
If the scrutiny finds no fresh evidence, but concludes that material so far submitted justifies
criminal proceedings or further enquiry what will the CPS do?

Answer
The CPS will of course carefully consider any views expressed by the independent scrutiny,
and take them into account before reaching a final decision.

Question
Is the CPS going to make a separate announcement of its conclusions?

Answer
I am aware that all those persons who have recently written to the Director of Public
Prosecutions or the CPS are being sent letters today by the Crown Prosecution Service
explaining more fully their conclusions at this stage and the assistance they will be providing
to the independent scrutiny.



Louise\Hills
                   4 4 u   x   i i.   .   i   -»-»•>* *




Question
Why has the CPS waited until now to announce its preliminary conclusions?

Answer
It would have been inappropriate to announce the view of the CPS while the Home Secretary
was considering requests for a further public enquiry. To do so might have given the
impression that no further action was contemplated.




Louise\Hills


               O
BACKGROUND

The Tavlor Inquiry

• The terms of reference for the Inquiry were:

   To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April
   1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at
   sports events.

• 174 witnesses gave oral evidence to the Inquiry.

• 71 hours of film was provided by the police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
  and the BBC.

   Interim Report

• The interim report, published in August 1989, was concerned with the events at the
  stadium on the day of the disaster.

• The report addressed all aspects of the disaster. This included the pre-match
  arrangements, such as access from Leppings Lane into the ground, Sheffield
  Wednesday’s arrangements and the police arrangements and communications. It
  also considered the build-up of supporters at the turnstiles and the monitoring of
  the terraces.

• Events during and after the disaster were also examined, including rescue attempts,
  events in the police control room, information given to those in the ground, for
  example tannoy announcements, and the provision and access for the emergency
  services.

• A number of causes of the disaster were identified:

  - The failure to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.
  - There were no maximum safe capacities for the pens.
  - There was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.
  - The protection afforded by the layout of barriers in the pens was inadequate.
  - Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
  - An unruly, drunken minority aggravated the problem.
  - Sheffield Wednesday’s signs and ticketing were inadequate and confused.

• On balance, the inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main
  reason for the disaster was the failure of police control.

• The report was critical of the actions of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
  statements attributed to him in the immediate aftermath of the disaster.
• In the view of South Yorkshire Police, all of the ten “unresolved questions” raised
  in the Granada programme were addressed at the time of the inquiry, with specific
  recommendations being made in respect of eight of them.

• In his interim report, Lord Justice Taylor made 43 recommendations which he
  considered to be the minimum required to ensure existing football grounds could
  be safely used in the short term. A large number of those recommendations were to
  be carried out with immediate effect.

   Final Report

• The final report of the Taylor inquiry was published in January 1990. It
  concentrated on the lessons to be learnt from Hillsborough, proposed a range of
  measures to improve safety at sports grounds.

• The final report contained 76 recommendations, these included the establishment
  of all seated stadia by the 1999/2000 season, which has been achieved in respect of
  the top divisions in the country. Another recommendation was the removal of
  spikes and overhanging or inward-turning sections on the perimeter fences.

• Where terraces remain, the report recommended that the maximum number of
  spectators to be admitted to each pen should be specified on the ground’s Safety
  Certificate. There was a further recommendation that all Safety Certificates should
  be reviewed.

• The report recommended a written statement of intent be agreed between the club
  and the police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control,
  with particular reference to the filling of each pen.

• There were a number of recommendations relating specifically to the role of the
  police and the responsibilities of senior officers.

• The co-ordination of the emergency services and the provision of first aid, medical
  facilities and ambulances was also addressed in the recommendations of the final
  report.

• The Football (Offences) Act 1991 created new offences recommended by Lord
  Justice Taylor to regulate behaviour at football matches; throwing any object at or
  towards the pitch or spectator areas; taking part in indecent or racist chanting; and
  going on to the pitch without lawful authority or excuse.


The 10 Unresolved Question

The press release accompanying the Granada drama documentary “Hillsborough” last
December identified what it claimed were ten unresolved questions. These were:
1.     Why was Ch. Supt. Duckenfield put in charge of a major semi-final only 21
days before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced in policing matches?

2.     Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build
up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the
previous year?

3.     Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers thought it
should have been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the
Liverpool fans safely into the ground before the 3pm kick-off?

4.     Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when
eye witnesses, including football commentator John Motson, were aware of the
problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?

5.       Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became
full, the procedure adopted at the previous year’s Semi-Final?

6.       Why did Ch. Supt. Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA by telling him
that fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew that he had given the order
for it to be opened?

7.      Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10
foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the
pitch too small to be effective in an emergency.

8.     Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as
to what was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the
ground to help - until 3.30pm?

9.     Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the
pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained medical
help?

10.    Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?

The Chief Constable has responded to each of these questions and pointed to the
recommendations which Taylor made in respect of each one. We are satisfied that
none of the evidence raised is new and that all ten questions were addressed at the
time of the Taylor inquiry. In eight cases Taylor not only considered the questions but
made specific recommendations as a result.

The video evidence

Granada suggested that South Yorkshire Police held tapes which represented new
evidence not seen by the Taylor inquiry. The families have alleged that video material
was deliberately withheld from the inquiry and inquest because it would undermine
police testimony that the camera (No. 5) showing the overcrowded pens was not
working properly. Roger Houldsworth, the club’s technician, has provided an affidavit
indicating that the camera was working properly.

The full set of tapes cover many hours leading up to, during and after the disaster. For
the purposes of the inquiry and inquest, West Midlands Police compiled a tape of
selected highlights from the CCTV and also from the television coverage of the
disaster. It is clear, though, that the full video evidence, including a detailed transcript
of its contents, was available to the inquiry.

We have viewed the South Yorkshire Police tapes and have confirmed that for the
most part they are of no consequence, showing general views of the stadium and
surroundings. In the final half hour leading up to the disaster, they are almost entirely
taken up with the turmoil outside the stadium.

The Tapes do include some material from camera 5 and we found it difficult to
conclude that this camera was less clear than the other cameras. The extent to which it
was claimed that the camera was not working properly, though, is a matter of
interpretation. The families believe officers misled the inquiry and inquest, but our
reading of the transcripts suggests that it was claimed the camera was not working
very well. This is still the police view. We do not consider this divergence of opinion
to be significant.

Two video tapes were stolen from the club control room on the night of the disaster,
the theft was reported and an inconclusive investigation was carried out by West
Midlands Police. The tapes did not contain any significant material but it has been
alleged that they were stolen by the police as part of a cover up.

Medical evidence/inquest verdict


Dr Ed Walker, who reported to hospital following the disaster, claimed in a recent
article that he tended Philip Hammond whom he says was alive after 3.15pm - the cut
off time established by the coroner at the inquest.

Dr Walker gave a statement at the time of the disaster. This does not name Philip
Hammond and is arguably ambiguous because it is not clear whether there was any
heart beat when the boy he treated arrived in casualty. It did not appear to contradict
the findings of the Home Office pathologist that the victims were effectively dead by
3.15pm and Dr Walker was not called to give evidence to the inquest because the
consultant in charge, Dr James Wardrobe, presented a composite picture.

Under the Coroner’s Act 1988 the Attorney-General must give his consent to an
application to the courts for a fresh inquest. At the 1993 judicial review of the
coroner’s inquest, Lord Justice McGowan accepted that one of the victims may have
been alive after 3.15 but concluded that there was 'no good reason for ordering a new
inquest or merely quashing the existing verdict’.
M ice discipline: medical retirement

The discipline regulations say that if “good reason” is given for an accused officer
being unable to appear before his Chief Constable on a discipline charge, the hearing
shall be postponed or adjourned. Interpretation of the law is a matter for the courts,
but it seems reasonable to conclude that “good reason” would include severe illness. If
a doctor certifies that an accused officer has no prospect of sufficient recovery in the
foreseeable future (e.g., is suffering a terminal illness, or such a severe psychiatric
condition that the stress of discipline could well lead to suicide), there is little option
but to discontinue the discipline proceedings and allow a medical retirement.

It should be remembered that discipline proceedings are stressful in themselves and
may exacerbate a pre-existing medical condition. It would not be fair to assume that
all officers who avoid discipline proceedings have exaggerated their symptoms to a
doctor for the necessary medical report.

We are sure that some forces are more robust than others in deferring medical
retirement until outstanding disciplinary proceedings have been completed. After all,
even if an accused officer is unable to carry out normal duties, it does not follow that
he cannot attend a discipline hearing. However, if there is evidence of an accused
being so ill that he cannot even attend a hearing, the force’s hands are tied and the
proceedings will be dropped.

The future of police discipline

A range of police personnel matters are live issues at the moment and proposals have
been submitted by PPTU. Proposed new procedures for discipline have been under
review for some time and agreement reached with the staff associations in
considerable detail, though there is contention about the standard of proof and “fast-
track” dismissal which need to be resolved.

The proposed new regulations should improve the ability of chief constables to deal
with discipline proceedings against officers who may qualify for medical retirement,
since they will provide for the exercise of discretion to proceed in an officer’s
absence. The draft new regulation, which has been seen and accepted by the police
staff associations, says that, in the unavoidable absence of the accused officer at the
hearing, the hearing may be adjourned (the present regulations say shall). It remains to
be seen whether this makes an effective difference to present practice.
DRAFT LETTER TO RELATIVES FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE


As you know, I continue to be deeply moved by the Hillsborough stadium disaster. I
am sure that concerns felt by those most closely affected and others that a number
of issues relating to the disaster remain unresolved can only make the process of
dealing with your grief all the more difficult.


I have had the opportunity to consider fully the many representations which have
been made calling for a new public inquiry, and the matters raised by the Granada
television programme broadcast last December. I have decided, in all the
circumstances, that there should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no
matter of significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken. That is why I
have announced in the House today that there will be an independent scrutiny by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal. I enclose for
your information a copy of my statement to the House, which includes Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference. You will see that I have undertaken to make
public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith gives me.


It is my earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to the
uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA.DOC
DRAFT LETTEI^ TO INTERESTED PARTIES FOR HOME SECRETARY’S
SIGNATURE



As you know, I have been considering whether there is a case for a further public
inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster in the light of the many representations which
have been received. Concerns that a number of issues relating to the disaster
remain unresolved received renewed attention following the Granada television
documentary drama “Hillsborough” last December.

I have had the opportunity to consider fully the material which has been put forward,
calling for a new public inquiry. I have decided, in all the circumstances, that there
should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no matter of significance is
overlooked before a final decision is taken. I have, therefore, announced in the
House today that there will be an independent scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal. I enclose for your information a copy of
my statement to the House, which includes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of
reference. You will see that I have undertaken to make public the advice which Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith gives me.


It is my earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to the
uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA.DOC
Interested parties

Councillor F Doran, The Town Hall, Liverpool, L2 3SW (former Lord Mayor)
Councillor Margaret Clarke, The Lord Mayor of Liverpool, The Town Hall, Liverpool
L2 3SW
Rodney Bickerstaffe Esq, General Secretary, UNISON, 1 Mabledon Place, London,
WC1H9AJ
Councillor G Howard, The Mayor of Knowsley, Municipal Buildings, Archway Road,
Huyton, Knowsley, Merseyside L36 9YU
(Mrs C A Hudson), Chief Executive, St Helens Metropolitan Council, Town Hall,
Corporation Street, St Helens, Merseyside WA10 1HP
R H G Kelly Esq, Chief Executive, The Football Association Limited, 16 Lancaster
Gate, London W2 3LW
David Moores Esq, Chairman, Liverpool Football Club, Anfield Road, Liverpool L4
OTH
The Right Reverend David Sheppard, The Bishop of Liverpool, Church House, 1
Hanover Street, Liverpool L1 3DW
Dr Ed Walker, \




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA.DOC
