,
}
:                 South Yorkshire
v-
                  POLICE                                                  M i l Hedges QPM LLB
                  JUSTICE          with   COURAGE                                  Chief Constable


     ACC/I D/VB
                                                                                  2. S~---
     29 ^September 1999                                                                   y^         /(—   .

     The Rt Hon Jack'S|raw MP
     Secretary of State \                                                                ^             c/.(
     Home Office          \
     50 Queen Anne’9^0ate\r _.^                                     SA*
     London             '   \
     SW1H9AT                  \                                              ..




     Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, 1^A ]M i1989 - Financial Im plications

     On 10 September 1999, the Chair of th ^ South Yorkshire Police Authority, wrote to you
     on the above subject. I write to add m$\support to those issues which he raised with
     you.                                  \ \

     The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster continues tq have a significant financial impact
     upon this Force more than 10 years after "Ifie '^vent. South Yorkshire Police, in
     common with many public services, face difficult financial decisions but we have
     managed to be one of the.few police forces tba^continues to maintain recruitment of
     police officers. This, will become increasingly difficult to maintain in view of. all the
     financial pressures we face.

     At the time of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, South Yorkshire Police had a public
     liability insurance with a limit of £8.5 million. At the tirtw ih a t was regarded as more
     than adequate. With the wisdom of hindsight we can setet that it was inadequate, and
     as a result of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, a num b^rV public bodies significantly
     increased their public liability insurance. Our insurance lim it.was reached within a few
     —         “ u" -                              -— - - - -                -      *—

     February 1998 £13.5 million worth of compensation had beenXpjwd. The number of
     remaining claims is small but their potential cost to the Force insignificant It has not
     been possible to settle these claims because the medical progn^sds for the victims are
     uncertain. These people have suffered terrible injuries whichxi% essitate a lot of
     professional help and in some cases permanent attendance of carirrgSst^ff. With the
     advance of medical knowledge, they may live longer than would have bfen the case'in
     the past. Therefore, the cost of treating and caring for them for the rest of their lives is
     greater and this increases the cost of settling their claims.               \

                Police Headquarters
                Snig Hill
                Sheffield S3 8LY
                Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3243
                               0114 2523400     Fax: 0114 2523481
29 September 1999

The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Secretary of State



In recent weeks I have received claims for damages from three people who have
previously made no claim. I do not know whether others will be made but they are
represented by the same firm of solicitors and are receiving legal aid. In each case we
are asking that the claimant explain why it has taken 10 years for the claim to be made
as, at first sight, it would appear that they are outside statutory limitations. These new
claims could add another half a million pounds to the cost of the disaster if they
succeed.

The costs of settling civil claims arising out of this ten years old disaster are an
exceptional case and represent a significant burden upon the Force finances. It is for
this reason that I seek your support by way of special grant to enable me to meet these
legal obligations without significant impact upon my ability to police the community of
South Yorkshire.

On the day of the disaster over 1,000 police officers were on duty. A handful made
claims for damages against the Force, alleging that they had been traumatised and that
the Force had negligently caused that situation. My predecessor was given legal
advice that the first group of claimants would succeed in their action and he was
advised to settle out of court which he did. The claims of the next group of officers
were resisted and I contested the case all the way to the House of Lords, which ruled
against the officers. I mention this because it is sometimes falsely alleged that
spectators who suffered injury received no compensation whilst police officers have
been compensated handsomely.

Another burden on the Force’s finances, arising from the Hillsborough Stadium
Disaster, has arisen in the last 15 months. This has been caused by the private
prosecution brought by the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) against retired
Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield and retired Superintendent Bernard Murray.
The evidence against Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield was considered by the Director of
Public Prosecutions in 1990 and he ruled that they should not be prosecuted. Lord
Justice Stuart Smith’s scrutiny report found no fault in that decision. In June 1998, the
HFSG’s solicitor, Ms Ann Adlington, began prosecutions against these two long retired
officers for alleged offences of manslaughter and other charges arising out of the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray asked the Director of
Public Prosecutions (DPP) to protect them, against what they believe to be a malicious
prosecution, by taking over that prosecution and ending it. The DPP declined to
intervene.

Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield asked the Police Authority to fund their legal costs in
defending themselves. I supported that application because I believe it important for
the operational effectiveness of the service. Officers should know that, when they
perform their difficult and sometimes dangerous duties on behalf of the public and
make immediate decisions in good faith which can have a crucial impact upon people’s
liberty and lives, they will be able to look to their ‘employer’ for financial support if they
face legal challenge. This particular case is all the more acute because of:
3

29 September 1999

The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Secretary of State



(a) the 10 year gap between the event and the prosecution,
(b) the private nature of the prosecution,
(c) the expectation that no prosecution would be brought (bearing in mind previous
    decisions of other tribunals).

Initially the Police Authority resolved to support the two retired officers but later
received legal advice that questioned whether they had the power to do so. I decided
to seek clarification from the High Court which ruled that the Police Authority does
have such power. That legal action accrued bills for the Police Authority and I.

Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield sought a judicial review of the Director of Public
Prosecutions’ decision not to intervene and were supported financially by the Police
Authority in that action. The High Court upheld the DPP’s decision but required him to
look afresh at one of the charges against Mr Duckenfield (an alleged offence of
attempting to pervert the course of justice). The DPP looked at this again and quashed
that charge only.

The Leeds Stipendary Magistrates committed Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray to Crown
Court for trial on the remaining charges. On 2 September 1999, Mr Duckenfield and Mr
Murray appeared before His Honour Judge Hooper to find that the private prosecutor
has re-instated the charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice. They have
entered not guilty pleas.

The South Yorkshire Police Authority agreed to pay the former officers’ legal costs up
to and including the committal. Now that the officers have been committed for trial they
will be applying to the Authority to fund their legal costs to defend themselves at the
Crown Court. The trial is likely to last up to seven weeks and could involve legal costs
of another one million pounds. The authority will decide soon whether to fund the
officers.

The exceptional nature of the impact of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of
15 April 1989 continues to affect the Force’s finances in ways that could not have been
foreseen and impose upon the Force a financial burden which reduces my ability to
provide the people of South Yorkshire with the policing service that I would like and that
they deserve.

I support the request by the Chair of the Police Authority for a meeting to discuss an
application for financial support towards Hillsborough Stadium Disaster related costs.

Yours sincerely




M 11 Hedges
Chief Constable
