D r . E d W alker


                                                                         B atley,
W e s t Y o r k s h ir e   W F17
H ome



11 November 1997

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 1106,
 >0, Queen Anne’s Gate,
LONDON SW1H9AT.



Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,

I have received from Mr. Bone a copy of the transcript o f our meeting on the 22nd of October,
for which I am grateful. At that time you suggested that if upon reading the transcript I felt there
were any further points I should like to make, I could do so in writing. I should like to take up
that offer by outlining the following.
The most striking aspect as far as I am concerned is how differently to other medical witnesses
I appear to have been treated. On page 6, line 7 of the transcript (of the meeting on 22nd
October) you say "..it is unfortunate that you weren’t given the credit..." to which I respond "It
is more than that." I should like to magnify this reply.
Every other medical witness I have come across was interviewed, often on more than one
occasion, by West Midlands police, and these interviews involved production o f photographs of
the deceased for identification purposes.
It is a matter of some distress for both myself and some families that I am still even now unable
to identify positively any o f the victims I worked on. Had I been shown photographs like others,
I would not have had to answer a string o f questions from you about the identity of victims in the
negative (page 9 line 17, page 11 line 22, page 11 line 32, page 12 line 24, page 13 line 34, page
 14 line 16.) I would also have been able to discuss victims' terminal treatment with their family
members. This would at least have been a source of some comfort to them. As it is, thanks to the
lack o f attention afforded me by the investigating force, I shall never be completely satisfied about
the identity o f the victims I dealt with.
You also raised the point (page 6 line 29) that I have not in fact given evidence at any other
inquests, and that the consultants concerned are usually called upon to appear in person, as
happened at the Hillsborough inquests. I agree that it would not be unusual not to call a junior
member of medical staff to appear personally, but I find it very odd indeed that even my written
evidence was not made available to the inquests.
Page 2


Once again I am brought back to the references to me as "unidentified." My feelings about this
are not merely prompted by pique at not receiving recognition - it is more accurately described
as incomprehension. I cannot state strongly enough that I was not "unidentified" at any stage. If
anything, I was one of the members o f medical staff most easy to identify.
It is o f course correct that I wrote out a statement on a West Midlands police statement form,
which as you say (page 3 line 17) presumably found its way to someone in authority. After this,
however, the statement seems to have disappeared until early 1997.1 also have to say that I was
surprised that you did not feel the addition of the signature o f a West Midlands officer (Julie
APPLETON) was significant (page 4 line 29) She has added her name to every page o f the
statement in a way as to suggest that she was a witness to the statement, which she was not. This
is surely at the least irregular. The statement was just as valid as evidence without the addition
o f her signature. The only reason I can see that she would have done this is to deliberately mislead
in some way.
I should also like to mention that the copy o f my police statement that I saw earlier this year had
 >bviously been typed up by South Yorkshire police recently, and prepared on a word processor.
All other copy statements I have seen are on West Midlands paper and typed on machines
contemporary with the time. This leads me to believe that my handwritten statement was never
incorporated into the evidence at the time.
For all the reasons above, it is transparent that I was not followed up in the same way as every
other medical witness. The question "why" arises. It may o f course simply have been oversight,
but given the inordinate lengths to which the authorities went to track down and interview all
other witnesses, I find this explanation unlikely.
I am forced to the conclusion that my evidence was deliberately overlooked, and possibly
suppressed. Again one must ask "why", as there is nothing particularly unique about my evidence.
After all I have heard I believe that I was simply an inconvenience. Producing my evidence at the
inquests would have led to awkward questions about how someone like me who was not
employed at the hospital came to be there before the first victim arrived. It may also have meant
that criticisms made in my hospital report (particularly concerning the delay in activation of the
major accident plan) would have been made public. I am unable to come realistically to any other
conclusion.
My final point concerns page 22 of the transcript, from line 15 onwards. This is discussion about
the timing of death, and what was being done in terms o f ‘first-aid.’ On line 8 o f page 23, you
make the point that people on the pitch were trying “to get the heart going again” .. “By manual
massage.”, and I agree to this. I should have stressed more strongly that what the victims needed
was expert intervention, with proper equipment and above all oxygen. Not attempted cardiac
massage by a fellow fan; not first-aid by a St. Johns ambulance person (however well-meaning);
and not even help from a fully-trained, but ill-equipped doctor. What would have saved lives was
help from the expertly trained and fully-equipped paramedical personnel, who were sitting outside
the gates in their ambulances.
I am aware that under the terms of reference of the Scrutiny what I am saying may be of doubtful
significance. However, if it is accepted that my evidence was deliberately suppressed (and as I say
I am unable to reach any other reasonable conclusion), and if the jury had been aware that the
evidence of someone like myselfhad been treatecLin this way, it may surely have had some bearing
on their deliberations. For this reason I believe my evidence now can indeed be said to be relevant
to the processes o f the Scrutiny.
    Page 3




    Finally there are one or two typographical errors that I should like to correct for completeness’
    sake.
    Page 8 line 35
            For “crack(?) thyroidotomy” read “cricothyroidotomy”
    Page 21 line 26:
            For “growing” read “groin”
             For “act(?)” read “carotid”




    Youi




    D r. E d W alker




f
