MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512


Date:      14 October 1997

To:     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith



This note discusses a number of letters which we have had over the last few days.

2.    ---At A, .we have a letter from Philip Jones, whom we saw last week, enclosing an article
from the Guardian about compensation. I have acknowledged this briefly as shown.

3.     ; ;At B, there is a fax from Mr and Mrs Rogers, whose son Henry died at Hillsborough.
The story is particularly sad since their other son Adam, who was also at the match, himself
died a little while later. I have looked at the transcript of the mini-inquest on Henry to
ensure that Adam’s death was not associated with his having been at the match. I have
acknowledged as shown.


Superintendent Marshall

4.     At C we have a letter from the solicitor who represented Superintendent Marshall
(who was outside the gates and requested they be opened). He gives a robust presentation of
Mr Marshall’s position (no doubt Mrs McBrien, whom we saw last week, would not agree
with much of what he says) though he does I think rather overstate the position as far as the
possibility of blocking off the tunnel is concerned. Again I have acknowledged.


Dr Popper

5.      At D, we have letters from Dr Popper and from the Coroners’ Society of England and
Wales' (You have already seen the Popper letter). Popper asks if we have any objection to
his discussing the inquests with Ann Adlington and her colleagues. The Society describe the
difficulties which Coroners face in high-profile and controversial cases such as Hillsborough
(I wonder whether Alun Jones QC might not be the target at paragraph 10 of their letter) and
offer their assistance.

6.     I attach drafts of the replies I propose to Dr Popper and the Society - are you S m
content with these? The letter to Dr Popper sets out the arrangements for his possible
discussion with you and also alerts him to the Society’s involvement.                  . r

G:\H!LLSB OR\S-S\020. DOCG:\HILLSBOR\S-S\020. DOC                                   £t<Vv\
Mortuary video


7.      At E, I attach the letter we were handed at our meeting last week by Leo Fallon (son-
in-law of Mrs Sefiton, the mother of victim Andrew Sefton). You will remember that this
asks for (or demands) a copy of the police video of the scenes at the temporary mortuary in            i*
the Hillsborough gymnasium.                                                               /        f
8.      I attach a draft reply to Mr Fallon which explains that this is a matter for the police,
not us, and that there are good reasons why they might not want to allow unrestricted access^
to the video. It says that (as I believe is the case) they have allowed people to see it in the
past, but under very strict conditions at police premises. I would propose to check this letter
over with the police before sending it to Mr Fallon. Are you content with that, please?


Letters from the police

9.       We have five letters from South Yorkshire police, plus a rundown of their research so
far into the ‘amended statements’ issue. I attach my suggested reply to all of this. Are you
content with it, please?                          <LU40

10.     The five letters are

        30 September, asking for confirmation that we will let the Coroner have his inquest
        transcripts back;

        30 September (recorded delivery), with composite maps of the Leppings Lane
        terraces, showing the locations of the victims when (a) last seen alive and (b) found
        dead;

        8 October , listing tasks the police are carrying out for us. They ask us to confirm
        these in writing and to say when we will visit them to check on the amended
        statements. The letter also says that the police do not have full information on the
        compensation issue, about which we or they need to consult their solicitors. I suggest
        we ask them do this themselves.

        9 October, setting out their conclusions about possible offences involved in Granada
        TV approaching the Hillsborough juror j                They suggest that no offence
        has been committed and that not much can be done. This seems sensible, and I don't
        propose to take the matter further unless you wish to me to do so.

        10 October setting out South Yorkshire’s policy on disclosure. This is the ‘policy
        statement’ which we asked them for when we visited them. It all seems pretty
        complicated, perhaps needlessly complicated, and there do not seem to be any clear
        principles involved. But as I read it the policy, since a recent meeting with the
        Coroner Mr Dorries, is as follows



G:\HiLLSBOR\S-S\02Q. DOCG:\HILLSBOR\S-S\Q20. DOC
        A -     Body files and other inquest material

        they release - to ‘properly interested people’ - everything except the summary, the
        sudden death report, and the addresses of people who made statements

        B -     Non-inquest material

        if a person asks for his own statement - they release

        if a person asks for someone else’s statement - they release if the person who made
        the statement agrees

        if a person asks for his ticket back, they give it to him (there can’t be many of these
        after eight years)

        if a person asks for a photograph or video still they will release it, except that

                they don’t release mortuary or post-mortem pictures

                they don’t release pictures of the dead except to family and
                legal representatives

                they only release material which belongs to the police

        if a ‘properly interested’ person asks for a post-mortem report, they release it
        (presumably they would refuse requests from the improperly interested)

        if a person asks for other material then

                they release it if it was submitted to the Taylor Inquiry or belongs to South
                Yorkshire police (i.e. it is ‘in the public domain’)

                if neither of these things applies, they seek the advice of the owner of the
                document, and act on it.

11.     The ‘audit trail’ documentation about the changes to statements apparently tells only
half the story - since he put this together, I understand, Superintendent Hepworth has found
more, which he will send to us.




C F BONE




G;\HILLSBOR\S-S\O2O,DOCG:\HILLSBOR\S-S\O20.DOC
