                 With Compliments




F2 Division
Home Office
Queen Anne’s Gate                    ©   C^GO/7^/
LONDON SW1H 9 AT

Tel:   071-273
       071-273 3000
                                      TTncury^cs
                                    a Ds o   Q ^ t12s A 2 c <o £_
                                                        f-o rs p l



          Mrs G I Moody               c : HMCIC
          F2 Division
          273 2621
          8 November 1991
                                                  Sw       A stigfes



Mr Goddard
F8 Division

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


Mr Pickering copied to you the attached letter from Mr George
Howarth MP on this subject.   Although ostensibly on the
subject of the retirement of Chief Superintendent
Duckinfield - a matter which I have covered in the attached
draft - the meat of the letter seems to lie in the request m
the last paragraph that the role of the South Lancashire
Police be properly investigated.   I would imagine that the
answer to this must lie in a reference to the Taylor enquiry,
but that was not commissioned by this division and I would
welcome material suitable for inclusion in the letter covering
these points.




                            MRS G I MOODY




GIM-042.GIM
Thank you for your letter of 5 November addressed to the Home
Secretary about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.


As you know, our sympathies are very much with all those who
were in any way caught up in this tragedy, but the way in
which your letter is written makes me think that you must be
under some misapprehension as to the scope and purpose of
police disciplinary hearings.   Such a hearing is held in
private and is concerned only with whether the officer
concerned may have failed to conform to police discipline.
It would not therefore in any way contribute to public
knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do more
than receive and consider evidence already known as to the
propriety of Mr Duckinfield's conduct.   Moreover the most
serious punishment which the disciplinary tribunal would have
been able to impose, had Mr Duckinfield been found guilty,
would have been dismissal or requirement to resign.      Mr
Duckinfield's resignation means that this end is already
achieved.


It would not be proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr
Duckinfield's case since the Home Secretary is the appellate
authority in police disciplinary cases,but I can and should
say that it needs too to be remembered that it is by no means
certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found Mr
Duckinfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred


GIM-042.GIM
^^against him.   If, as seems to be the case, he is a sick man
  it would not be right to refuse him retirement on medical
  grounds in order to hear charges which may or may not be
  proved and whose most serious result could only be that he
  leave the service he has already asked to leave voluntarily.
  This, however, like the other matters raised in your letter,
  is a matter for the South Lancashire Police Force and I
  suggest that your concerns might best be discussed with the
  Chief Constable of that force.


  Having said this, I find it difficult to see what further
  areas can usefully be explored when the Taylor enquiry...




  GIM-042.GIM
                                     ' k i w ^
                                                    jlL        ~   W



               HOUSE OF COM M ONS
                    L O N D O N SW1A OAA
                                                         t/R

5th November 1991

Rt Hon Kenneth Baker M.P.
Home Secretary                             "
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SWIH 9AT
                                                *   >»



Dear Home Secretary                                       /
RE:- HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I am writing to protest at the way in which South
Lancashire Police have effectively side-stepped the
proposed disciplinary investigation into Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield for his ‘part in the
Hillsborough tragedy.
As you are aware, the policing of the Hillsborough
tragedy has consistently been a subject of criticism,
not least in the Taylor report. However, to date, no
detailed investigation around the responsibilities of
those concerned has yet been undertaken or published.
This means, in effect, that specific responsibility
for certain decisions will never, unless you
intervene, be fully pinned down.
Let me say that I am not seeking to hound Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield, or question the fact that
he was allowed to take early retirement on the basis
of his ill-health, which, I understand, has been the
subject of a proper medical examination. However,
if the families of those sadly killed at that event,
or, indeed, any of the survivors, are to b e ‘satisfied
that the justice they were promised by the then Prime
Minister has been obtained, then surely the policing
of the event, irrespective of the medical circumstances
of anybody at this time, must be subject to a detailed
investigation. Whether this is achieved by a
disciplinary process or some other means, does not, it
seems to me, really matter.


                                               (continued).
Having met a large group of the families, I can assure
you that they are far from happy at the whole process
which has so far taken place up to and including the
Coronor's Inquest and this latest decision, which
incidentally they predicted several weeks ago to me and
my colleague, Peter Kilfoyle, only adds to their sense
of frustration and injustice.
I have written separately to the Attorney General, arising
out of a letter from the Prime Minister's office to one of
the families and hope to meet him in the near future.
However, I do believe it is within your powers to look
very closely at the implications of South Lancashire's^
Police decision to effectively evade an investigation into
the role of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
Although I have copied this letter quite widely to a
number of interested parties, it has not been written with
a view to publication.'-*
There is, however, a very serious issue at stake here,
namely the fact that at the time of <the Hillsborough tragedy,
the families were given very clear assurances by not least
a person than the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, that
everything would be fully investigated and that no stone
would be left unturned.
V,Tailst I realise that it might be convenient to leave this
matter as it stands, I am painfully aware that all of these
people are left feeling that every promise they were made
has not been honoured, either in the spirit or the letter.
It is in this part that I seek your intervention in finding
some way of properly investigating in detail the role of
South Lancashire Police in general and the role of the
officers' responsible specifically, in the policing of
that day of that event.
Yours sincerely




c.c. Mr   Peter Joynes
     Mr   P Hammond, Hillsborough Family Support Group
     Mr   Peter Kilfoyle M.P.
     Mr   Eddie O'Hara M.P.
     Mr   Eddie Loyden M.P.
     Mr   Bob Parry M.P.
     Hr   Bob V.’areing M.P.
     Mr   Frank Field M.P.
     Mr   Joe Benton M.P.
     Mr   John Evans M.P.
     Mr   Gerry Bermingham M.P.
