INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
       STADIUM DISASTER




               With the Compliments of
              the Secretary to the Inquiry




                                       "R m v J
50 Queen Anne’s Gate                         „
London SW1H9AT
01-273 3602
GREATER MANCHESTER

AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                     C O N T E N T S



                                                                PAGE NUMBERS




INTRODUCTION .................................................       1
REPORT AND RECOMENDATIONS ....................................       3
COPY OF LETTER FROM FOOTBALL LEAGUE TOALL CLUBS ..............       7
SECOND LETTER FROM FOOTBALL LEAGUE TOALL CLUBS ...............       9
COPY OF LETTER FROM RUGBY LEAGUE TOALLCLUBS ..................      10


CLUBS - INFORMATION AND ACTION SHEETS PLUS PLANS

BOLTON WANDERERS .............................................      14
BURY .........................................................      16
LANCASHIRE COUNTY CRICKET C L U B ...............................   17
LEIGH RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL C L U B .............................   18
MANCHESTER C I T Y ...............                                  21
MANCHESTER U N I T E D ..........                                   31
OLDHAM ATHLETIC FOOTBALL C L U B ................................   35
OLDHAM RUGBY L E A G U E ........                                   37
SALFORD RUGBY C L U B ...........................................   40
SWINTON RUGBY LEAGUE C L U B .............................          43
STOCKPORT COUNTY FOOTBALL CLUB ...............................      46
WIGAN ATHLETIC FOOTBALL C L U B .................................   47
WIGAN RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL C L U B ...................             50
ROCHDALE FOTBALL CLUB AND ROCHDALEHORNETSRUGBY LEAGUE CLUB ..       53
                NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

                  GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




Immediately following the Hillsborough Disaster the Chief Ambulance
Officer convened a meeting of his Senior Officers to:
a.   Ensure that had the incident occured within our area, we would
     have been able to manage. Clearly from all the Control Log
     Sheets we would have managed. At the time of the incident there
     were 60 vehicles available to Control
b.   To bring our own Major Accident Plan up to date so as to include
     a Plan for Football and SportsGrounds.
To this end a Committee was formed   which consisted of 3operational
Officers and 3 Control Officers. The Committee produced a report and
a number of recommendations as well as information and action sheets
for the Major Accident Plan.
The Report, which is attached, has now been superceeded by the
Rt. Hon. Lord Chief Justice Taylor's Interim Report which makes 43
recommendation, 28 of which had to be implemented before the start
of the Season. The remaining 15 to be completed as soon as possible
after the start of the Season.
The 28 recommendations have caused a lot of difficulties for Clubs,
because of the short time between the publication of the Ret>ptt and
the commencement of the Season. A lot of work needed to be
carried out to comply with the Taylor Report so as to ensure a Cert­
ificate of Safety could be issued.    This Certificate is required as
part of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 and isissued by the
Local Authorities. These Authorities began to contact their local
Police, Ambulance and Fire Services, in accordance with the Act,
and the result has been a number of meetings. Mr. G.K. Underhill,
Assistant Divisional Officer, was nominated the Designated Officer
for Football and Sports Grounds within the Greater Manchester Area,
by the Chief Ambulance Officer. He has attended meetings at all
the Football and most of the Rugby Grounds along with the Police
 and Fire Services, to explain to the Clubs what is required of them
 before the Safety Certificate would be issued. The Clubs were
 allowed a certain amount of time to comply with the recommendations.
 Each Club has been visited by the Local Authority responsible for the
 issue of the Certificate, who stipulated the areas that required
 attention.                                   #                  -n ~
 Follow up meetings and inspections were carried out and are stiii
 in the process of being carried out.
The Greater Manchester Ambulance Service is responsible for ensuring
that all the Clubs within its area comply with the First Aid,
Medical and Ambulance requirements. It has been asked by the St. John
Ambulance Brigade, to co-ordinate the movement of their staff, at
Football and Sports Grounds and to ensure that the medical facilities
are correct. This it has agreed to do.
Recommendation No.17 requires the formation of an Advisory Panel,
which must include Police, Ambulance and Fire as part of the Panel.
Mr. Underhill was selected to represent Greater Manchester Ambulance
Service, along with Mr. S. Foster, A.D.O. Belle Vue.
Apart from giving advice the Panel must also visit Clubs to ensure
that the Certificates are being complied to and then report back to
the respective Councils.
Clearly the recommendations place an obligation onto the Ambulance
Service to ensure that vehicles and crews are in attendance at
games where gates exceed 5,000. This Authority has decided that
the following will apply throughout Greater Manchester.
             5,000 to 15,000    1   fully equipped Ambulance plus C r e w
            15,000 to 40,000    2   fully equipped Ambulance plus C r e w
                                1   Officer
                                1   Equipment Vehicle
   This vehicle carries a large number of folding stretchers,
   blankets, first aid equipment, oxygen, face masks (oxygen)
   advanced first aid equipment, body bags, labels and pencils
So as to ensure we know when gates will exceed 5,000 the Greater
Manchester Police.Fax Match details to our Headquarters each Friday
at around 1200 hours. This allows time for me to ensure that all
the games are covered and the respective Controls notified.
Mr. Underhill has started a file for each Club and the file will
hold a copy of the Certificate and any documentation relating to the
Club. These are kept in his office at Oldham Ambulance Station.
Each quarter the Emergency Liaison Committee meet and a regular agenda
item will be the progress of the Advisory Panel.
Currently, Mr. Underhill is meeting with the Police and Fire Services
to discuss Emergency Procedures, for the respective Grounds, to decide
such things as pre arranged routes to and from the Ground, holding
areas for Ambulances, temporary mortuaries etc., When completed
these will be included in the Major Accident Plan in the form of
Control Information and Action Sheets (please see attached copies)-
At these Grounds where there is a Service involvement, the Ambulance
Crew or the Officer, is provided with a Police radio. This allows
direct communication both ways, should anything happen.
A number of extention sets for Officers radio's have been ordered.
This is to enable the Officer to be able to hear radio messages whilst
in the midst of all the noise that takes place at a Football/Rugby
Match.
The Ambulance Crews attending the matches are trained in Advanced
First Aid and in the event of an incident they would become immediate
Care Teams.
    NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY




      GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCEW SERVICE




       MAJOR INCIDENTS WITHIN SPORTS GROUNDS




Should an incident occur within a sports ground
the Ambulance Service will be faced with a
number of problems that will be totally different
to those of any Air, Rail, or Motorway Incident.
In this report we have attempted to highlight
these problems and make recommendations that will
help to resolve them.




                        - 3 -
  ACCESS AND EGRESS
 The fact that most major sports grounds are built
 within existing housing estates creates a problem
 insomuch as the surrounding Roads and Streets
 become inaccessable to emergency vehicles due to
 the large numbers of parked vehicles and also the
 large numbers of people who are making their way to
 the ground on foot.


 RECOMMENDATION
 With the co-operation £>f the Police an access and
 egress route be kept free of traffic so as to allow
 fehe free movement of Emergency Vehicles.
 Grounds will be visited and access and egress
 roads noted.


MASS HYSTERIA

It is important to remember that should an incident
occur within an enclosed ground, involving large
numbers of people, hysteria will develop rapidly
unless the incident is organised quickly and efficiently,,
Because of the large numbers of people who will
have already managed to escape the ground with injured
friends and relatives, Ambulance Crews arriving at
the scene may be able to assess the scene.     It is
reasonable to assume that failure to treat, escaped
injured persons, could result in the vehicle being
forceably removed and the staff injured.


RECOMMENDATION

That Ambulance Crews be in situ prior to the commencing
of the event and that various sites within the ground be
designated for use should an incident occur.




                         - 4 -
 IDENTIFICATION OF STAFF
 Presently we identify staff at an incident by the
 colour of the protective helmets.    However, these are
 soon discarded by the Ambulance Crews because they
cause problems whilst trying to work in confined
spaces and this makes identification of staff
extremely difficult.
Also currently there is no way to identify the
extended trained crews irrespective of whether
they are N.H.S.T.A. or Voluntary Trained, they
both carry out the same roll and need to be identified.


RECOMMENDATION
The most common termonology for the extended trained
staff is PARAMEDIC.    This is recognised and accepted
by N.H.S. staff, the Lay man as well as other
emergency services.    Therefore it is recommended that
the word PARAMEDIC be attached to both the front and
rear of the High Visibility Jackets of relevant staff.
Also the inclusion of Epaulettes of a High Visibility
material to be worn by the relevant staff.
Cromwell Helmets could and should replace the present
helmets.


INITIAL RESPONSE
This would not bev required. Vehicles will be in situ

prior to the commencement of the event and will be
inclusive of one Equipment Vehicle.    The Helmets and
Protective Clothing purchased for the event of riots
should be- placed on these vehicles and could be used
by the initial response teams.


SITE TERMS
Will be nominated by the Incident Officer in accordance
with standard emergency procedures.




                           _ 5 _
 TRAINING
 Currently there is little or no.training for staff in
 the management of Major Incidents, other than Airport
 Exercises.
 RECOMMENDATION
 That regular training be carried out, for all staff
 These should be Field exercises and Table Top exercises.
 Field Exercises should be on an annual, basis where as
 the Table Top exercise could be on an Ad-Hoc basis at
 Divisional Level.


COMMUNICATIONS
With the present hand portable. Radios it is not possible
to hear any radio messages, whilst in the vacinity
of large noisy crowds.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Further hand portable Radios be purchased along with
ear pieces and or extension microphones for all the
existing sets used by Senior Officers, also the purchase
of extra batteries.


GENERAL COMMENTS
Should we endeavour to receive reports from other Ambulance
Services regarding Major Incidents dealt with by them.


That regular Checks be made of all equipment available
and show what levels and where it is kept.
It would be reasonable to nominate one Station per
Division to be the holding point and upkeep of such
equipment.


Regular review of all Legislation and purchase of all
relevant documents.


Students at the Regional Training Centre be used in
the event of an incident occuring and that the Control.'
Card '3' be adjusted to make this possible, and read
"Notify Regional Training Centre that a
Major Incident has occured a t ----------- "
                         -   6   -
                                                              H
                                                              •x
                                                               t?


                                                                       0 ,JH £iEV \» 4



                                    T H E F O O T B A L L LEAG U E L IM IT E D
Lythnm St Annes. Lancashire. FY8 IIG . T e l e p h o n e 02'5'J 72-9-121 Telex                            Fax 0 2 ^ ’ 72lT.Sd      Secreiarv I 0



5/5918                                                                                                    10th July, 1989


TO ALL CLUBS


Dear Secretary,

                                                First Aid Facilities at Grounds

   ^ ^ o llo w in g the tragic events at Hillsborough, consideration has been given
uO the subject of first aid facilities at grounds.

      It is recognised that clubs would need a fully-equipped casualty ward to
cope with a major disaster. This is clearly not feasible, so w hat has been looked
at is what can reasonably be provided.

      The Management Committee consider that clubs should follow the
recommended guidelines given below. It should be stressed, however, that these
should be seen as minimum requirements.

a)     First Aid Room

      Each club should have a designated First Aid Room, in addition to the club's
medical room. The First Aid Room should contain at least two beds, a sink, a
work-top and a curtain to give the necessary privacy. The room should be
supplied with power, light, water and a direct line telephone.  There must be
ready access for emergency vehicles.

 )     Medical Equipment

      The First Aid Room should have a well-stocked cabinet containing antiseptics,
analgesic, bandages e tc . Management should designate one person as being
responsible for stocking the cabinet and for the general up-keep of the First
Aid: Room.

       Stretchers, a carrying chair, blankets and oxygen should be available.1

€):    Medical S taff

      It is recognised that the club doctor's attendance at matches is primarily
for attention to players. It is felt, therefore, that there should be at least one
extra qualified person in attendance at matches.




                                                                                                           Continued/2



                 \H co rre sp o n d en c e lo h e iidd ren scd 10 The Sfcrcliiry RciiishrttMl oMicc .i«                 in i ouLimi Mtml 2
IOth July, 1989


TO ALL CLUBS




d)     Am.bulance

      At least one fully-equipped ambulance should be in attendance at all matches
with an expected attendance of 5,000+. The ambulance should be equipped with
defibrillators and resuscitative equipment and be manned by personnel trained
in their use.

     jflflu b s should be able to hire such an ambulance with two paramedics for
 comm £90 per match.
e)     First Aid Personnel

      All first-aiders serving at grounds should be fully trained and experienced.
At the start of each season, clubs should be furnished with a complete list of
trained first-aiders by the organisation providing their first aid service; such list
to be regularly updated.

      There should be a minimum of three first-aiders for up to 1,000 spectators,
with one additional first-aider for every 1,000 spectators above the first 1,000,
up to a total of 10,000 spectators. Thereafter an additional first-aider for every
additional 2,000 spectators.

      Clubs will be- asked to detail their first aid facilities and their emergency
procedures in a revised local plan; separate instructions on this will follow shortly.
If you have any queries, please speak to Chris Whalley or Jack Crawford.

                                   Yours sin cerely,




                                     J.D. Dent,
                                    SECRETARY




                                             - 8 -
                                                                I $             s         l
                                                                         °V /T D E D



                                    T H E F O O T B A L L LE A G U E LIM IT E D
Lytham St. Annes. Lancash.re. FY.H MG. T e le p h o n e 0253 729-121. T elex 07075 . f « 0253 72-17,%                                   Secretarv I D D e nt

5/6172                                                                                                17th August, 1989


TO ALL CLUBS


Dear Secretary,

                                                 First Aid Facilities at Grounds

  flfc In the light of the Interim Taylor Report, it is necessary to revise certain
o f T h e recommended guidelines issued in my letter of 10th July, to bring them
into line with the Taylor recommendations.

c)     Medical S ta ff

      You will have noted that the Interim Taylor Report specifies that a medical
practitioner should be available to deal with any medical emergency at the ground
and    he shouldbe trained and com petent in advanced first aid.

      It is the view of The Football League that the club doctor's attendance
a t matches is primarily for attention to players and we would prefer an
additional doctor to be on hand to look a fter spectators. We are, however,
currently looking at the best way to achieve this and will report further as
soon as possible.

      In the meantime, clubs should ensure that at least the club doctor is
available in line with the Taylor recommendation.

d)     Ambulance

      The ambulance referred to in my le tte r of 10th July must be provided by
the local ambulance authority (although we understand there is a possibility of
a work-to-rule by ambulance drivers in the near future). The level of equipment
and personnel to be determined in liaison with the ambulance authority.

et     First Aid Personnel

     There should be a minimum of three first-aiders for up to 1,000 spectators
with one additional first-aider for every additional 1,000 spectators.

                                                                Yours sincerely,




                                                                     J.D. Dent,
                                                                    SECRETARY.



              All im n.-tpom lt.-nrc lo h r .id tlre ts c d to The Secretary R e e n te re d Office   nbovw. Rc8isior.*d in Kn,.|i,,„l .KOM >
                                                                                        9 —
05 SEP '89 15=18 WIGAN RL.FC 0942 820111                                                    P.i




The Rugby Football League
180 Chapettown Road Leeds LS7 4HT
D. S. Oxiey MA
Chief Executive and Secretary to the Council                                    21st August, 1389.
Telephone 0532-624637
Fax 0532-623386
R FL/2M /89
DSO/MTM




 Dear Secretary,
                     re:- Medical and First Aid Facilities at Grounds.

Following the tragic events at Hillsborough, a very important ross^ing
taken place between representatives of the Board and Officers of the Rugby
League Medical Association.    In the light of this meeting, and Lord Justice
Taylor's interim report on the Hillsborough disaster, the Board has concluded
that certain requirements in respect of the Medical and First Aid facilities
available to treat spectators whenever necessary must be f
the beginning of the 1989/90 season i.e. from Sunday, 3rd September onwards.
These requirements are listed on the enclosed sheet.       j

 Itfjere the provision of a First Aid Room is concerned, the Board has agreed
 upon recommended guidelines which should be seen as minium require^nts.
 The Board recognises that the provision of such a facility at
 will involve thought, expense, and time.    However, time is not on our si -
 Clubs will understand that the mandatory requirements se£ out by the
 and the provision of a fully equipped First Aid Room will yary quickly
 statutory requirements under the Safety of Sports Grounds P|ct.

 In addition to details of the Medical and First A W 'Mlllt:
 be available for the public, I enclose on a separate sheet the'
 requirements for the treatment of players which all teams are entitled
 expect to apply at all matches.



 Yours faithfully,

                   1
 0. S.OXLEY.
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE.




  Oist: Club Secretaries.                                                        ,
            RLMA                                                                 *
                                          Patron: Her Majesty the Queen
                               Ufe President: The Right Honourable The Earl of Derby
                                                   Founded 1895                  '

                                               10
05 SEP '39 15:19 WIGSN RLFC 0942 820111                                                       P.3




 The Rugby Football League
180 Chapetown Road Leeds LS7 4HT
D. S. Oxley M.A.                                                             „      Auaust 1989
Chief Executive and Secretary to the Council                                 2 1 st HLjgusx * 1303 *
Telephone 0632-624637
Fax 0532-623386
 RFL/Spac.

           re:- Medical and First Aid Facilities at Grounds(Spectators).

The fallowing requirements are mandatory from 3rd September; 1989.

l-:   First Aid Personnel.

      Fully qualified First-Aiders must be in attendance an the scale of one
      First-Alder for every 1,000 spectators.    Clubs must provide adequate
      permanent storage for the basic equipment which may have to be used
      by their First Aid Attendants.

2.    Ambulance.

      One fully equipped ambulance must be in attendance at! all matches where
      an attendance in excess of 5 >000 is expected.    Clubs should be able
      to hire such an ambulance, along with two paramedics, for about £90
      per match,                                           j
                                       ■       .    i
3.    Medical Practitioner.

      In addition to a fully qualified medical practitioner with
      responsibility for attending players (see other sheets, a second medical
      practitioner must be available to' attend to spectat-ora whenever
      necessary.    He or she must be In attendance on match days for not leas
      than" '3 hours and must arrive at the ground at least one hour before
      kick-off.                                             |

      Division 1:-        Mandatory for all matches.

      Division II:- Mandatory for matches where an attendance in excess of
      5,OdD is expected.

The following recommended guidelines should be seen as minimum requirements.

1.    First Aid Room.

      Each club should have a designated First Aid Room in addition to a
      medical room for the use of players.   The First Aid Hoorn should contain
      at least 2 beds, a sink, a work-top and a curtain to give the necessary
      privacy.    Tha room should be supplied with power* light, water and
      a direct telephone line.     There must be ready access for emergency
      vehicles.

      The First Aid Room should have a well stocked cabinet containing

                                         Patron: Her Majesty theQueen
                             LifePresident:The Right Honourable The Earlof Derby
                                                 Founded 1695



                                     - 11 -
,05 SEP '89 15=20 WIGAN RLFC 0942 820111

 Cont/...                              2



 RFL/Spsc.



      antiseptics, analgesic, bandages etc. Clubs should designate one person
      as being responsible for stocking the cabinet and for the general
      up-keep of the First Aid Room.

      Stretchers, a carrying chair, blankets and oxygen should be readily
      available.

It is obvious that all clubs must maintain the closest possible liaison yith
’
tTie" 'Polfee, tliiih the flmbtUanca services, and m t h the fire Irigade.




Q.S.OXLEY.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE.




Dist: Club Secretaries
      RLMA.




                              - 12 -
                            NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                               GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR          BOLTON WANDERERS FOOTBALL CLUB



           CONTROL INFORMATION

           There will be in attendance at all home games one fully equiped ambulance
           plus crew.

           The vehicle will be situated inside the ground via the shutter door's
           adjacent to the Normid Store.

           The ambulance will not leave the ground. In the event of someone
           requiring hospital treatment, control will be responsible for providing
           transport.

           Should an incident occur, the ambulance crew will assume the roll of Incident
           Officer and Control Point.

           TKe St. John Ambulance Brigade will deal with minor injuries. There are two
           first aid rooms situated underneath Wing stand near to the Police Control Room.

           Temporary Mortuaries will be situated in the gymnasium and or the cold rooms
           in the Co-op Stores, dependant on the site of the incident.




          CONTROL ACTION

           1.     Dispatch vehicles to notified R.V. Pointwhere        they will be met
                   by a Police Marshall.

           2.     Notify G.K.Underhill (designated Officer      forFootball andSports
                   Grounds).

          3.      Notify Duty Officer.

          4.         Notify Bolton Royal Infirmary, Hope Hospital and Wigan Infirmary.


           Please note: The Police Constable at the R.V. Point will be wearing an
           orange waistcoat marked Police Marshall.




          GU/HJG
          21.09.89




                                                - 13 -
                    BOLTON l&irDSBERS FOOTBALL C U B .   .•


Ground.             BURJTOBT PARK - Tel    0204 389200


Location            Manchester Road - 1 mile from Town Centre«


Access              To Pitch - Shutter doors adjacent to ITORMID
                    Manchester Road.
                    To First Aid Room & Police Control - Gt. Lever
                    end of Manchester Road stand,


Clearest A & E 5- Bolton Royal Infirmary ( 1-i- miles )»
                    Hope Hospital, Salford 10j- miles0


Suggested R.V
Points              Raikes Lane - This affords direct to and from
                    St. Peters T.fay, -which would enable out of area
                    vehicles access for back up»
                    Manchester Road near Greyhound Stadium.




1T.B.     Police Control   Manchester Road, corner of Gto Lever Stand.
          First Aid Room   Gto Lever end of Manchester Road Stand*
                                          B o iT o i; '-:a i :i )e r e r s   fo ctball   c l ub




                                              St. Feters Kay

                 — rC— Vv-— ff'—     K”           '■}f"~—




                                                                ■                                 ■■   ^   .
                                                                               Burnden Terrace
                   Farking
                   Area.



                                                                             Football Field
                                                                                                                        Police Control


                                                                                                                           / -fj/
                                   Car                                           Road. Stand                              / to/
                    Auto
                                   Fark
                   Safety                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                          „jcS*// Greyhound
                                                                                                                                  r - T - T
                                                                                                                          °/       Stadium


                                   Manchester Road

■To Bolton Royal Infirmary
                                                         Automatic shutter door                                First Aid Post
                                                          ( Direct access to pitch
                                                                                                               Suggested R.V
                                                                                                               Point.
                          NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                               GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR       BURY FOOTBALL CLUB




CONTROL INFORMATION

          There will not be a Service Attendance at this ground, unless the capacity
          exceeds 5000.
          First Aid cover will be provided by the St.John Ambulance Brigade.

          The Holding area for Ambulances will be along Manchester Road.




CONTROL ACTION

          1. Dispatch vehicle to scene andremainder     toManchester   Road.

          2. Notify G.K.Underhill (Designated Officer for     Football and Sports grounds).

          3. Notify Duty Officer.

          4. Notify Bury General Hospital.




                                              - 16 -
                           NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY



                               GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                   I


MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR       LANCASHIRE COUNTY CRICKhT CLUB_______________



              CONTROL INFORMATION

              There will not be a service attendance at this ground unless the capacity
              is 5,000, or more.

              Medical cover isprovided      by the British Red Cross.

              Access to the ground     will be via TalbotRoad,


   '   •
              CONTROL ACTION
   i          1.   Dispatch vehicles to notified R.V. Point. They will be met by
   !               a Police Constable, who will be wearing an orange waistcoat marked 'Police
   1               Marshall'

              2.   Notify G.K. Underhill (designated Officer for Football and Sports
   j               Grounds).

              3.   Notify Duty Officer.

              4.   Notify Manchester Royal Infirmary, Withington Hospital and the
                   S.M.A.R.T. Team.




                                               - 17 -
                          NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                               GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR        LEIGH RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB_____________


              CONTROL INFORMATION

              There will not be any service attendance at this club unless capacities
              is 5,000, or more.

              Medical cover is provided by the St. John Ambulance Brigade.

              Access to the ground will be from Glebe Street, and the holding area would be
              Grassmere Street.




              CONTROL ACTION

              1.   Dispatch vehicles to notified R.V. Point where they will be met
                   by a Police Constable. This Constable will be wearing an orange
                   waistcoat marked ’Police Marshall*.

              2.   Notify G.K. Underhill (Designated Officer for Football and Sports
                   Grounds).

              3.   Notify Duty Officer.

              4.   Notify Leigh Infirmary and Wigan Infirmary.




                                                - 18 -
                                                                &

                   LEIGH   RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB.



 Ground          KILTOII PARK - Tel     0942 674437



 Location s-     Rear of Glebe Street - Close to Town Centre.



Access           Main Gates via Chadwick Street.
                 Popular stand £ Playing area via access road
                 at rear of 3 j; Q.
                 Family stand from directors car park.



nearest A & S    Leigh Infirmary -    mile.,



Suggested R.V.
Point.           Clear area at rear of houses in Glebe Street
                 adjacent to Grassmere St. Health Centre»




N.B.             Polioo Control Point — aooouu via gat« 'A'
                 directors osar park#
                 Medical Room under Popular stand*




                                      - 19 -
                                         LEIGH RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB.




                                             Leigh By - Pass          Atherleigh Way#
                                                                                                                •si#C?n=e
                                                                        . . 1 .rrUlf
                                                                                           I
                                         Directors         ? Apolice                       X         i
                                                                                                    ;
                     u m/9-ry*<                                     Control
QMS                                      Car Park                                          ~ fs    Jc
                      f'-r'td.                                                                       : B & Q
                                                                                                o
                                                                                            - «    i
                                                            OjJ-l                                    : H I
                                                                                                d 3:
                                                                                               •H ) Store
                                                                                               •
                                                                                        PM m / ©tJ i
                                                                                                   It
                                             © ffi                                          :. **■ i>      •
                                                                                                         t\
                                                                                           ?        >•            ,
      Grassmere
                                                                                                    'f
                             oooc                                                                  T W    ■
                                               Health                                                Wccb F trici/lC ,.
                                    rt*TlL     Centre
                                    f&t*       Rear Gate
                                                                                              1 rpp-p-raced Houses
                                                                                              L.— — — ■--- - 1 '
                                                TerracedHouses
                                                                                                  Glebe St.

                                                     Glebe St.



                  Suggested R.V
                  Point.                                                                  t




                                        Gordon
                            NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                               GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR      - MANCHESTER CITY FOOTBALL CLUB




CONTROL INFORMATION

           There will be in attendance, at every home game, 1 officer and 1 fully
           equiped ambulance plus crew.

           The ambulance will be parked on the Maine Road forecourt, adjacent to
           the club directors car park and visiting team coach. It will be under

      •    Police supervision.

           The crew members will be located in the invalid area near to Apple Pie
           Corner.

           The Officer will be in possesion of a Police Radio. His call sign will
           be "Ambulance Control Officer". In the event of an incident, the Officer
           will be asked by the Police to attend the Police Control Room, where he
           will assume the roll of Incident Officer. The crew members will become
           the immediate   care team.

           The ambulance   will not leavethe ground. In the event of someone requiring
           hospital treatment, control will be responsible for providing transport.

          The St. John Ambulance Brigade will deal with minor injuries and will be
          directed by the incident officer.


CONTRACT ACTION

           1.   Dispatch vehicles to notified R.V. point, where they will be met by a
                Police Marshall.

          2.    Notify G.K. Underhill (designated Officer for Football and Sports
                Grounds).

          3.    Notify Duty Officer.

          4.    Notify Manchester Royal Infirmary, Withington Hospital Accident and
                Emergency and the S.M.A.R.T. Team.

          Please note: The constable in charge of the R.V. point will be wearing
          an orange waistcoat marked ’Police Marshall'




          GKU/HJG
          19.09.89



                                              - 21 -
SECTION 'G'   EMERGENCY AMBUALNCE PROCEDURES




G. 1.         Ambulance Stand - by.


G. 2.         Major Incident / Disaster.




                  - 22 -
SECTION 'G'                EMERGENCY AMBULANCE PROCEDURES




              Am bu lance Stand - by.



              (i)          Greater Manchester Ambulance Service will

                           provide         ambulance at each   'home'   fixture,

                           together with two c r e w members.

                           This facility will be provided under a

                           'contract'     basis with the Manche st er City

                           Football Club.



              (ii)         The Ambulance will be parked on the Maine

                           Road forecourt, adjacent to the Club

                           Director's Car Park,     and the Visiting T e a m

                           Coach.



              (iii)        The   'crew members'   will locate themselves

                           in the Invalid Are a of the M a i n Stand, near

                           to Apple Pie Corner.



              (iv)         The Ambulance Service will also provide an

                           'Ambulance Control Officer'      who will be in

                           direct radio link with the ma in Am bulance

                           Control Roo m and the Police Gr ound Control Room.



              (v)          In the event of any incident which requires

                           an ambulance to attend,      the Control Offic er

                           will be contacted by the Police Control Roo m

                           and he will deploy the stand - by crew.



              Cvi)         Should the stand - by ambulance leave the

                           Ground,   arrangements will be made     for itls

                           immediate return from the local hosp it al or

                           for a replacement vehicle and c r e w to attend.




                                 - 23 -
Major Incident / Disaster



            Once the Police Commander has decided that

            any incident or disaster           is to be classed

            as a 'Major Incident', he will request the

            attendance        in the Police Control Room

            of the      'Ambulance Control O f f i c e r ' .



(ii)       This officer will be in radio contact with

           the main Ambulance Control Room and will

           co-ordinate the attendance of A mbulance Service

           personnel and equipment.



( iii)     He will advise his Control Roo m of any

           rendezvous points and through the police

           'MARSHALLING OFFICER'          arrange    for deployment

           of ambulances,        as required on location at the
           in c i d e n t .



(iv)       Should the Senior Am bu lance Officer wish to

           leave the Police Control Room at any time,

           he will be allocated a Constable with personal

           radio, thereby retaining full contact with

           the Police Incident Officer.



(v)        It is stressed that         full co-operatiqn exists

           between the Police and Ambulance Service and it

           is important that this is created at a Senior

           level as well as on the ground.


(vi)       Once the operation is in           'full-swing'      it is

           expected that senior officers            from the Ambulance

           Service Headquarters would wish to attend.

           Again they will be directed to the              'rendezvous

           point'     for Ambulance Vehicles,        and instructed

           as to when and where to attend, together with

           parking arrangements,         dependant upon the full

          nature of the incident and available                 locations.
Whilst these measures may seem unnecessary

it is important that     'traffic   flow'   is

conducted in a proffessional m a nner to minimise

the risk of loss of life and the ability to

get   'to' or 'from'   the scene.




      - 25 -
                                 ..   ilItv*.11/. .I

                                HAN' Oi: STADIUM




                                                                                           DRAWING    a




                                                                           * RL T O N   AVENUE




                                       north   sta n d
                                                                                  ^\HOME
                                                                                     SUPPORTERS



        /* -V-. ^
 •      Q,/    \• ■
                  -
                  .9©
                  I '^
     v.°
     f*oi     w* ; \                                           *?            fe j ^
     tie*         !
                                                               I             S j? r                    51Edwcrds
                                                              ^9 ***** swfi /s*—C  r/-*                 Serwa
                                                              /            / ^ f x'/j

                                                                         /S ? /    ? vettng
7;i■■       . w                                                       _ /£:•/      Ji SUPPORTERS




              ®



                                                                                                            4
                         PARK


                                                                                            KEY X T»re E.'t.tTS
                                                                                             ffi) muiBiio w»o« ■"rI




                                                                                                             16

                                                       26 -
                                                                    > >         --- -
                                                                    ! H           ■'---
                                                                    J.f",      !'      ».     • v ;
                                                                    ^ Rvrtkt**        r       :    iNf_

                                          ■S T * w T s te * *               ' - w ' - r*’ — ~ N f
                                              —       -— /           /    1 :         ’ * ■' ' ‘ 1
                          ii                            L I I I                              5-T .\;
       u     i                                              I/             •'>.’■     !•i     --- -
           I i                                                                        s
                               L :, M                           l           r i
 ,2 S ii] L
                  '>r-_    r          Z           m                         s.          t                    %     %
     rt !** ^*»!;1
    > W °l lit                    -ij             h>           * r\~ \ « r              ■■'   :j.- •.nt-i 1 i'1 '__
    I i f •»
                                                                                 y>0 u M "flS * C
                                                                           svu-fSOS.
                                                                              i




|rtfd 4 ^ ^ 7 c - : - r _ i      1        I                  / H i f ! L\                     j

                               i »••,         n        y      m       m              * iiV L


r                TZtSCZL,            f3 f i i ! >\           * '■                                  V




                                                                                              /.
            Ptfl-r-f <-AkJ£-




                                                                             * o a ;>
                    A .6010




                                                                                                          •t i r i u i i a a i i - u :




                                                                                    - 27 -
f          '.v:i>          w ill assist.  u i w . - ' u persons so evacuated : run the danger area by
                    cne snorcesc and nose -iirec: '^uce. O ffic e r s w iil r a c ilit a c e entrance to and
                           from the dct^* ^orcne “     --iiKl ;\rnbuLunce v e h ic le s.

           ACCESS ROUTES

           EMERGENCY ROUTES TO/FRCt! MANCHESTER 'TTY FOOTBALL GROUND -MAINE ROAD



    Ijl    Wilms low Road, Claremont Road. Maine :-oad

           This route allows access for Fire Sr.^ade, Police and Ambulance vehicles to the Maine,
           North and Platt Lane Stands.

    OUT    Maine Road. Claremont Road, Wllr-sicv '-oad

           Manchester Royal Infirmary and m e Ilry Centre Fire Station are located close by and
           are within access of Wilmslw Road.

           Maine Road and Clareront Road are cxed to prevent congestion with parked motor vemcles.

           Wilms low Road is a wide arteriai r3=c running North/South.

            Princess Road, Claremont Road. Mains 3oad

           This route allows access for Fire ir.aade, Police and . W a n c e vehicles to the Main.
            North and Platt Lane Stands.

    OUT     Maine Road. Claremont Road, Princes; Road

            Withingcon Hospital and Moss Side Fire Station are located close by and are within easy
            access of Princess Road.

            Maine Road and Clareront Road are ~ned to prevent congestion with parked motor vemcles.


            Princess Road is a wide arteriai r:ai, running North/South.

            Access to Kippax Street Stand

     XN      Wjlmslow Road/Princess Road; CLarersnt Road, Kippax Street

            Leading on to Kippax Street Car Pare at rear of the Stand.

     OUT    Kippax Street, Claremont Road; Prircess RoadAJilrnslow Road

            The Fire Brigade will send on FIRST CALL _ 3 water tenders,                 .
             I Turntable unit to the Main Entrance on Maine Road, to ascertain the location ot the
             fire(s) at the Football Ground.

             They have no specific route for arriving at that Ground.


             See plan of jraj.


     8.      TRAFFIC ARRANGEMENTS

             (i)      Due to its location a ser,:us incident at Maine Road Football G r o u n d should not
                      affect the ^ j o r traffic       Le. —        Road/Princess R o a d / W ^ a n Road.

                                                                                                               6




                                                              - 28 -
                »iro/.mnul.uK e/poi id ' and a m ’ss to ClaraiuiiL Koad m m Wilnwluw Koud unu
                Princess Road i s co be rescrtcced Co emergency v e h ic le s i-niy.

      (iii)   ^ T h e following   craffic poincs-’will* be manned^o prevenC access by imauchonsed
                vehicles:

                Princess Road/Claremonc Road.
                Wilmslow Road/Claremonc Road.
                Upper Lloyd Screec/Claremonc Road.
                Maine Road/ClaremonC Road.
                Kippax Streec/Claremonc Road.

      (iv)      The necessary signs/cones will be available ac PlaCC Lane Traffic UniC via
                F o r c ^ r a S o n s Rocm. A long C e m diversion will uCilise Local Authority signs
                 as required.

      (v)       Traffic poinCs will be manned uncil Che emergency can be scaled ckwn.

      (vi)      The exiscing ’No Parking’ arrangemencs will be concinued, che signs being left
                 in posicion Co prevenC local craffic congestion.

      (vii)     Greacer ManchesCer Passenger Transport Operacions Roan will be informed of Che crarfic
                 diversion via Force Operacions Roan.




      Anfoulance Concrol will notify as co which hospicals will receive casualcies fran che
       incidenc.

      The following hospicals will normally be available Co receive casualties:

       (a)       Manchester Royal Infirmary, Nelson Street, Mancnester 13.

       (b)       Withington Hospital, Nell Lane, Manchester 20.      (For serious bums).

       (c)       Wythenshawe Hospital, Souchmoor Road, ManchesCer 23.




       i S S t S n g i v t n T o the despatch o£ D o t a t i o n leans to the hospitals myolved.

10.    POLICE OFFICERS CONCERNED

       (0        On the occasion o f each football m tch, there"'will already
                  officers available co deal wich any incident (m accordance with thefootball
                                         The Senior Officer on duty w ill b eco* the Incident O fficer.

       (ii)      Police Officers will be deployed by che Chief Inspector, acting upon che direcCions
                  of che Incident Officer.

        (iii)    Inter-police comunications will be by che 'E1 Division personal radio, or another
                  channel already in use and made available by W.C.T.l. Department.

        (iv)     Officers allocated co che Police Control Roan at all matches are as follows:

                   (a)   Chief Superintendenc/Superintendent in overall ccnmand of che event.

                   (b)   Inspector - dealing wich briefing and deployments and having general operational
                         control of Che event.

                   (c)   Police Conscable C.C.T.V. operator co assist Inspector.




                                                         - 29 -
                                         FOOTBALL   'EMERGENCY'       PROCEDURES




   In che evpnt of any major                 incidenc ac Maine Road Foocbalt           Ground     che

   Video OperaCor will              be designaced as che official.           'POLICE M A R S H A L L ' for

   ambulances accending                 che Ground.

   You will make your way                 Co a designaced recepcion poinc          (eg. Claremonc

   Road/Maine Road junccion).                    You will wear    che official     'POLICE MARSHALL'

   Cabard     from Che Ground Concrol Room and cake wich you a mulci-channeI

   radio.

^^Your    ducies are         Co meec       all   incoming ambulances      Co che Ground.        Inscrucc

   chem Co park ac your direccions,                   and awaic   inscruccions       from   'ECHO TEN'

   as Co where and when                 chey are   required.

  Do noc direcc chem yourself                    Co any   incidenc.

  Do noc allow any driver Co leave                    che ambulance unaccended.




  Chief S u p e r i n c e n d e n c .
                            NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                               GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR      MANflHFSTFR TTNTTFT) FOOTBAT.T. H i m




CONTROL INFORMATION

           There will be in attendance at every Home Game:-

                               2 Fully Equiped Ambulances plus crews
                               1 Emergency Equipment Vehicle
                               1 Officer.
      #
           The two Ambulances will be parked between the shop and reception building.
           Two bay's have been marked for Ambulances only. The equipment vehicle will be
           reversed into the ground and parked opposite the First Aid room.

           The Officer in attendance will report to the Police room where he will be
           issued a Police Radio and an ear piece. His call sign from the Police is
           'Ambulance Officer'.

           Seats are provided inside the ground, for the crews. The ambulances will not
           leave the ground and in the event of an incident they will become "Immediate
           Care Teams" and the Officer will assume the Roll of Incident Officer.

           It will be the responsibility of Control to provide vehicles to remove
           "casualties" from within the ground.

           The St.John Ambulance Staff will be directed by the Incident Officer.



           CONTROL ACTION
                                                                   «


           1.   Dispatch vehicles to Warwick Road, Old Trafford. (This is the designated
                Hoidtflg &Eea, and is kept clear of traffic on match days).

           2.   Notify G.K.Underhill. (Designated Officer for Football and Sports Ground).

           3.   Notify Duty Officer.

           4.   Notify S.M.A.R.T.

           5.   Hospitals to be used - Manchester Royal Infirmary, Whithington and Hope
                Hospital, & Trafford General.




                                                 - 31 -
 Telephones are p r o vi d e d with in the police control b o x a n d oper ate on an
 internal system to communicate with all parts of the ground, i n c l u d i ng the
 Police C a s ua l t y/ M o r tu a r y Post. A telephone p r o v i d i n g an outside line is also
 available.

 A T a n n o v System is o perated boch w i th i n a n d outside the g r o u n d b y Club
 officials.       A facility exists to operate this from w i t h i n the Police Control
 Box a n d in the event of a major incident w o u l d be u s e d to tra n sm i t m e ssages
 to police a n d spectators.       It w ou l d be u s e d to summ o n the Club doctor, St.
 John's ambulance personnel, the retained ambulance on dut y at the g r o u n d and
 any other medical personnel attending the g r o u n d as supporters to a t t e n d at
 the ca s u al t y receiving post.

 Ca s ua l t y R e c e iv i n g Pos t/ M o rt u a ry Facility

The 1st choice C asualty Receiving Post a nd M o r t u a r y f a c il i t y is sit u a te d
b e n e a th the family s tand at the forecourt e nd of the g r o u n d a d j o i n i n g 'K'
stand/ticket office, map attached.             Access from the p l a y i n g p i t c h is v i a the
double gates ad jo i n in g gate 27 and upwards a lo n g the d i s a b l e d persons ramp to
an ar e a undern e a th the family stand.          The 2nd choice C a s u a l t y R e c e i v i n g Post
     ’ M o r t u a r y facility is situated ben e a th 'H' stand, access from the p l a y i n g


f     ch w o u l d be upwards through U n it e d R oa d p a d d o c k v i a gate 18.

     blue fl ashing light no rmally vised for bomb alerts
                                                                                       The entrance
      the c a sualty post in use w o ul d be clearly m a r k e d b y the use of the mobile
                                                                                at the ground.
C a sualty Post/M o r tu r a r y facilities w o u l d be m a n n e d b y officers from the 'M'
                                                                                                        The

N o rt h ar ea office who are trained in its use.                    B o t h locations ha v e secure
telephones to provide a direct link with the I ncident Con t r ol O f fice at the
g r ound a n d a separate facility to m a i n t a i n a link w i t h the m a t c h incident
de s k at the Force Operations Room.

A m b u la n c e Service

The Grea t er M a n ch e s te r Ambulance Service m a i n t a i n a pres e n c e on m a t c h days at
the ground, in a d d i ti o n on receipt of a n em e rg e n c y call from the Incident
Control Officer, the ambulance service w o u l d d i s p a t c h all a v a i l a b l e units to
the f or e court of the football ground v i a the A . 56 C h e s t e r Road.                 A Police
offic e r from the C asualty Receiving Post w o u l d receive them on the forecourt
in the v i c i n i t y of the Souvenir Shop.

O n receipt of the call,           the ambulance service w o u l d s et in m o t i o n plans       to;

              a) A lert hospitals.
                                                                  «


              b) Put medical teams on stand b y a nd if r e q u e s t e d se n t to scene.

              c) D i sp a t c h large amounts of First A i d equipment,           stretchers,
                 o x y g e n ,- to the s c e n e .

The a m bulance service will only concern itself w i t h su r v ivors a n d n o t persons
who are deceased.

The units in taking casualties to local h os p itals                     would   exit   the   f o re court
al on g W a r w i c k Ro a d N o r t h on to Traf f o rd P a r k Road.




                                                        - 32 -
      Visitors coach parking area




      p
      '




^€2

             &                            VI
                 &

                                           0

                                   js *



                               o




                      - 33 -
                                                            MANCHESTER        UNITED       FO OTBA LL       CLUB.
                                                                         i7 y ' x% u          |7      (5-




                                                                                                                                                  Location of

                                                                                                                                                  Emergency
                                                                                                                                                        i
                                                — UNITED HOAO PaOOOCK.
                                                                                                                                                  Exit Zones
       ±                         'IS
                                                          14


                                                  S4                                                                                              and S e c to rs
                                                                                                      21
                                       S3                                                                                          *- Yt<\%
                Ij I I !>•                                                                                   Z9                         • f u
                                            K                                                               urn Tfwnf>l                 H
                     Z4      I                                                                                   nfO!;||",
                                                                                                                           ....



                                  7                                                    v              231        iri
                                                                                                                       rflPP
*                                                                                                                         Hi»
     t'!i

            i    .
                                       S2-1                                            L   S 7        K
                                                                                                                         I.IIK     ■-
                                                                                                                          •I* ,i   -
                                                S1

                                                                                   tHAFFORO RftOOOCK                                            L.MT&
u>




                                  b% (A 7©             T t n       ®7<f 7*    74    77 7 f       tt
                              NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                                GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




 MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR      OLDHAM ATHLETIC FOOTBALL CLUB




: eoffrm   information


             There will be in Attendance, at every Home Game, one fully Equiped Ambulance
             plus crew. The vehicle will be parked at the rear of the ground next to a set
             of double wooden doors, behind which is the First Aid room.

       ^ ^ T h e Ambulance will not leave the ground. In the event of an incident the crews
            will assume the roll of 'Incident Officer' and Control Point.

             There is an ideal area for the Mobile Control, behind the score board. This
             area is tarmaced and over looks the whole ground. Entrance is made at the
             rear of the ground.




CONTROL ACTION


            1. Dispatch vehicles to the ground.

            2. Notify G.K.Underhill   (Designated Officer for Football and Sports Grounds).

            3. Notify Duty Officer.

            4. Notify Royal Oldham Hospital.

            5.   Hold any extra vehicles at   the Royal Oldham Hospital.




                                                  - 35 -
               POUAjTJPll^y i'KUK :                                    run'*                                                                          jv i



                                                                       *jv-s>                            Uc..I. •                          < >.•. >
                                                                                    ~^Xr\iM'"?/:„fto ^>c
                                                                                                                         \■     ^j:-,
                                                      ~ i_ v.U-Ni^'*                    a-   r-s                                                      1oUCi-

                                         M A R T IN S                   SI f i N ^ 5? 5/3
                                            — F fiM lc rt—        .               ■V               V l£ lT 0 6 S              •*’ »i

                                                        paddock                                      .   STG&IL& ~2Ct*6>


-    K W V
                                l<yfAu    c^APP'CITo/1                                       24.2-f&
                                Lts$     V16 1tc?G.$

                                                                                                                     i
                                Hoiufe.’ SuPPoe3ge£ cwecrtdl                                 14.3 5 /                                                     ROCHDAL
                                                                                                                                                          TERRACED
                                                      tA&A&ws m $ s                                            (iftfi° ^
                                                                                                                                                          555/4


                                Ch£uku Suppofxr&ts                                           g.042-                                                            »>vJ” .

    €H Q                               CNON AA(i^VM&)66S )
                                                                                                                    a^>
    Q    C£L                                                                                                                                   t^cCl
    Q    UJ




                   »VO«'i                       <^ a d d o c | & - " «                             ( ©
                                                ~ ~ —     -|-               !------------------------ —
                    W*N I                        ■'                     .   t2 |J J < .®
                                                                            Suufi.*'’                    I
                                                                                                         |   . nmiI'6.
                                                                                                             v
                            I
                                                         rJlAIN              STAND 4 5 5 /1 ;
                                           ISliyT jj—                        ■-• ,.?°;,£
                                                                             12/13.                                                     iS/’lb/i?'
    iA>\,.v                                                                 T '    -s
                                                                                   \
                                                                                             <vOK
                          NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                               GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR         OLDHAM RUGBY LEAGUE CLUB



              CONTROL INFORMATION

              There will not be a service attendance at this ground unless the
              capacity is 5,000, or more.

              Medical cover is provided by the St. John Ambulance Brigade who have
              a first aid room underneath the main stand.

              Access to the ground is via Counthill Road, turning right into the
              ground. This entrance is opposite James Street.

              The pavillion will become a temporary mortuary.



              CONTROL ACTION

              1.   Dispatch vehicles to notified R.V. Point. They will be met by a
                   Police Constable who will be wearing an orange waistcoat marked
                   'Police Marshall'

              2.   Notify G.K. Underhill (designated Officer for Football and Sports
                   Grounds).

              3.   Notify Duty Officer.

              4.   Notify Royal Oldham Hospital.




                                                 - 37 -
                                                                             J3„YMBjQLS_
                                                     —   *   t         GAS    -       M a in s t o p v a l v e
                                                                 ©
                                                                 ®     WATER              *- MAIN STOP TAP

                                                                 ©     ELECTRICITY                 -   MAIN fu s e s

                                                                 ©     AFA    -       INDICATOR PANEL
                                Sec
                                                                 ® SPRINKLER - s t o p v a l v e
                                                                 ®a - AREA OF SPECIAL SALVAGE
                                                                 0     HAZARD IDENTIFICATION

                                                                        W A T E R SUPPLIES

                                                                 ®     SUITABLE FOR MAIN PUMPS

                                              £                  @     LPP'S ONLY
                                        to'*r:$coo
                                                                 —» ( ? ) —*• LENGTHS OF HOSE

                                                                             HYDRANTS
                            □     " n                                  YELLOW
                                                                 O                        -     0 - 3 4 0 L/MIN

                                                                 O     GREEN          =       3 4 0 -6 8 0 L/MIN

                                                                 O     BLUE       =    6 8 0 - 1 1 3 0 L/MIN

►■ " Z iy v r A *   Zc*v£                                        o     RED    =       1 1 3 0 + L/MIN

                                                                     OTHER WA T E R S1JPPIIFS
                                                                                                                      ">s..
                                                                                  V 6c s t T i O t i S
                                                                               l^Mcon       GnVnxoce. Cpfe*-

                                                                               fyCUcker         &Vn>n.cA—
                                                                      s r 3, I idceJt* EhVRxnce..
                                                                      \. ^ ’T\cWe)_ ^r\Vttuic-€_
                      f7 s                          ^   7   S                N Jy Clic K e r    &hiM>cje^
                   M A   n   J    S    t   * w ;d                              lEx'\V _<^o3i^i>^flc>Lrp)
                                                                               I, E-kiV" opjtiu f i a c h
                                 T f
                                                                                  £x\V o^xlb. (jA aVcW Pfvyp)
    VJftTgRSV\C3^»jq 'PeiQD-OCK
                                                                               lOjEklV- ^b-.-^Jpyk.-W^VoA
    I Q     H     E          ^                                                          cpfej. -   w   /s   w j    Jl .


                                                                     ^         ^ t^xV          - \ j js W L L -
                                                                N
                PlaY                                            O
                                                                J7       f
                                                                         -
                                                                              l£ SC\V q p h ^ T' E x c . tt_
                                                                              fk/iebxL ^efe»_CP.-.^\.oc\c.
                                                                                                                                 ON
                                                                                                                                 CO


                                                                k             II,Heiol                  *D- Clock.
                                                                     £s
                                                                         I    \ & f"\eV<d-_SWpE>________
                                                                      VJ
                                                                                ^U^xku^^-SHMJ-CiCV^
                                                                         5 ^ M u i c K u r \ $ > rOlzXcC/jM.

                                                                     J?
                                                                     c*           ^h&Ac>^3>}3>£:                   ^ _ ._ .
5


    Z M         O .
                                                                                             Ajrca_rjJ|i>WL
                                   x       l

                                                                              IS/IiJLUlCkfil—      .----------- ------- ------



                    r a P x t-Aft              ^»VPC
                                                                              %    H(jJUV *“ V^U^t\l,M(V.
                                                                              7s Hujr^Vu^f\              *** s%
                                                                                                              s*t>
                               NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                                GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR                  SALFORD RUGBY CLUB




CONTROL INFORMATION


             There will be in attendance at Home Games
                      1 Fully equipped Ambulance plus Crew
                      1 Officer
                 The Ambulance will be sited just "inside" the gates situated at the
                 Weaste Lane end of Willows Road. The vehicle will not leave the ground
                 and in the event of a Major Incident, the Officer will assume the roll
                 of "Incident Officer" and the Crew, are immediate "Care Team".
                 Holding Area will be Weaste Lane. The Police will supply a Constable
                 for the Holding Area and he will wear an orange tabard displaying the
                 words "Police Marshall"
                 First Aid will be provided by the St. John Ambulance Brigade.
                 Any person requiring hospital treatment will be transported to hospital
                 by a vehicle supplied by Control.
                 The Club Room would become a temporary Mortuary.



CONTROL ACTION




                 1. Dispatch vehicles to Weaste Lane

                 2. Notify G.K. Underhill   (Designated Officer for Football and Sports Grounds)

                 3.   Notify Duty Officer

                 4.   Notify Hope Hospital- Salford Royal




                                                  - 40 -
                 SALFORD RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CHIB.




Ground           THE WILLOWS - Tel      061 737 6363




Location         Willows Road - Salford 5»




Access           Main Gates via Willows Road ( First gate from
                                               Weaste Lane ).
                 Playing Area via Main Gate.
                 Rear Gates via top Kennedy Road.




ITearest A & E s- Hope Hospital - -j- mile.




Suggested R.V.     Weaste Lane - Between Gore Crescent & Gore Ave.
                   Willows Road.




II.B. Parking not allowed on Weaste Lane & Willows Road on match days.


     First Aid cover provided by St. Johns Ambulance.

     No police control point at this moment, police officer located
     in the scoreboard.
                   SALFORD RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB
                             THE WILLOWS                                                 Church

                                                           Flayers tunnel
                                                                                                  C+

     Park Gates
                                  ..easte Lane                          Main Ambulance Access


                              Terraced Housing



                                                                               M                       Lords Ave


                   Weaste
                  Cricket
                   Ground                        Rugby Field            o w
                                                                        M
                                                                                           o




Access to                                    • Terraced Housing .
rear of field
                                          Kennedy Road




                                                      Barff Road

                                     c+




                                     'i'ootal Drive
                               NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                                GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR       ______ SWINTON RUGBY LEAGUE CLUB




CONTROL INFORMATION



                 There will not be a Service Attendance at this ground unless
                 the gate capacity exceeds 5,000


                 First Aid Cover is supplied by the British Red Cross
                 who have a purpose built unit just inside the entrance to the
;                ground

                 Holding Area -     Station Road, adjacent to the
                                    Railway Station or
                                    Pendlebury Road

                 Temporary Mortuary sited in the B.R.C. Building




CONTROL ACTION




                 1.   Dispatch vehicles to the scene

                 2.   Notify G.K. Underhill (Designated Officer for Football and Sports
                                                                               Grounds)

                 3.   Notify Duty Officer

                 4.   Notify




                                                   - 43 -
                     SV;rJTOLT RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB.
                                                             i




 Ground             STATION ROAD - Tel     061 794 1719



 Location           Iynton Road - -V mile from Town Centre.



Access              I-Iain Gates via lynton Road.
                    Playing Area via Main Gates.
                    Rear Gates via Pendlebur.y Road.



Nearest A &         Hope Hospital - 2 miles.



Suggested R.
Points.             Station Road, adjacent to Railway station,,
                    Car park - Pendlebury Road end of grounda




H.3.      Ho parking area along Station Road prior to lynton Road
                                             SV:iNTOI? RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB
                                                           STATION ROAD


                                                        Townsend Road



                                                  Car
                                                  Fark
                                                             " M “         “" M H       M    ’

                                                                                                                  i
                          Housed



                                                 ■3            I
                                                                         Rugby Field             J'   Tunnel ^
                                                 rH
                                                 O            I
                                                              I                                              oU
             •s                                   a4          l-
             r§                                  co
                                                                                       Stand
              C
              o
             •H
                                                ,Jte4     dM -
             +>
             nJ           Lynton Road
             +>
             to
                                                                   Red
                                                                   Cross
                           Roused Area




R.V. Foint
                  jzHzQzHzi m i r m t c
                  .■I i


                           I Stn.
                                                            Railway Line




                                         +>
                                         to
                                         ®                              Disused Warehouses
                                         a
                                         rH
                             NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                               GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE


MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR        STOCKPORT COUNTY FOOTBALL CLUB______________


            CONTROL INFORMATION

            There will not be Service Attendance at this ground except when capacities
            exceed 5,000.

            In the event of an incident occuring you will receive the message via
            G.M. Police -

                        " A major incident at Stockport County F.C. Hardcastle Street,
                          Edgeley

            First Aid cover provided by St. John Ambulance Brigade, who have a medical

     •      room sited to the right of the ground on the car park of the Jacobean Club.


            CONTROL ACTION

            1.     Dispatch Vehicles to the scene via Dale Street into Hardcastle   Street.

     ;      2.     Notify G.K. Underhill (Designated Officer for Football and Sports
                   Grounds).

            3.     Notify Duty Officer.

            4.     Notify Stockport Infirmary, Withington and S.M.A.R.T.




                                               - 46 -
                              NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                                   GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE


    MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR     WIGAN ATHLETIC FOOTBALL CLUB, SPRINGFIELD PARK.




    CONTROL INFORMATION

               There will not be Service Attendance at this ground unless the capacity
               exceeds 5000.
*             First Aid cover is provided by the St.John Ambulance Brigade.

               In the event of a major incident the Holding Area for Ambulances will be
i



i
<
          •    along First Ave. Egress will be via Second Ave.

              The first vehicles’will report to the Police Station via a Police Marshall.

              The Police Station is situated just inside the ground,access is through
j             the double gates to the left of the club room.

               The club room will become a Temporary Mortuary.




iCONTROL ACTION


i              1. Dispatch vehicles to scene and remainder     to First Ave.

j              2. Notify G.K.Underhill (Designated Officerfor Football and     Sports Grounds).

;              3. Notify Duty Officer.

1              4. Notify Wigan Infirmary - Leigh Infirmary,     & Royal AlbertEdwardInfirmary.




                                                   - 47 -
                 WIGAN ATHLETIC FOOTBALL CLUB.




Ground s-        SPRINGFIELD PARK - Tel      0942 44433




Location s-      Springfield Road - Springfield. - '.Jigan.




Access          Main Gates via First Avenue»
                Playing Area via ,»;a.te far end of car park.




Uearest A & E    Royal Albert Edward Infirmary - 1-A- miles.




Suggested R . V . Springfield Road adjecent to Springfield Hotels




1T.B. Parking on Springfield' Road and St. Andrews Drive not allowed
     for public on match days.




                                    - 48 -
                                                                                                          / “uijCq u x pueqs UT-BUi aapun
                                                                                                      /     qsoa pfv q-SOT^ suqoi* »q.s

                                                    x xx


                  uaaauBO t o o u o                                                    a-eo    /                           saTxasuJnjj
                                                              lauunj, saa^-ejj             y

                               qoantioi ^                   > '   /   '   ' A
                                                                                r*ipu«nE                                  Xoa^uoo aofiocj
                                                                                • i
                                ,s 5.3* sa^ Puo°9S— IJ /
                  q-aaj^S spu-eiAi
                                    "ft \          *p ivj
                                     5     I      *



                                    □
          laqon pia-cjSu-iads \ ^flT £     *      >-
                                     CO
                     3I-T6J X S 0
                                            •a/i? pJttu,
                         IT'S--0                        -




                              Gsnoi                                             aATJOi Biiajpuy •ip


                                                              ^OHd[
                                                            epxg-V-C,
                                                                                    •eajy pa snow


        -fUTO(J
A*H ps^saS^ng




                                                                  anio Tivsaoaa o ijo t e l v h vd ik
                           NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                               GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR      WIGAN RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB,CENTRAL PARK.




CONTROL INFORMATION

         There will be in attendance at every home game:- 1 Officer, 1 fully equiped
         Ambulance plus crew. .
         The vehicle will park alongside the Police Control room which is accessed via
         Doughlas Road-.
         The officer and crew can site themselves within the Police Control Room.

     •   The ambulance will not leave the ground and in the event of an incident the
         officer will assume the roll of Incident Officer and the crew will become
         the ’Immediate care' team.
         Injuries within the ground, requiring hospital attention will be moved from
         the scene by a service vehicle provided by control. The patient/s will be
         cared for by the crew in attendance at the game or the British Red Cross.

         Holding area for Ambulances will be Hilton Street and Additonal vehicles will
         be held on Central Park Way.

         The club room will become a temporary Mortuary.




CONTROL ACTION

         1.   Dispatch vehicles to Hilton Street.

         2.   Notify G.K.Underhill (Designated Officer for Football and Sports Grounds).

         3.   Notify Duty Officer.

         4.   Notify Wigan Infirmary - Leigh Infirmary, & Royal Albert Edward Infirmary.




                                               - 50 -
                                                                          &

                    illGAIT RUGBY LEAGUE FOOTBALL CLUB.


    Ground          CENTRAL PARK.         Tel    0942 31321


   Location         Central Park Way - Close to town centre.


   Access           Main Gates via HILTOIT STREET.
                    Rear Stand via DOUGLAS ROAD.
                    Car Park - River Douglas side ( limited access ).


   nearest A & E   ROYAL ALBERT EDUARD gJFIRHARY. ( -k Mile ).


^Suggested R.V.
^ F o i n t s-     CEHTRAL PARK WAY & PARKDTG AREA rear of training
                   ground. ( Access from Douglas Road )a


   Incident
   Control         Adjacent to police control unit* This gives complete
                   overview of the whole .ground and also close liaison
                   with both Police and British Red Crosso




  IT.3. British Red Cross caravan & ambulance park adjacent to Police
        Control Unit*




                                        - 51 —
                     WIGAN RUGBY 1EA.GUE FOOTBALL CLUB




                                                                                                RAEI

                             Housed Area                                   Control
                                                                   Point
                                         H I
                                                                                        Cplm
Hilton Street                        I     Popular Stand

                                                                                                  &

                                                                            T rg       Car
                                     £      Rugby Field    Jf *            G round   Parking
Snooke:                                                                               Area
                           ra o



                                     p —     —    ~-------- —      I

                                  pesestrian Walkway

                                  River Douglas

                                     Central Park Way
                                                                                               R.V. Point
                            Scout HQ
                            & Car
                            Park
                      Turner Street               Housing Estate


     0
   Car Park
                £
                V>
                •*
                u
                         Housing
                *         Sstate
                 %
                          NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                               GREATER MANCHESTER AMBULANCE SERVICE




M&JQH INCIDENT PROCEDURE FOR     HXHQttE FOOTBALL OLIJB AND ROCHDALE HCRNELS RUGBY OLIJB


              CONTROL IONFORMATION



              There will not be service attendance at this ground except when
              capacities are 5,000 or more.

              First aid cover is provided by the St. John Ambulance Brigade.

              Access to the ground is off Sandy Lane, (main entrance) and or
              each corner of the ground on Willbutts Lane.

              Holding area for ambulance will be Sandy Lane.            The nearest accident
              and emergency unit is Rochdale Infirmary.




              CONTROL ACTION

              1.     Dispatch vehicles to notified R.V. Point where they   will be
                      met by a Police Constable who will bewearing an orange
                      waistcoat marked 'Police Marshall'

              2*      Notify G.K. Underhill (designated Officer for Football and
                      Sports Grounds).

              3.     Notify Duty Officer.

             4.      Notify Rochdale Infirmary.




                                                 - 53 -
