                                                   (a.I      ,y /vO> I iTvvv,^      -   A^-a ^


Statement of Dr Edward C Walker, SHO in Anaesthetics at Rotherham DGH
regarding the Hillsborough Incident on Saturday 15th April 1989


At 3.00 pm on the day   of the incident I had just returned home and

happened to turn on the television to see pictures of the crowd disturbance

at the Hillsborough ground.    There was no talk at that time of any

casualties nor from the pictures did it seem apparent that there would be

a great number of people injured or killed.

However, I decided that it night be worth my travelling to the Northern

General Hospital just to see if I could be of use in the event of any

casualties being received.

   >ve at Tinsley and as idrove out of the house/1 encountered an

ambulance travelling towards the centre of Sheffield with lights and

siren on, and I put my own headlights on and followed immediately behind

this ambulance.

It transpired in fact that this ambulance was in fact on its way to

Hillsborough,but it passed the Northern General Hospital in doing so.

I turned off into the hospital grounds.

I arrived at the Casualty Department to be told that they did know of a

disturbance at Hillsborough and also that ambulance control had told them

     there was a Daediatric cardiac arrest coning into the department.

However, the two events were not linked as far as we knew.             We learned

later that the paediatric cardiac arrest was in fact from the ground.

This first child received was in cardio-respiratory standstill and we

instigated routine cardio-pulmonary resuscitation.          1 intubated the child

and in doing so noted that there was evidence of gross inhalation of

stomach contents.   As far as I can recall we did establish sinus rhythm




throughout.   1 oeiisvo this bov has since died.

Whilst resuscitation '•■;as oeinr; carried out cn this first patient, the second

~^iid arr•ved also in a state of csrdio-oulncnarv arrest.            Similar measures

we ^2 carried out ar.d this child was broucht cac.-' into sinus rhythm v/itn a
                                                   <J o*1
                                                   P
- f y t r ^ o c ”7
good output although he also had fixed dilated pupils throughout and

has also I believe since died.

These two patients had taken up the available space in Resuscitation room

 and I believe the next case was taken into the "clean theatre area".

This patient had a good cardiac output but was irritable c e r e b r e f t v and

in a decerebrate posture, although not actually fitting at that time.

 I intubated this patient without any drugs and another doctor took over

his further care.                             During this time more casualties had arrived and

were being taken through to Plaster room area, One of these was in a
        Co'yol
similar peoition -to the last patient, ie cerebrally irritable but

  l^^hing and with a good cardiac output.                                         I took the decision to leave

this patient in the care of a non-medical member of staff, as there were

further patients in^cardiac arrest state coming in.

As far as I can recall the next patient I dealt with was also in the

plaster room area.                            He was^caraiac and respiratory arrest.                             I intubated

him and was joined by a doctor whose name I never found out, who was

apparently at Hillsborough and had come to the hospital from there.

I think he said he was from Liverpool.

There was also a police officer present who assisted us with ventilation

~nd cardiac massage.                              We had dificulty establishing venous access and

w^^fentually resorted to a central line. ia®fci«rrta6 > was re-established with

a good cardiac output.                                 However, his output fell at one stage and he

re-arrested.                     We re-started him, but then he arrested for a third time and
                                                                                           4s
his pupils were fixed and dilated throughout.^ A t this time as there

were more casualties arriving.we took a joint decision to abandon

resuscitation on this patient.                                         It was during this time that we ran into

—*->^ *■   r*   -f   • •-* *^ ? r f »-   •*    .3 i p ‘I    ' *’   '      *“      a   j?   ' ^   V r1   O I tS           and


                     r-.aXiS V-               01 course nor available routinely in tne piaster room,

and oeocie t.nat we asked to **etcr. drues were                                                           not familiar

with resuscitatior. 3 roecur* 5 ' f or examoie iunisr student nursss 1 and '
                                                                  v
'’smember one oartic.jiar incident where I was brs,uah£ back a wtoiai of Atroci:
   and a vial of Adrenaline but no syringe or needle with which to draw

    them up.   I eventually resorted to drawing up the drugs in a discarded
                                                                                       /u^A )
   syringe, diluting ufl0 ®*^tap water, and injecting down the endo-tracheal

    tube.

   >As I recall the next patient I attended to was in the recovery area

   of the clean theatre.      He was having closed cardiac massage and being

   hand ventilated with a face mask.      I inspected this patient and we

   continued routine cardio-pulraonary resucitation.            Unfortunately due to

   the large number of cardiac arrest situations that were going on at

   this time there were no cardiac monitors at all available and we

   ^^suscitated this patient 'blind' throughout the procedure.

      also ran into a problem here in that although there was an ambu-'

   bag available to \eitilate the patient through the endo tracheal tube,

   we had great difficulty in finding a) suitable piping and b) a suitable
                                                                                                 ' V?
   oxygen outlet through which to oxygenate the patient.             This patient      K V - / <U/J '




   was therefore ventilated on air before this situation was remedied.

— 7 ?I believe at this stage I was asked to go round to the dirty theatre

   area where there was a young boy who was fitting.            He had been treated

   by one of the casualty officers and by Dr Ryan and required intubation

       ventilation.

   Operating department assistants were available at this stage and I
                                                  *

   carried out a routine raDid sequence induction before transferring the
                      1
   Datient to GITU. -
                                                           0\
   An identical procedure was then carried out on fltfe second patient in the
                                                 -\rsco
   dirty theatre area who was also^ transferred to GITU.

   I then got involved    in the resuscitation of a patient in the Resus area

   2.nc i;:ia.
             ’'tod a central lip?? cn this oat .lent.     T^is ostient was in

   asystcie for so.r.e 15 rr.inutss and I believe resuscitation attempts were
     ii
   abandoned.                                                /!
                                                           AiT
                                                           /             _
   I then went uo to ward 60 where the victims who had*been sent to GITU

   we’-'e remittee- several of these deteriorated neurologicalIv on the ward
                                                        585
and I carried out rapid sequence inductiongon two of these patients before

transferring them to CICU. -     Q Jv/

As far as I can recall this covers the major amount of work in the immediate

primary care of the patients vdMftSte I encountered.

I would like to list a few of the difficulties which I encountered during the

course of the afternoon -

a)     There appeared to be considerable delay before activating the Major

Accident Procedure, I am unclear to exactly how long this was but I

understand that members of casualty staff were trying to do this and found

        they could not get through to the hospital switchboard.

I am not aware of the standard procedures for activating the Major Accident

Plan     but I am unclear as why this could not have been done by Ambulance

Control.

b)     Identification of patients - obviously the standard Major Accident

Procedure did not get under way until a good number of patients had come

into the department.      Had I personally known what the scale of the

disaster was going to be, I think the simplest way would have been to Letter

or Number the patients with a marker pen.

 ^^^Although this was probably a unique event in the number of cardiac
                                                                                      /■frW
arrest situations that were going on simulataneously^       I am sure that the
                                                                                                *
lack of available cardiac monitors was detrimental to some patients.             I )f^ ,            *«v<
                                                                                 I Av H '
d)     I noted that in the Major Accident packs all the endo^tracheal tubes      I          ^       «

that I could find were uncuffed and of one size.  They were also uncut
         -t-51
and didW*% have any angle piece connectors already attached.  This led to

some delav in establishing satisfactcrv ventilation, one to the large extent
            '    1                                                          ..   ?
of innalaticnal"        i-Jury that was sresent, cuffed tubes were essential.     i

e)     As I mentioned previous!'/ there was difficulty in oxygenating one

 patient cue to the lack of available suitable oxygen tubing to conenct

an anbu-oa,-T tc zr. cv/gen outlet.   As I recall there was only one oxygen

                                                     rP^:Q'0 is connected tc a
outlet in the recover'/ are.a for clean theatre and t’
 Boyle's machine.                                       < ^ £ 2/

  f)   There appeared to be a lack of suitably large^venous cannulae.

  g)   The only available peripheral venous cannulae were of Jelco or
  Cathlon types, ie they require a separate injection port to be attached
  once they have been inserted into a vein and they are also difficult
                                                           u    ^   »
  to secure effectively.   I would stress very strongly that Venlilon catheters

  should be available as these do not require separate needles to be attached

  to the syringe with which the injection    is to be given, and theij* are also

  much easier to secure.    Hfe1 Sleek*' adhesive tape is undoubtedly the easiest

  and^msot effective tape to use when securing venous cannulae and drips in

  a ^^■ry.   This was not available.        W\Mpi   v',v)

k)Again this is probably due to the number of cardiac arrests which    going
                 b\jJc
  on at one time^ We encountered a shortage of basic cardiac arrest drugs such

  as Adrenaline, AtroDi.ne and Lignocaine. We verv soon exhausted the/suDDlies
             0 ±J ■ " M i * : - j i t : "            '                   A
            j&y&cg&fy preparations.       As I recall most of the cardiac arrest

  drug trays that were opened   only contained one or two vials of Atropine and

  Adrenaline.   In the situation that we found ourselves in during the day

  Atropine, Adrenaline and Lignocaine were the only drugs which we really needed




    •
  in the acute stage of cardio Dulmonarv resuscitation.


  These points are purely those which caae to nind in the immediate aftermath

  of the disaster.    I make no claims whatsoever     as to their relevance for

  future planning and as much as anything this is merely a wayo? noting them

  before they get forecotton by me.




                                                            587
                                                                      Sheffield Heaith Authority




ref    JW/D3/                                                  Herrtes Road, Sheffield S5 7AU
ref.                                                                  Tdldphone (0742) 434343
se reply to     A & E D e p t,           Ext.

        3r d    H ay,   1989



        Dr. H.G. Shroeder,
        Consultant Anaesthetist,
        Soyal Hallamshire Hospital.


        Deat' Dr. Shroeder,


        I would like to inform you of the outstanding contribution made by one
        o f A i e rotating Anaesthetic Senior House Officers on the 1 5 th April
        o S R w i n g the Major Accident at Hillsborough Football Ground.

       Dr» Edward Walker, 3.H.O. in Anaesthetics presently at Rotherham was at
       home and heard of the incident on the radio.    He therefore decided on.
       his own initiative to come to the Northern. General iiospital and arrived
       here just as the first casualties were arriving.    Almost immediately
       the department was flooded with large numbers of acutely ill patients
       requiring urgent resuscitation.    For a cirae Dr. :<alker was the only
       person with anaesthetic training in the resuscitation Hoorn and he was
       instrumental in bringing speedy treatment and resuscitation ho a large
       number of patients..

       I am indebted to the cool and efficient actions of this young Doctor
       on that day -and he deserves special commendation.


       Yours sincerely,

                               *   ' \    JA
       J.      WARDHOPS
       Consultant in Accident and Emergency Medicine-




       Dr. V. Boyd, Consultant Anaesthetist, motherham District General Hospital,   /
                                                  Moorgate rtoad, Kotherhcwi.     v




                                                      S88
                                                                                     Sheffield Health Aulhority




                                                                              Kerri0* Road, Sheffield SO 7A U
                                                                                    Telephone 0 7 4 2 4 3 4 3 4 3
                                                                                          Fax 0 7 4 2 5 6 0 4 7 3
.se reply to


         Accident-
                 , and Emergency Department

         15th June, 1930




         Dear CoU£a*ue,

         As vou nay Know, the West. Midlands Police are investigating the incident
           "^Lllsborourch stadium on the 1 5 th April 1939*      One arm of the investigation
          .-r^Plrns the Coroner and he is esceci-.ii■/ interested in the patients who were
         oroupiht to the Accidcnt and Rmer^ency Department of the Northern General
         Hospital and have subsequently died.      I have provided sn over used statement
         of the situation but the Coroner would li:<e such ncre detail on the
         activities in the Resuscitation Hoorn on that day,      I have therefore provided
         the Police with a list of’ people involved in the Accident and Emergency
         D£par-:ment.

         ■fou rnav therefore be asked for a statement by West Midlands Police,
         There :nay be difficulties in patient identification but all the available
         information on patients is housed with                         In the Medical
         Records Office.                         ----------------------

         I have contacted the Solicitors acting for the Health Authority in this
         .
         ’natter and they have advised that if you have any reservations regarding
          rheso statements, you contact them beforu speaking to the Police,

         Tre*Solicitors concerned are O.-cicy « Coward, address - 2 5 GIossop Hoad,
         ^ j ^ i e l d 310 2UB, telephone Mo. 727A.35 and the person dealing with this
          9 c r is                 '   \


         Yours sincerely,


                             '/




         J. WARDiJOPF:
         Consultnr.t ir. Accident a n d '\rar;’encv Medicine.




                                                                     589


                                           I L L S VZL TST0   :   ‘ON 3H0Hd             9 S J H QNOWWbH H H d
   ••d   w d i_ sl£ 0 <1661 6 0
                                                                      Sheffield Health Authority


                                                QsffisssmH            H o s p i t a l
f.    JW /D S
                                                            H erries Road, Sheffield S 5 7AU
f.                                                                  Telephone (0 7 4 2 ) 4 3 4 3 4 3

 reply to                              Ext.


      Accident and Emergency Department

      3rd May, 1 9 8 9



     Dr. E.C. Walker,
     S.H.O. in Anaesthetics,
     Rotherham District General Hospital,
     Moorgate Road,
     Rotherham.


     Dear Ed,


     Thank you very much for your very important report on the incident on the
     15th April.

     I owe a great debt to you for the work you did that day and from your
     account your efforts were very significant in bringing speedier treatment
     to a large number of patients.

     If there is anything I can do for you in the future, please do not
     hesitate to let me know.


     Yours sincerely,




     u.   /<j-vRDROPE   F .*i.C .S .
     Consultant in Accident and Emergency Medicine




                                               590
    D r. Ed Walker



  8 February 1997

  Mr. James Watdrope,
  Consultant, Accident & Emergency Dupt.,
  N ortkern G cn etaiH osp ital,
  Sheffield
  S 5 7A U .

  Dear Jim,
  A s a result o f tko Granada 'Hillsliorousjk' dnuna broadcast ill Deccm kcr 'ast, I iiavo finally te e n p u l ;.n touch
  witli iky Hillsborough Family Support Group, anti kave w e t up witk tke Hammonds?, tke parenU o f Philip
  tau n m ou d , the first v ictim to arrive at tke N G H - He was tko first victim I attempted, to resuscitate on tke
  oW> Mrs. H a m m o n d kas keen trying to discover my identity for nearly e ig k l years.
  I kavo aleo seen copies of tke tmjuesl and police statement transcripts, «nu learned tkat I '.vas referred to. on
  several occasions as an 'unidentified doctor’, and tkal Dr. Stater stated tkat Pkilip in kia opinion was dead
  bv tke time lie arrived at the kospital.
  I skould ke grateful if vou could let me "know wketker you know of any reason tkat I was not conlaclca ijy !r
  West Midlands Police to provide an oflicial statement, nor asked to appear at tke inquest. In my statement. ^
  lu you I said tkal at one stage Pkilip did indeed kavc a sinus rhytkm and a cardiac output, wkick is okviously
  al odds witk Dr. Slater's evidence.                                                       -
                                                                                            n r ih'i i,
   I look forward to ken ring from you.                                                       A t' J* <j

   Kind regards,

   Yours sincerely,




   D R . E d W a 1.KKR




                                                                         £91



1i p r . c n   *<zrr r r                ■( ir    i Trrn       *i"i*i -u ir>i i                      ,**»m-mt*h.j»'
    _______________________        E-MAIL:

  13 February l^ V i

  Rickard cniitli. Editor,
  The BMJ,                                                                                  :
  BMA Kuiisc,
  Tavistock Square,
  London W\_1H 9 JR.                                                                                    ;
                                                                                                               f
  Editor,
                                                                                                                V-

     December List year. I reviewed Lie HiJsDorct^L' television drama tor the BMJ. I had keen keen to db
^ m is as I was invclvcc voluntarily in. resuscitation ciiorls on n a a v oi Ihe victims ivno arrived at the
  Northern General Hospital. In order tc donate The tee to tne ir'amilv support croup, I made contact witfi
  .kc sccrclarv, wtio I now snow is Ilie lather ot the iirsl victim i a fourteen -year-cua :'ov' .o ai>pcar at Lhe
  accident & emergency department.                                                                              .*

  I kave also teen given, tor the tirst time, copies ui inquest transcripts and post-mortem tinuings. I read
  ihal I am rcicrrctt to several lim.03 as an "unidcutiiicd doctor, acspile niv identilv being wok known, and
  despite the iact mat I provided tile consultant concerned witk a written account or niv actions on tke Jar.
  A lik ougii I was puzzled at not having oeen asscd tor a statement l-v ^,'cst i orkshirc mojLcc i.jvno wofe
  charged witk gathering evidence tor t ie inquests), I had until now assumed that what happened at trie
        i I             1     i       r **• *               !                     ’        •»"**.
  aospilats was never brougul up. 1 _iun il upset, ing and u> some cxicnl insuiliui .o be referred to in atv
  aijsence.

  Three points out oi many deserve mention, rirstlv, 1 sav in my report that the rirst victim at one itage nad
        cardiac output ana a snius riiylkm on the ECG. Secondly, I note tkat many victims ha<.\ c-.-idcncc
     gross soiling oi tne airway with gastric contents. Foircdv. most "resuscitation unigs used wefie
  administered via ike cndolrackeai lubes.

  In die inquest ana post icoricm repcri, ike pathologist suites he thought il iikctv ihai Lie tiisi victim wjis
  dead by tke time ke arrived, and possiblykerore tkat, a; his pulse was only telt In* a -ooiiceman. who was
  proijablyin iocL palpating his own puisc. Tuere is no mention in ike posi mortem trouorl 1 have seen uior.
  I understand in any others) or bronchial soiling. Finally, muck is made or there being nc marks <i>z
  aLiemptcd cainndation on Uic lirst •.•iciim I received. Tke. supposition is iiiai no rcsusci. alien w$=
  attempted, whereas hi iact adrenaline ana atropine were given via t_ie tracheat r;:ure. Someone other th in ^
  me removed the endolracneai tube bciore die boy go I as Lar as .he cost mortem room. Ajlkoiun u 'v»>ldd „
  je difiicult to say csactiy when this happened, as ail the deceased iincluding those that diwi at die hospital)
  wore transported k.ics to ike temporary mortuary at me iootbaii ground. Tiiis parlictdar bey s parents never
  even knew ke had keen at tke hospital untii she months later.          .           ~~                        3
13 L-sltt-iiary

            one o r many volunteers who dici w.u: tkey could oti t l - a t Jay. In particular, I Tvr>rlceri to
     vas o n ly
 Stk a doctor fcrom L iv e rp o o . o r akotit my o w n a*e 12 6 at i k e :im e > . I n e v e r s a w kim again. I h a v e
•viliingly involved in the rainilies attempts to win a iudiciai’,reviev ot th e inquest verdict. O n e w-v i
je   aj3ie to dc? so is t o ask i t t a e r e are any ot.ier Jocturs reading tk i s who w e re involved o n riie uay/aiid
approaclied to provide statements nor appear ar the inquests, it. like me, they teei that certain aspects
e v e n ts o n t l i e Jay w e re at ttie very leastc lo sse d o v e r at the inquests. 1should b e    i r a t e i u . ii tney co
contact e:tiievmv3e:r (via e-mail.                  orthroughthisloumali.or contact tnetaitiiivsupport o r o u p                  direcriv.T?
■.vn'-"ct is:                                                                                            v                          i
                                                                                                                            f       \
                                                                                                                         i~       *


            M r. P   H a m —i . n J .                                                                                    F
                                                                                                    >                             I


                                                         A                       t

                                                                                                                                   £

                                                                                                                                   f




i ) R . | - D W \ f K TR
                                                                             593
         HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                             (WEST D I S T R I C T )



                 INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

           VICTIMS OF THE HI LL SB OROUGH FOOTBALL

                       STADIUM DISASTER

                    ON THE 15TH APRIL,        1989



                   INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


m                          PHILIP HAMMOND




                               Bet ore

      DR. S.L.   POPPER.    LL.B.    B.MED.Sci,   B M . B S . MRCGP

                    (Her Majesty's Coroner '
                                           )




                                    At

                   The Medico-Legal Centre.
                        Watery Street.
                          Sher f i e l d .

                                    On

                           2nd May 1990

r..
> 1
                   TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




           From the Notes of J.L. Harpnam. Ltd..
                Official Shorthand Writers.
            55. Queen Street. Sheffield Si 2DX
                                          591                         1043
                                    INDEX


|DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

  By THE C O R O N E R ..........................................




                                                                       to
                                                                       10
  Cross-Examined bv I1R. F R A S E R ...........................


(POLICE SERGEANT JOHN     KILLOCH - Called

  By THE C O R O N E R ..............                                  7


DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled

  Ey THE   C O R O N E R ............................................ 10


DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MI CHAEL LAYTON - Called

  Ey THE   C O R O N E R ............................................ 11




                                •-oo — oo- •




                                         595

                                                                            1044
2na Mav 1v90

            INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF PHILIP HAMMOND

          M R . FRASER: The final evidence you will hear today
  relates to Philip Hammond.     Philip's mother and father are
  directly behind me and they have with them some family
  friends, a social worker and Mrs- Hammond's brother who is a
  social worker here in Sheffield.     The practice which
  represents Mr. and Mrs- Hammond is a member of my Group and
  I therefore appear as their agents through the Steering
  Coffimi t t e s .

       THE CORONER: ^ I have the impression that Mr. Hammond
  was  here on the day of the opening.  Do I recognise him?
  Yes, you were here.   I must have seen you at some point.  In
  that case I won't describe the format of the Inquest because
  you are probably familiar with that already and we will
  start.

       This is a resumed Inquest which was opened on 18th
  April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, rny
  Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

        "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
        identified to PC 1927 Taylor of the South Yorkshire
        Police as that of Philip Hammond by Brian Hammond, his
        uncle.   He was 14 years of age having been born on 8th
        December 1974 at Liverpool.   He was a single man and he
        iived at                                   Liverpool. He
        was a schoolboy by occupation.   H e d i e d at the Northern
        General Hospital following an incident at the
        HTTlsborough Football Ground on Saturday, 15th April
        1989.  PC 1972 Taylor caused the body to be removed to
        the Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
        Detective Constable Simon Wei goId who subsequently
        identified the same body to Dr. Slater.       It is the
        family wish that the body should be buried."

       At that point I adjourned the Inquest.      Then I wrote
  and you, Mr. Hammond, signed the form for me on 30th April
  1989 and what I asked you was to check whether we had got
  the spellings and so on right and in fact you did.      I want
  to just double check that "Philip" has only got one "1", is
  that right and no other name just Philip Hammond?      All the
  other detai Is -L..have read out are correct , aren't they?
  (indicating agreeme nt )

       Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol estimations and in
  the case of Philip these were less than 10 milligrammes per
  100 mils.   I would pause here because I know this has
  concerned you but I do want you to listen to what it
  actually says.   It says, "less than 10 milligrammes per 100
  mils".   It does not say "10 m i ^ i ^ r a m m e s pei’ 100 mils"- It


                                   1                              1045
doesn't say "9".    It s a y s , "less than 10".   That can mean
anything from zero - well, not zero - but .01 up t o -10 and
what it signifies, as I understand it, is negligible.         It
can't be measured.    That is why he expresses it that way.
 It shows on the trace but you can't actually say how much it
is and so the mere fact that it is that, even if it were 10
it would still be negligible.        It might only be .1 and so you
shouldn't be concerned about this.         All right? Ke has got
to record it like that because otherwise he is not telling
us what he has read but it is the conventional way of
expressing a minute amount which he can't quantify and
which is of no si gni f icance. Does thc-it make it any clearer
to you?   I hope it does.        nr. Fraser, do you just want to
ask your client whether he wants me to have another go?

     MR. FRASER:   It wasn't that, sir.  The reason the
family were concerned was that certainly in the local Press
- and this is not a criticism of the Press - in Liverpool
the blood alcohol levels were all recorded at the conclusion
of the first day's business and they are very concerned that
a 14 year old boy, for that is what he was, should have been
recorded as having alcohol in his bloodstream and that has
certain connotations for certain people which is unfortunate
for them but also unfortunate for the family.

          I have actually taken the liberty of speaking to
Dr. Forrest - to Dr. Slater - about this and I think I may
be able to deal with it with him but one of the things that
Dr. Forrest said, and I was looking for it in the
t r a n s c r i p t , was that it could be the equivalent of having
drunk a couple of pints of beer the night before and the
family are very keen to allay that comment in relation to
their son and I think when Dr. Slater comes to the stand I
may be able to allay that fear for the Jury and for the
family in particular.

     THE CORONER:   I think Dr. Forrest was giving an
example to show that this might be a residual reading but he
wasn't saying this was the only way or that had to be the
amount.  It was I think an example of fading really.

     MR. FRASER:    I am sure that is what he meant but the
problem is that not everybody reads that information and
takes what he means.   They sometimes put their own
interpretation on it.

     THE C O RO NE R :’    It may be Dr. Slater will be able to
help on i t .

      MR. FRASER:         I think he will, sir.

      THE CORONER:         I will call Dr.' Slater now.


                                       597
                                                                  1046
                                                   DR.   DAVID   NEIL   SLATRR




                 DR.   DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

                          Bv THE C O R O N E R :

. Dr. Slater, would you introduce yourself in the usual way.
. My name is Dr. David Neil Slater.  I am a Consultant
  Histopathologist and a Fellow of the Royal College of
  Pathologists.

. You are going to tell me now about Philip Hammond who is
  also known to you as No. 93 I think? - A- That is correct ,
  sir.

. We have got him down as identified by Inspector Timms but
  you are quite satisfied this is the lad we are talking
  about, namely Philip? - A. Sir, there was initial
  identification with DI Timms and then later a joint
  identification with DI Weigold, sir. .

 Can you then take me through your post mortem findings? -
 My examination of Philip showed evidence of mild asphyxia.
 There certainly was very mild blueness to the face, a small
 number of haemorrhages to the face, and also small scratches
 around the face but this asphyxia was possibly trivial
 although present and the main findings and cause of death
 lay within the c h e s t •

      Both lungs showed evidence of extensive bruising with
 evidence of haemorrhage into the actual lung substance.
 This was accompanied by a fracture to the second rib on the
 right side and this was accompanied by a tear into the lung
 on the right side with an accompanying haemorrhage of
 approximately half a pint of blood and this was the reason
 why Philip had actually died.

      My autopsy showed evidence of medical intervention in
 that three ECG erectrogesr~^arerrgnpgSTc~lone<f ~on"The b o d y . It
 was my op in 1 on that Che fracture to tne riTT"was not a
 consequence of any attempt at resuscitation.         This was based
 on findings that resuscitat ion fractures are usually either
 symmetrical or on the left side.       It would be unusual for
 them to be on the right side and certainly not on the right
 side in this very, very high position.        So I am confident in
 my own mind that this was an unequivocal traumatic fracture
 that had o c c u r r e d .

      My examination showed that Philip was normally
 developed with no evidence of any natural disease which
 could have contributed towards death and clearly Philip
 would have had a normal life expectancy.

      I submitted my cause of death, sir, as respiratory
failure, that his respiration stopping, due to (1) traumatic
pulmonary contusion.   If I could explain that that is the
                                         598
                                  3                                         1047
                                                  DR-    DAVID   NEIL   SLATER




         medical term for bruising of the lungs and than as a
         contributory caus.= of death I had fractured rib and ■
         pulmonary laceration with haemorrhage.   Pulmonary laceration
         is the medical term for cutting and tearing of the lung due
         to the fractured rib, sir.

     [Q. You mention that there    is marked coning of the cerebellar
 B       tonsils? - A. Yes.

        That happens when you get anoxia in the brain, in other
        words, when there is a reduction in oxygen going up to the
        brain? - A- That is absolutely correct, sir.  When there is
        not enough oxygen in the blood the brain becomes swollen.
        Obviously the cranial cavity, the head, is a limited space
        and the swelling of the brain causes death to occur more
        quickly, sir, yes.

  [Q. Generally speaking, when that happens it is hopeless? -
  |A. Certainly when there is brain swelling and, as you say,
      compression like this, coning, irreversible brain damage is
      present and the outlook is hopeless, sir.

D |Q>    Can you just deal with what your view is in this case of
         loss of consciousness? - A. Yes-        Of the autopsies I dealt
         with at Hillsborough, this was an unusual cause of death, as
         you will appreciate.       The cause here was the accumulation of
         blood within the actual lung substance.        Now if we get fluid
         on our lungs this can be removed by various means-        There
         are medications that can remove this if you can get to
  ■     people quickly enough but when blood develops in the lung
E|      substance this cannot be removed at all and so, in fact,
         there is no known effective medical treatment for this.
         Blood is    very heavy       and accumulates in the lung and in )C X
         fact there is no doubt that in this type of death
         unconsciousness would have occurred extremely rapidly, if
        not instant a n eo us l y, and there wculd then have been no hope
        at all. s i r .

  Q. And no pain? - A. Certainly no pain,         sir,    no.

  |Q. Or even perception being unconscious? - A- The person would
      be totally unconscious with no perception of pain,
      discomfort or anything, sir.

        j^an I just tu r n to the marks of medical      interv e nt ion? I       y V
        tfTTirnryournent ionTtKree ECG~~eTect rodes^    is that right? -
                      >ct , sir.

  |Q. Are these little things which are stuck on the chest,               aren't
      they? - A. Yes.

   |0- Apart from that did you see anything else? - A. Philip had
       the three ECG electrodes to the chest.   The patients who
UI     carne from the Northern General, clearly we were very much

  '                                         599                              1048
                                          DR.   DAVID   NEIL   SLATER




aware that medical or surgical intervene ion could have been
undertaken and therefore all these cases were examined
extremely carefully to look, for example, for needle marks.
If needle marks had been placed in Che body I am quite
confident I would have found those.  There were certainly no
needle marks thac I found in Philip, sir, and so clearly
there had been no injection of anything into Philip.

By extension, just crossing the t and dotting           Che i, there
were no cannulae in situ anywhere? These are            the little
plascic tubes which are put into veins and so           on? - A. Oh
no.  They are quite big things, sir, and chey           would have
been unequivocally seen.

      THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser.

     HR. FRASER;   I think it is right for the record that
the enquiry by Che family as to whether or not there were
any marks of resuscitation was never in any way intended as
a criticism.

     THE CORONER:     Oh no -

     MR. FRASER:    I wanted to make the point lest other
people may have drawn the incorrect inference.   It is just
that Mrs. Hammond has some experience and she just wanted
her own mind satisfied-

               Cross-Examined bv MR. F R A S E R ;

Dr. Slater, correct me if I am wrong, but I think by the
t ime~PFrirlTpHfiaa'~goTr~Tro~Trdspital he was dead:' - A. Yes, I
shouldn't be surprised in my profession.           I was somewhat
surprised th^t~~Pin^Trj^'^a^”talcen to the Northern General
Hospital because my autopsy finding was such that I would
have thought he would have died extremely quickly and become
unconscious instantaneously at Hillsborough.           I have asked
the Officers involved with this and I understand Philip was
not seen by a doctor at Hillsborough.          I think this explains
that only essentially lay people saw him and, in my opinion,
Philip would have been brain dead at Hillsborough.

So the hospital carried out what they thought was exactly
the right procedure but it was sadly of no avail? - A- That
is correct -

The second matter you may be able to help the family on and
obviously the Coroner and that is the question of this
negligible alcohol reading.   It is something which you,
Dr. Slater, will understand has troubled the family a little
because on the opening day I think Dr. Forrest s u g g e s t e d
that a reading like that might be a carry over from a
previous evening's consumption of alcohol and that has
concerned the family.  Certainly it is known to the family
                                       600
                                5                                  1049
                                                               DR.   DAVI D   NEIL   SLATRR




                         that on the way to the ground Philip had a can of shandy,
                        appreciate this is not within your strict discipline but
                        could a can of shandy produce a reading of less than 10
                        milligrammes per 100 millimetres in the blood? - A. There
                        are several points here.   Firstly, in very general terms, S 0
                        milligrammes per cent of alcohol is equivalent to
                        two-and-a-half pints of relatively strong beer and so in
                  B     fact when you are talking in very trivial levels like this,
                        and below 10 was the figure I heard, you are certainly
                        talking there of well less than a pint of lager.   You are
                        probably in fact talking of less than half a pint of very
                        weak lager.

                       Can I draw the inference from what you have said that a can
                       of shandy could produce a reading of less than ten? -
                       Yes, I think that is absolutely true.      I think there is
                       another important point that Dr. Forrest actually has given
                       a figure.   It is less than 1 0 and this could have been a
                       trivial amount.   When any individual dies there are natural
                       body processes which in fact do go on.      The person has died
                       but bacteria still live.      This bacteria can produce very
                       small amounts of a l co h ol . This was a problem, for example,
              D        at the Noorgate Tube disaster.      If the person has not been
                       refrigerated very quickly, in fact, these organisms can
                       produce very small amounts of alcohol which could be
                       registered by Dr. Forrest and I put this forward as a
                       possibility why a very, very small, trivial amount of
                       alcohol could be registered by a machine.

                             THE CORONER:  In fact, I think I have      to say
                       Dr- Forrest did actually deal with this, it      is only fair,
                       and on the whole he agreed with that but he      thought in these
                       particular instances that was not likely to      be a reason for
                       the levels and he gave explanations for it,      because he
                       didn't find the high alcohols.  Do you want      to reput your
                       quest ion?

                  Q. I think what you are saying is that if you drink any
                     alcohol, Dr- Slater, and shandy obviously contains some
                     alcohol? - A. Yes.

                  Q. Particularly if you have drunk it relatively near to the
                     point of death when you measure the blood you may well find
                     something because presumably it will be absorbed? - A- That
                     is right.

                      . That would be right, wouldn't it? - A- This is a very low
                        level and not actually equivalent in scientific terms to a
                        pint or indeed a half pint of lager actually.

                            MR. FRASER:   I am grateful
                                               O        t. D.r. SI at ex'. I was keen to
                       make the point on behalf of the family.      Thank you-

                            THE CORONER:    Thank you.   Dr. Slater,    there are two
              H
                                                            601
                                                                                          1050
Harpham Ltd
                                                    p.s.   JOHN K [ Lf.nr.H




more things.  First of all, I would like you to stay when we
have finished this Inquest because th’
                                     e re is something I wish
to consider and which Iwill say in a moment    and so don't;
leave the Court until Iask you to please?

      THE WITNESS:       Yes.

     THE CORONER:   The second thing is, subject to that,
this is in fact your last appearance before me.  You are not
appearing tomorrow or Friday.  If I have done my sums right
it is 17 cases I believe you did?

      THE WITNESS:       That    is right, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Dr. Slater, I would like to take this
opportunity of firstly thanking you for helping us on that
day because not only were you there on the Sunday and the
Monday I know that 17 cases is a lot and you really worked
very, very hard.   I also recollect you actually accompanied
me when we went to Hillsborough itself on the 15th.      Your
support then and your help then was appreciated by me and
also appreciated by the families.   The families did not see
you   in the mortuary when you were working but they   have seen
you   in Court and I think I can safely say that the way you
have presented your evidence has been sensitive, helpful and
kind and I very much would like to thank you on behalf of
all the people, not just this family, but all     the people for
the way you have presented your evidence in these very
tragic circumstances.   Thank you.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, can I be associated with those
remarks as a member of the Committee and as a person who has
stood before you and represented in excess now of 70
families.  Without question, those to whom Dr- Slater has
spoken have felt the benefit of a quiet word with hirn in
private.  They have very much appreciated it.  Thank you,
sir.

            POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KTLLOCH - Called

                          Bv THE C O R O N E R :

Hr. K i l l o c h . - A. Police Sergeant John K i l l o c h , sir, of the
West Midlands Police.         I have previous taken the Oath-

S e r g e a n t K i L l o c h . c o u l d you take me through the
circumstances as we have them? - A. At about 0920 hours on
Saturday, 15th April 1939, Mr. Philip Hammond senior saw his
son, Philip Hammond, leave the family home with the
intention of travelling to Sheffield in order to watch the
Semi Final football match to be played at the Hillsborough
Stadium.

      Philip was known to be in possession of a ticket for

                                            602                         1051
                                    7
                                                   P^s. _JOHH   KTT.rpf^



 the West Stand terraced area and lie travelled with a friend
 Mr. Ian Southgate.  They travelled on'a coach organised by
 Amberline Coaches of Liverpool and upon their arrival in
 Sheffield walked to the ground and ente red the stadium via
 the Leppings Lane turnstiles.  They then walked through the
 tunnel and into Enclosure No. 3 where, at approximately 1330
 hours, they took up a position about halfway down near to
 the fence separating Enclosure 3 and Enclosure 4.

      They were joined by Mark Peter Preston who states from
 1400 hours onwards the crowd in Enclosure 3 gradually
 increased until by 1445 hours he was unable to move-

      At 1455 hours when the teams took to the pitch there
 was a surge from the crowd behind and Ian Southgate states
 that Philip was pushed forward and out of his sight.  He did
 not see Philip again.

       Mark Peter Preston says that when the teams took to the
  pitch he was holding Philip's hand but the pressure from the
  crowd was pushing them gradually forwards and he slowly lost
 his grip for at 1502 hours there was a further surge from
 the crowd which pushed Philip forward and out of his view.
 He did not see Philip again.
?
       Shortly after 1505 hours, following the severe crushing
  in the West Stand terracing, Police Constable Stephen Taylor
 went into the tunnel leading to the West Stand terraces.   At
 the end of the tunnel he saw a boy who he now knows to be
 Philip lying on the ground.   The Officer, with assistance
 from Police Constable Andrew James Shiel, carried Philip and
 placed him in an ambulance which was in attendance at
 Leppings Lane-

?      Attempted resuscitation was then p a r r i e d out by Police
 Constable Taylor. Ambulance Officer Jane Mofratt ana            “*
^mbu lance ^Offic er Alan Smith. "The amtSUlSrice was then driven
  to"the Northern~GeneraI Hospital by Police Constable Shiel            ,
 and during that journey the Police Constable and the           i Lp/P*
 ambulance crew continued attempted resuscitat i o n .        y K .^

     Upon arrival at the hospital Philip was taken into the
Casualty Department where further treatment was carried out
by a doctor who unfortunately has not been identified, sir.
After some twenty m i n u t e s t H e ~ 3 o c t o r stated he could not
detect any pulse or signs of life and Constable Taylor took
Philip into the plaster room which was being used as a
temporary mortuary at the hospital.

     Dr. Janet Rosemary Doore shortly afterwards examined
Philip in the plascer room and certified 1 ife e x tin ct-

     At 1900 hours Police Constable Tay lor escorted Fhilip
to the gymnasium at Hillsborough Sl>£ttlfljurn where a temporary

                                                                   1052
                                 8
                                             p. S.   JOHN KlLr.or.fl



tnorcuary had been set up. An 0345 hours on Sunday,, 16th
April 1989, Mr. Brian Hammond identified the body of his
nephew to Police Constable Taylor in the gymnasium.

     At 0500 hours Police Constable Taylor escorted Philip's
body to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the
identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

     On 16th April, following identification by Detective
Constable Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried out an autopsy
and submitted a report giving the cause of death.

     Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
blood sample taken from Philip where the presence of ethanol
was detected.  The witnesses proving continuity of that
blood sample are Detective Constable Green, Detective
Sergeant Turner, Detective Sergeant Fletcher and the
analysis-was carried out by Dr. Robert Alexander Forrest.
That concludes my evidence, sir, and there is visual
evidence.

Can you just hold on for a moment or- two?   I just want to
look at one or two things-  With regard to paragraph four of
the summary I think what Ian actually says - he doesn't say
the crowd surged.  I think you will find this on page eight.
He says Philip had been pushed forward.    Is that right, or
have I missed it? - A. Page eight, sir?

Yes.  He says, "By 2.50 it was packed solid" and he goes on
to say he was standing with Philip and describes his own
position.  He goes on, "By this time Philip had been pushed
forward and I did not see Philip again after about 2-55"? -
That is what he says, yes-

In fact, at page nine - and I am just trying to get this
right - this is Mark Peter Preston's evidence, he does
describe a surge? - A. He describes it as a surge.

That is right.  Ian in fact, having lost sight of Philip does
say, "The next thing was I felt a sharp push".

If you turn to page 14 I think I arn right in saying there is
a time of 1502 which I think you mentioned in the summary,
paragraph six.  Wait a minute. - A. Paragraph five, sir-

Paragraph five is a constructed time in the sense that you
worked out from the fact that he said, "About a minute or
the game started"? - A- Yes, he doesn't specifically mention
that time.

He does actually say, "There was a hell of a big push from
behind"? - A- That is right.

Page 25   Stephen Tavlor's evidence,   this is one o f the
                              604
                                                              1053
                                                DR.   DAVID   NEIL   SLATER




Officers to Cook the decision to take - and perhaps you
would listen, Dr- Slater, because I foight ask you to comment
on this in a moment - Philip to hospital, that is right,
isn't it? - A. Yes, he remained with Philip for some time.

I think he says that first of all he was unconscious when he
carried him from the tunnel, that is right, isn't it:* -
He appeared to be unconscious.

They took him to an ambulance,          is that right? - A. Yes,          that;
is r i g h t .

They   tried to revive him? - A. They did.

They cleared his airway and performed heart massage and he
says, "We were able to restart the heart"? - A. Yes, he said
that a pulse could be felt in the neck.

Then they decided to take him to the hospital, that is
right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

That   is how he got into the ambulance presumably? - A. Yes.

When they got to the Casualty Department they were helped by
hospital staff? - A. He mentions specifically the doctor who
we haven't identified.

In fact, he says they tried for about approximately twenty
minutes and then they decided they couldn't do any more. -
Yes.

So what Stephen Taylor is saying is that when he came across
this lad he appeared unconscious.  They tried to revive him
and he restarted the heart so far as he could tell, felt the
pulse, took him to hospital and some doctor, he doesn't, know
who, did what he could and after approximately twenty
minutes--- - A- The doctor said there were no signs of life.

       MR. FRASER:      No questions,    sir,    thank you.

       THE CORONER:      Any questions from any of you?

       HR. LIMB:      No, sir.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, sir.

              D R . DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled

                          Bv THE CORONER:

Dr. Slater, I don't suppose for a -minute it will change what
you have already said but I want to feel as reassured as 1
can be that the family have got this right.     You have heara
what I have just read to you.        *"5 a ^0 ^ ce          noc


                                 10                                     1054
                                                                         D.I.   MICHAEL   LAYTON




                            a doctor and not an ambulanceman.     It i,s right it is
                            possible to restart a heart, is n’t it, not at any point of
                           (course but at some point?     If a person goes into cardiac
                           /arrest you can sometimes restart it? - A- That is certainly
                            theoretically possible.     From the evidence I have just
                            hea r d 7 the posslBFtrty I wonder, especially with a lay
                     B      person, is whether or not they are actually feeling their
                            own pulse, sir.

                           Whether they are feeling a pulse? - A. No, their own pulse.

                           Their own pulse? - A. Yes, this goes through the finger as
                           you know, sir, and I think it is so unlikely the heart could
                           have been restarted because I feel he would have been brain
                           dead and my impression there, having heard the evidence,
                           they probably were feeling their own pulse.

                           Because in fact, particularly if you use your thumb, which
                           is what a lot of people do, you can feel your own pulse
                           quite easily, can't you? - A. Absolutely, sir, yes.

                    J)di   Yes, that is a good point, I hadn't thought      Of that-  So
                       |   what you are really saying that even having      heard this it
                       I   makes no difference to your opinion? - A- I      haven't altered
                       I   my opinion at all, sir.

                           I just wanted to hear that because it is obviously very
                           important for the family? - A. Yes.
                       I\
                    Eft'- I still don't want you to leave because I might need you.           -
                          Yes.

                                THE CORONER:   Did you want to ask anything?

                                MR. FRASER:   No, sir, I am grateful      for you taking the
                           point to clarify it for the family.

                                THE CORONER:   I am very anxious that as far as we can
                           we deal with it.

                                MR. FRASER:   If you hadn't clarified it, sir,        I would
                           have attempted to do so.

                                  DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                                                Bv THE C O R O N E R ;

                     Q- Mr. Layton. - A. Michael Layton, sir, Detective Inspector in
                        the West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination has been made
                        of video film and photographic evidence and Philip has been
                        identified alive in Enclosure No. 3 at 1503 hours on a
                        photograph which has been given the reference number
                        PR1/10A.  On a photograph referenced PR1/15A Philip is also
                H       shown alive in Enclosure No- 3 and that photograph, sir, is


. Harpham Ltd                                           „       606                        1055
                                                 D. I ■   HICHAEL   LAYTON




 timed at 1504.     Sir, Mr- Hammond, Philip's father, has seen
 these photographs and has been able to confirm these
 ident if icat ions•

     Mark Peter Preston has viewed visual evidence and he
has identified himself on a BBC video tape referenced HAP 1
and timed at 1438:44:11.   He states, sir, at this time
Philip would have been next to him although he can't
actually be seen on the video.   Sir, he signed a plan
indicating the position he believes he was in on the
terraces at this particular time and that plan, sir, is
referenced MP1 . Sir, in respect of Philip I haven't
actually done a plan of my own because I feel to all intents
and purposes the plan MP 1 actually reflects the photographs
we have already referred to.

That will be C2 17.    Could you come across? - A. (moved to
p l a n ) Sir, as I have said, this is Mark P r e s t o n ‘s plan and
the point that he indicated is in Enclosure No- 3 and the
point he has indicated is in this position here (indicat- ing)
and as I have said I believe the photographs we have already
referred to actually shows the same approximate location in
Enclosure No. 3.

     THE CORONER:       Any questions,     Mr. Fraser?

     M R . FRASER:     No, thank you, sir.

     MR. LIMB:       No, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:       No, sir.

      THE CORONER:  Is there anything else? Do you wish me
to read what Mr. Wardrope said at the opening with regard to
Phil ip?

     HR. FRASER:   No, I don't think so, sir.  Mrs. Hammond
is going to have a chat with Dr. Slater afterwards and those
matters which remain a little unresolved can be resolved in
the privacy of a private conversation.

     THE CORONER:       Yes.

     MR. FRASER:    I rise again because the family of this
young man particularly want to thank through you the people
who have helped their son on the day and particularly they
want to thank the Officers of the West Midlands Police for
the sensitive way they have dealt with a very d i f f i c u l t
problem over the last twelve months.   The loss of this young
man has obviously caused great distress and the West
Midlands Police Officers, in Mrs. Hammond's words, were
exceptionally sensitive in the way they have dealt with
their investigations.
                                     607
                                                                    1056
                             THE CORONER;   Thank you very much indeed.  I am s<i:re
                        from what I have seen of the West Midlands Police Officers
                        in this Inquiry I would second that.  Thank you very, very
                        much for mentioning it.  It is good for the Officers to know
                        you have recognised their efforts to help as best as they
                        can.
                    B
                              I would just like to say obviously it is very, very sad
                         for you that you should have lost this lad in very tragic
                        circumstances such as these.    I only hope I haven't upset
                        you more this afternoon than, if you like, you were already
                        upset.   The object of the exercise was not to do that.    I
                        have two objectives.   One is that the Jury should know what
                        has happened so that they can understand what is going on.
                    C   That is the legal objective, if you like, but I have a very,
                        very clear objective which is as far as yc    are concerned
                        you should feel so far as we are able we have put things
                        before the Jury so that' they can understand what has
                        happened and so you can understand what was done.    Because
                        you have had contact with the West Midlands Police a lot of
                        this may be within your knowledge but that doesn't matter-
                        It sometimes helps to be able to hear it again.
                D
                             I think Dr. Slater was very, very clear what his
                        feelings were with regard to Philip and unfortunately it
                        would seem that whatever had been done he couldn't have been
                        saved in the circumstances. That doesn't bring him back, I
                        know that, and I am very, very sorry indeed.

                E            Ladies and gentlemen, this is the end of the Inquests
                        we are hearing today.   I don't want you to go just yet
                        please because I want to reconsider something with regard to
                        one of the Inquests which was done and I need a few minutes
                        to think about it.   If you would be good enough to stay and
        «               I will deal with it or not once I have made up my mind-   Can
                        all the legal representatives please remain.   I will resume
                        and just say what we are doing so that we all know what we
                F       are up to.  I need a few minutes to apply my mind to the
                        question.  Thank you all very much indeed.

                              (The Inquest into the death of Philip Hammond
                                 was adjourned until a date to be fixed)



                G




                                                   608
                H
                                                                               1057
                                                   13
L Harpham Ltd
                                   j   j   h   o   X    K   c
                                                            r   s         J         *         r         \      >




                                                                                        J. WAKJJKUPE


          g e n t l e m e n ? Would i t be v e r y i n c o n v e n i e n t f o r y o u ?  I would
          l i k e t o d o w h a t we a r e p l a n n i n g t o do t o d a y .      We w i l l be a s
          q u i c k a s we c a n , b u t a s I s a i d , I w ant t o d o i t p r o p e r l y jr,(j




                                                                                                                              M M
          want y o u t o know w hat we a r e t a l k i n g a b o u t .           We w i l l l i s t e n ,
          t h i n k , t o Mr. Wardroj^e n e x t , and t h e n we w i l l b r e a k f o r a f e w
          m i n u t e s and t h e n come back and d o P r o f . U s h e r and t h e two
          In q u ests.        A ll rig h t? We w i l l c e r t a i n l y d o o n e o f t h e
          In q u ests.
B
                                               JAMES ■ WARDROPE
                                                          ■■ m /%             Sworn
                                                                               ”  ..

                                                       By THE C O R O N E R :

    c     Mr. Wardrc-pe, c a n you g i v e me y o u r f u l l n a m e s , p o s i t i o n and
          q u a l i f i c a t i o n s ? - a . My name i s Jam es fefardrope..              I am
          c o n s u l t a n t i n A c c i d e n t &. E m erg en cy M e d i c i n e ^60 t h e S h e f f i e l d
          H e a lth A u t h o r it y based a t t h e N orth ern G e n e r a l H o s p i t a l ,
          S h effield .

          And i n f a c t t h e r e a r e two c o n s u l t a n t s i n A & E a t t h e ’moment?
          - A. At t h e m om ent.        At t h e t i m e o f H i l l s b o r o u g h I was t h e
          o n ly one.

          You w e r e t h e o n l y o n e .        C o u ld you g i v e y o u r q u a l i f i c a t i o n s a s
D         w e l l , s o t h a t we know what you h a v e g o t ? - A. I am a B a c h e l o r
          o f M e d i c i n e and S u r g e r y , U n i v e r s i t y o f E d i n b u r g h , I h o l d a
          F e l l o w s h i p i n G e n e r a l S u r g e r y from t h e R o y a l C o l l e g e o f
          S u r g e o n s o f E d i n b u r g h and a F e l l o w s h i p i n G e n e r a l S u r g e r y fr o m
          t h e R oyal C o l l e g e o f S u rgeon s, E n glan d.              I a l s o h old th e
          F e l l o w s h i p i n A c c i d e n t 4 E m erg en cy M e d i c i n e and S u r g e r y from
          t h e R o y a l C o l l e g e o f S u r g e o n s and P h y s i c i a n s o f E d i n b u r g h .

Eo        Mr. W ardrobe . t h e r e a s o n why I h a v e a s k e d y o u t o come i s
          b e c a u s e I w a n t y o u t o v e r y b r i e f l y d e s c r i b e t h e s e t up o r a t
          l e a s t w h a t h a p p e n e d a t t h e N o r t h e r n G e n e r a l s o t h a t we c a n
          u n d e r s t a n d a l i t t l e b i t b e t t e r t h e p r o b l e m s t h a t you f a c e d ,
          and a l s o w h a t h a p p e n e d t o o n e o r t w o o f t h e c a s e s .           Can you
          p e r h a p s o u t l i n e f o r me, i t i s q u i t e a b i g d e p a r t m e n t .      I th in k
          you s a y a b o u t 5 S .0 0 0 p a t i e n t s a y e a r .        I s t h a t r i g h t ? - A.
          Y es, s i r , t h e r e a r e 55,0 0 0 a tte n d a n c e s p e r y e a r to th e
          departm ent.

    O. And t h a t       is   365 days a year,                       is   not i t ?       -   A.    Y es, s ir .

    Ci. And I w o r k e d t h a t o u t a t a b o u t 1 5 0 a d a y .                             Would you a g r e e ?   -
        A. T h a t i s c o r r e c t , on a v e r a g e .

          Of t h o s e ISO, .and o b v i o u s l y t h i s i s j u s t a n a v e r a g e                      fig u r e,
          how many a r e a d m i s s i o n s ? - A. Our a d m i s s i o n r a t e i s                         a b o u t 10"
          of that t o ta l.

    d).   S o a b o u t 15 p e r d a y ? - A. y e s .

    Q.     Of t h o s e 15 how many would you e x p e c t t o g o t o t h e i n t e n s i v e
          c a r e u n i t o r t h e * c o r c n a r y c a r e u n i t ? - A. T h e r e w o u ld be on
H         average about one s e r io u s ly i l l p a tie n t per day.

                                                                              609
                                                                    19                                                    72
/




                                                                              J. WARDROPF


         3.    So r e a l l y , q u i t e a s m a l l number t o i n t e n s i v e          care? -        a.   Who
               are s e r io u s ly i l l , yes.

         3.    The o t h e r s o b v i o u s l y n e e d t r e a t m e n t and h e l p ?      - A. Y e s .

         3.    But t h e y a r e n o t l i f e     t h r e a t e n i n g ? - A.    That i s      correct.

         3.    Now, t h e d e p a r t m e n t i s s e t - up w i t h t h e u s u a l f a c i l i t i e s ,
    g          i n c l u d i n g a r e s u s c i t a t i o n room? - A. T h a t i s c o r r e c t .

         3.    And t h e r e s u s c i t a t i o n room h a s g o t how many b e d s o r t a b l e s
               w i t h i n t h e r e ? - A. T h e r e a r e two b e d s i n t h e r e s u s c i t a t i o n
               area.

         3.    So y o u a r e r e a l l y a i m i n g t o b e a b l e t o         c o p e w i t h tw o    se rio u sly
              i l l p e o p l e a t an y o n e t i m e ? - A. Y e s .

         3.    On t h e d a y i n q u e s t i o n o n t h e 1 5 t h how many d o c t o r s w e r e
              a c t u a l l y on d u t y , A & E d o c t o r s ? - A. T h e r e w e r e two a c c i d e n t
              and e m e r g e n c y d o c t o r s on d u t y .

         3.   T h at i s t h e a v e r a g e number f o r t h e h o s p i t a l ?          - A. T h e r e a r e
              a l w a y s two o n .
    D   3.    B oth SHOs o r . . . .      - A. B o t h S e n i o r H o u s e O f f i c e r s ,     yes.

        3. You c a r r y a b l e e p e r .        Were you o n c a l l         t h a t d a y ? - A.        I w a s on
           c a l l t h a t day, y e s .

        3.    T h at d o e s n o t mean y o u h a v e g o t t o b e a t t h e h o s p i t a l ? - A.
              No.

        3.    You h a v e g o t t o be c o n t a c t a b l e ? - A.        Yes.

              In f a c t ,   y o u w e r e c o n t a c t e d ? - A. Y e s .

        Q, What t i m e was i t ?         A b o u t h a l f - p a s t - 3 o r s o ? - A. A t a b o u t
           1 5 . 2 3 I was c o n t a c t e d .

        Q.    And y o u made y o u r way t o t h e h o s p i t a l ?          - A. Y e s .

        Q.    Can y o u remem ber a b o u t w h a t t i m e y o u a r r i v e d ? - A. 1 5 . 3 3 .

        Q.     A t t h a t p o i n t had a n y p a t i e n t s a r r i v e d t h e n ? - A. Y e s ,      and
              t h e r e w e r e t h r e e p a t i e n t s i n t h e r e s u s c i t a t i o n a r e a and t h r e e
              a l s o were in o th e r p a r ts o f t h e d ep artm en t.

        Q. So a t t h a t t i m e a b o u t s i x        p a t i e n t s had a r r i v e d ? - A. Y e s .

            f And t h e n w i t h i n
        Q .•I                            t h e n e x t h o u r how many p a t i e n t s a p p r o x i m a t e l y
              d i d y o u r e c e i v e ? - A. 8 7 p a t i e n t s .

              So y o u g o t more t h a n h a l f - a - d a y ' s w o r k ,       on a v e r a g e ,     w ith in   an
              h o u r ? - A. Y e s .

    H         And o f t h o s e p a t i e n t s how many w e n t t o t h e c o r o n a r y c a r e u n i t
              - I mean i n t e n s i v e c a r e o r c o r o n a r y c a r e ? - A. T h e r e w e r e 17
                                                                        610                                         ?3
                                                                 J. WARDROPE


ip a tien ts    went to i n t e n s i v e c a r e u n i t s .

So a large number? - A . y e s .

:In a d d i t i o n t o t h a t t h e r e w e r e a l s o p a t i e n t s who n e v e r made
 t o c o r o n a r y c a r e , u n f o r t u n a t e l y , who w e r e d e a d ? - A. T h a t zj
 correct.

And I t h i n k you made a r r a n g e m e n t s         - I d o n ' t know w h e t h e r yc-
d id i t or w hether t h i s i s p a rt o f              y o u r p l a n n i n g - t h a t o n e •:
t h e p l a s t e r room s s h o u l d a c t a s a       te m p o r a r y m ortuary.        I s z:
r i g h t ? - A. Y e s , s i r , t h a t i s p a r t       o f t h e m a jo r i n c i d e n t p l =
for th e h o sp ita l.

So t h a t     was a p r e - p l a n n e d a r r a n g e m e n t ? - A.   Yes.

O b v i o u s l y t h e d e p a r t m e n t was o v e r r u n w i t h p a t i e n t s , I t h i n k
w o u l d b e f a i r t o s a y ? - A. We w e r e e x t r e m e l y b u s y , e s p e c i a l l
in it ia lly , yes.

And i t i s p r o b a b l y t r u e t o s a y , i s n o t , Mr. W ard rob e, t h a t 1
t h o s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s y o u r s and e v e r y b o d y e l s e ' s o b j e c t i v e was
t o t r y and h e l p t h o s e who c o u l d b e h e l p e d ? - A. T h a t i s
correct.

P a p e r came a v e r y l o n g s e c o n d ? - A.         I am a f r a i d     th at is
correct.

I am n o t i n a n y s e n s e c r i t i c i s i n g y o u f o r i t .  I am j u s t
t r y i n g t o e s t a b l i s h t h e f a c t s s o t h a t we know.   The u p s h o t c
t h a t i s t h a t d o c u m e n ta tio n f o r a t l e a s t some o f t h e p a t i e n t s
e it h e r does not e x i s t or i s not a d e q u a te.           Is th at rig h t? -
That i s c o r r e c t , y e s .

Now, we w i l l come t o t h e i n d i v i d u a l s who h a v e d i e d i n a
m oment, b u t y o u I t h i n k , h a v i n g i n i t i a l l y h a d t o h e l p w i t h r
a c t u a l r e s u s c i t a t i o n o f i n d i v i d u a l s , b u t a s s o o n a s so m e n o r
d o c t o r s ca m e down fr o m v a r i o u s p a r t s o f t h e h o s p i t a l y o u i n
f a c t c a s t y o u r s e l f i n a d i f f e r e n t r o l e , d i d n o t y o u ? - A. Tfa.
is correct, y es.

And w h a t w a s t h a t r o l e ? - A. My r o l e i n t h e m a j o r i n c i d e n t
p l a n i s t o s t a n d a t t h e a m b u l a n c e r e c e i v i n g d o o r and s e e e v e
p a t i e n t a s t h e y come t h r o u g h t h a t d o o r , a n d t o t r y and
c a t e g o r i s e t h o s e p a t i e n t s i n t o t h o s e t h a t r e q u i r e im m ed iate
c a r e t o s a f e l i f e , t h o s e who h a v e o b v i o u s l y s e r i o u s i n j u r i e s
and r e q u i r e a d m i s s i o n , t h o s e who h a v e g o t m i n o r i n j u r i e s b u t
r e q u i r e t r e a t m e n t t o t h e m in o r i n j u r i e s a r e a , and t h o s e whc
are d ead.

And t h e t e c h n i c a l word f o r t h a t i s        " tria g e" ,     is   not i t ?    -
A. T h a t i s c o r r e c t , y e s .

And r e a l l y t h e o b j e c t i v e i s t o s o r t - o u t t h o s e p a t i e n t s f o r
whom t h e l i m i t e d number o f d o c t o r s / n u r s e s h a v e g o t t o be a i s
a t ? - A. Y e s .
                                                                 J. WARDROPE


 With t h e h o p e o f d o i n g t h e m ost g o o d ? - A.                Yes.

 And p e o p l e who h a v e o n l y g o t a m i n o r i n j u r y - , and t h a t m i g h t
 mean a b r o k e n arm, w o u l d h a v e t o w a i t ? - A. Y e s .

 P a in fu l or n ot.       - A.    Yes.

 If there is         a life      th rea ten in g s itu a tio n ?         - A.      A b so lu tely .

 I th in k p a r t o f th e m ajor i n c i d e n t p la n n in g i s t h a t p e o p le
 s h o u l d g e t t a g g e d w i t h d i f f e r e n t c o l o u r e d l a b e l s ? - a. T h a t i s
 correct.

 And t h e y a r e g i v e n M a j e x n u m b e r s , I t h i n k      is    what ycu c a l l        it?
 - A. T h a t i s c o r r e c t .

 In f a c t , t h e d i f f e r e n t c o l o u r e d l a b e l s w e r e n e v e r u s e e .     You
 j u s t u s e d w h i t e l a b e l s . I t h i n k ? - A. Y e s .

And w o u l d I b e r i g h t i n s a y i n g t h a t i n t h e e n d e v e r y b o d y d i d
g e t a M ajex number? - A. E v e n t u a l l y , so m e t i m e a f t e r t h e
even t.

They may n o t h a v e g o t th e m s t r a i g h t a w a y ,           but th e y d id in th e
e n d f i n i s h up w i t h n u m b e r s ? - A. Y e s .

S o i t i s p o s s i b l e t o i d e n t i f y t h e p e o p l e who d i e d , and I t h i n k
^ e x c l u d i n g Adam S p e a r r i t t and L e e N i c o l , t h e r e w e r e 1 1 . Is
 t h a t r i g h t ? - A. T h a t i s c o r r e c t , y e s .

By t h e i r M ajex n u m b e r s ? - A. Y e s .

Have y o u g o t a c o p y o f          your sta tem en t?           - A.    Yes,    I have.

B e f o r e we come t o t h a t I j u s t w a n t e d t o d i s p o s e o f o n e o t h e r
m atter.        The p e o p l e who d e a l t w i t h t h e n u m b e r i n g o n c e t h e
s y s t e m w o r k e d a r e m e d i c a l r e c o r d s o f f i c e r s ? - A. T h a t i s
correct, y es.

It is     th e ir task .        T h e y a r e n o t m e d i c s ? - A. No.

T h ey a r e adm in p e o p l e , b u t i t i s t h e i r t a s k t o d o t h e
l a b e l l i n g and t h e a d m i n i s t r a t i o n s o o n e knows who i s who and
w here t h e y a r e ? - A. Y e s .

And o f c o u r s e , t h e y h a d t o d e a l w i t h a l l t h e l i v e o n e s a s w e l l
a s a l l t h e p e o p l e who h a d d i e d ? - A. T h a t i s c o r r e c t , y e s .

I f we t u r n t o y o u r s t a t e m e n t and i n p a r t i c u l a r I t h i n k i t i s  I\
your sta te m e n t o f t h e 6 th .        I w an t t o g o t h r o u g h o n e o r t w o o f fI \
t h e s e b e c a u s e I h a v e a f e w p r o b l e m s w i t h so m e o f t h e
i n f o r m a t i o n and I w a n t t o be c l e a r i n my own m i n d . .^ajex          No.
2 i s L e e N i c o l ? - A. Y e s .

And h e i s a l a d who a c t u a l l y went.            u p    to   t he i n t e n s i v e ca re
u n i t ? - A. T h a t i s c o r r e c t .                     - -        ' ‘ *—— — -----—

                                                        612
                                                                                                        75
                                                                  J . WARDROPE
                                                                   >    ' '   i   ■     .I,




. And t h e r e a r e n o t e s a b o u t him;        p r o p e r h o s p i t a l n o t e s and
  r e c o r d s ? - A. Y es .

. So we w i l l l e a v e him.           P h i l i p Hammond,          who i s          No.   8 . is   that,
  r i g h t ? - A. Y e s .               —-*'— — ——

. He was a t t h e h o s p i t a l b e c a u s e h e had a M ajex number? -                            a.
  Yes .

. But t h e r e i s no d o c u m e n t a r y e v i d e n c e      a s t o w h a t h ap p en ed ? -             a   .
  That i s c o r r e c t .

. E x c e p t t h a t t h e r e a r e some EGG e l e c t r o d e m ark s on him? -                      a.
  The p o s t mortem r e p o r t d i d s t a t e t h e r e w e r e t h r e e ECG
  e le c t r o d e s attach ed to h is c h e s t.                       ' *

 | And y o u c a n a t t e m p t t o h e l p me w i t h t h i s by t r y i n g t o e x p l a i n
 j how t h a t c o u l d h a v e h a p p e n e d .       C o u l d y o u t e l l me w h a t y o u r
 ! b e s t g u e s s , s h a l l we s a y , i s ? - A. I n t h e i n i t i a l p a r t o f t h e
 / i n c i d e n t I was s e n d i n g p e o p l e who cam e i n w i t h a c a r d i a c
 | a r r e s t , p a t i e n t s u n d e r g o i n g mouth t o m outh r e s u s c i t a t i o n and
   e x t e r n a l c a r d i a c m assage, I s e n t them t o t h e r e s u s c i t a t i o n
   room i n i t i a l l y t o s e e w h e t h e r t h e y c o u l d h a v e a c h a n c e o f
   b e in g brought round, t o s t a r t t h e h e a r t g o in g .                The f a c t t h a t
   t h e o n l y p o s t mortem e v i d e n c e w e r e t h r e e ECG e l e c t r o d e s , I
   t h i n k p o s s i b l y he was s e n t t o t h e r e s u s c i t a t i o n room b u t t h e
   ECG s h o w e d no c a r d i a c a c t i v i t y , an d b e c a u s e o f t h e g r e a t
   p r e s s u r e o n t h e r e s u s c i t a t i o n b e d s a t t h a t Lxme fie wuul d -be
   s e n t t o t h e m o r tu a r y .

  To t h e m o r t u a r y ,    yes.    Then No. 9 i s B a r r y B e n n e t t ,                I b eliev e?
  - A. Y e s .                                    —!— —*           ---------

  And a g a i n , i t i s e x a c t l y t h e s a m e , t h e r e i s a n e e d l e mark b u t
  no r e c o r d i n t h e h o s p i t a l ? - A. No r e c o r d i n t h e n o t e s , n o .

  V i c t o r i a H ick s,     No. 2 0 . - A. Y e s .

  T h e r e i s o b v i o u s l y p o s t mortem e v i d e n c e t h a t s o m e t h i n g was
  a t t e m p t e d f o r t h i s you ng l a d y ? - A. Y e s .

  And t h e r e i s i n f a c t , I b e l i e v e , q u i t e a l o t                 o f m ed ical
  e v i d e n c e t h a t p e o p l e t r i e d ? - A. Y e s .

  A r e t h e r e a c t u a l l y any p r o p e r l y w r i t t e n up n o t e s i n r e s p e c t o f
  t h i s g i r l ? - A. T h e r e a r e no p r o p e r l y w r i t t e n up n o t e s , b u t I
  know f r o m o t h e r p e o p l e t h a t s h e was i n t h e r e s u s c i t a t i o n room
f and h a d i n t e n s i v e r e s u s c i t a t i o n ' a t t e m p t s T '                 ~ ‘

  So a l t h o u g h t h e n o t e s a r e d e f e c t i v e y o u a r e s a t i s f i e d from t h e
  i n f o r m a t i o n you h a v e b een g i v e n by t h e d o c t o r s t h a t a t t e m p t s
  w ere made.           We w i l l f i n d o u t l a t e r q u i t e a l o t o f a t t e m p t s
  w e r e m a d e . - A. Y es .

  No.   21    is   S t e p h e n H a r r i s o n ? - A. Y e s .

  And a s     f a r a s you c a n f i n d t h e r e      i { |i 4 £ s o l u t e l y n o th in g ,      eith e:
                                                                         J. WARDROPE


           p o s t m ortem o r i n t h e h o s p i t a l - r e c o r d s .     Is    th a t rig h t? -       a   .
           No.

     ({). I b e g y o u r p a r d o n . There i s a m e d ic a l r e c o r d .            I m isread i t
          - A. T h e r e i s no d e f i n i t e e v i d e n c e i n m e d i c a l r e c o r d s , s i r ,
          b u t f r o m t h e p o s t mortem r e p o r t i t w o u l d a p p e a r t h a t Mr.
          H arrison r e c e iv e d in t e n s iv e r e s u s c i t a t i o n e f f o r t s .

    Bo.   Let us j u s t g e t t h i s r i g h t , b eca u se I have c o n fu se d m y se lf.
          T h e r e i s p o s t mortem e v i d e n c e o f i n t e n s i v e t h e r a p e u t i c
          e f f o r t s ? - A. Y e s .

     <p. I s t h e r e a m e d i c a l r e c o r d a s w e l l ? - A.        And t h e r e i s    ev id en ce
         in m e d ic a l r eco rd s, y e s.

     <J). When y o u s a y " m e d i c a l r e c o r d ” , a r e y o u s a y i n g i t      is   a ctu a lly
c         i n t h e n o t e s ? - A. I n t h e n o t e s , y e s .

  <j). So t h e r e a r e p r o p e r h o s p i t a l n o t e s w h i c h a c t u a l l y r e f e r t o
       t h i s p e r s o n by name, s o t o s p e a k , o r a t l e a s t by number? - a .
       Y’e s .
     tf
  0. Adam S p e a r r i t t , No. 2 9 , you know I t h i n k t h a t a t t e m p t s w e r e
       made~T5^HeTp' t h i s l a d , and h e i n f a c t h e w e n t a l l t h e way up
D      t o i n t e n s i v e c a r e ? - A. Y e s .

        And u n f o r t u n a t e l y a r r e s t e d t h e r e , b u t I h a v e a c t u a l l y s e e n h i s
        n otes.        I n f a c t , I h a v e g o t them h e r e , an d I c a n ' t f i n d
        a n y t h i n g i n t h e m , and y e t you se e m t o s a y t h a t t h e r e i s
        e v id e n c e i n th e m ed ical n o t e s .           Can y o u j u s t w i t h r e g a r d t o
      V t h a t ? - A. T h e r e i s n o t h i n g i n t h e m e d i c a l n o t e s b u t t h e r e i s
        t h e h o s p i t a l m ajor i n c i d e n t l i s t w h ic h n o t e s a l l t h e p a t i e n t s
        who w e r e a d m i t t e d on t h a t d a y , and t h a t l i s t c l e a r l y s t a t e s
        t h a t h e went t o t h e i n t e n s i v e c a r e u n i t .

     ). I s e e .     When y o u a r e s a y i n g t h e r e i s d e f i n i t e e v i d e n c e i n t h e
        m e d i c a l n o t e s you a r e b a s i n g i t o n t h e f a c t s o m e b o d y h a s made
        a r e c o r d i n y o u r r e g i s t e r , s o t o s p e a k , w h a t h a p p e n e d t o h im ?
        - A. Y e s .

     3. B ut y o u c o u l d n o t from t h a t r e g i s t e r s a y p r e c i s e l y w h a t was
        d o n e ? - A. No.

     3. What a b o u t No. -30 ■ Gary J o n e s ?          I s t h e p o s i t i o n t h e sam e
        t h e r e ? - A. N o , t h e r e i s e v i d e n c e i n t h e h o s p i t a l n o t e s and
        from t h e p o s t mortem r e c o r d t h a t Mr. J o n e s r e c e i v e d i n t e n s i v e
        resu scita tio n e ffo rts.

    3. So h e m u s t h a v e come i n t o t h e r e s u s c i t a t i o n          u n i t ? - A. Y e s .

          No. 6 j. , g t e g faen O 'N ei l l , t h e r e i s s o m e e v i d e n c e fr o m p o s t
          m ortem b u t n o t h i n g i n y o u r n o t e s ? - A. Y e s .

          Now, t h e o n e t h a t g i v e s me a b i t o f p r o b l e m w i t h i s P a u l
          B r a d y , N o. 6 2 .    I b e l i e v e t h e r e i s a s t a t e m e n t from a Dr.
H                       " A.- Y e s .
                                                                    614
                                                       O /                                                   77
                                                                        J. WAKDROPE


     O. Or J a c o b .      -A .    Jacobs.

     4). Who s t a t e s t h a t h e a t t e m p t e d t o d o c e r t a i n ' t h i n g s   b u t was
         u n s u c c e s s fu l ? - A. Y e s .

     cjj. Mr. J a c o b s I t h i n k i s a c t u a l l y a c o n s u l t a n t ,   is   n o t h e? - a.
          He h a s r e c e n t l y become a c o n s u l t a n t , y e s .

           He i s    a f a i r l y s e n i o r d o c t o r anyway? - A. Oh,          yes.
B
           But t h e r e i s    n oth in g     i n t h e n o t e s ? - A. No.

           And t h e r e i s n o t h i n g     on t h e PM f i n d i n g s e i t h e r ? - A. That i s
           co r r e c t, yes.

    iji. And I t h i n k y o u s a i d y o u t h o u g h t h e was t r i a g e d         a s d e a d ? - A.
         Y es.

           I s t h a t i n f a c t p o s s i b l e , b e c a u s e i f Mr. J a c o b s d i d
           r e s u s c i t a t i o n on him , i f he had b e e n t r i a g e d a s d e a d he w o u ld
           h a v e b e e n d i v e r t e d t o t h e p o s t mortem r o o m , w o u l d n o t h e ? - A.
           That i s c o r r e c t , y e s .

    (j).    W h erea s i f Mr. J a c o b s worked on him h e m u s t h a v e b e e n              d iv erted
D          s o m e w h e r e e l s e ? - A. Y e s .

    <j>. Can y o u h e l p me on t h a t ?           What d o y o u t h i n k a c t u a l l y h a p p e n e d ?
         - A. I t i s v e r y hard t o be s u r e , g i v e n t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s .              I
         know t h a t I d i d s e n d a t l e a s t f o u r p e o p l e t o t h e            m ortuary i n
         t h e l a t t e r s t a g e s o f t h e i n c i d e n t com ing i n a s dead b e c a u s e o f
         t h e g r e a t p r e s s u r e on t h e r e s u s c i t a t i o n a r e a , and I made t h e
         s t a t e m e n t o n l y w i t h t h e e v i d e n c e I had b e f o r e me - t h a t w as
         m e d i c a l n o t e s - and t h a t g i v e n t o me, t h e p o s t mortem r e p o r t s .
         U s u a l l y i f s o m e o n e h a s had r e s u s c i t a t i o n a t t e m p t s t h e r e w i l l
         b e a n e e d l e . ECG e l e c t r o d e s , so m e i n d i c a t i o n t h a t t h e r e h a s
         been r e s u s c i t a t i o n .    I c a n ’t e x p la in i t .

    <j>.   What I am t r y i n g t o f i n d o u t fr o m y o u i s a r e y o u s a y i n g i f Mr.
           J a c o b s d i d do r e s u s c i t a t i o n on t h i s y o u n g man c o u l d h e had
           b e e n t r i a g e d a s d e a d ? - A. n o .

    d>.    He c o u l d n o t h a v e b e e n , c o u l d h e ? - A. N o.

    o.     T h a t i s r e a l l y a l l I am t r y i n g t o     e sta b lish .      No._j53 i s D a v i d / (
           T h o m a s.  I s t h a t r i g h t ? - A. Y e s .                                     ------

    cp.     And t h e r e i s no e v i d e n c e a t a l l a b o u t h i m , and y o u c o n c l u d e
           t h a t t h i s m ust h a v e b e e n o n e o f t h e p e o p l e whom y o u t r i a g e d
           a s d e a d ? - A. Y e s .

    <j>.    No . ^ a i s Joh n G i l h o o l e y , and a g a i n we h a v e g o t        p o s t mortem       ' ^
           e v i d e n c e b u t notnTng" e l s e .   Is th a t r ig h t? - a .          Yes.

           ^ h i l i p S t e e l e , No. 9 9 , i s i n t h e sa m e s i t u a t i o n a s P a u l sradyf.f4
           Dr~I C a u i d e r and E)r. ND a v i d s o n I t h i n k w e r e i n v o l v e d w i t h t h i s v V<
           man;       n o t fo r very lon g;           but t h e y w ere i n v o l v e d .  Would
           a c c e p t t h a t t h a t i s c o r r e c t ? - A.       (th ey s a y s o , y e s .

                                                                                                           78
                                                                J. WARDROPE



 I f t h e y s a y s o , and i f t h e y do s a y t h a t w o u ld i t              be r i g h t   to
 s a y h e c o u l d n o t h a v e b e e n t r i a g e d a s d e a l ? - A.         Yes.

 B e c a u s e h e w o u ld h a v e b e e n i n a d i f f e r e n t      part?    - A. Y e s .     the
 r e s u s c it a tio n u n it.

 No. 1 1 9 . A r t h u r H o r r o c k s , 1 b e l i e v e Dr.         N id u - d o y o u know Dr.
'Nf<fu"7 d l a d y —d o c t o r ? - A-. Y e s , I d o .

I t h i n k h ad s o m e t h i n g t o do w i t h t h i s g e n t l e m a n .       A gain , i f
t h a t i s s o c o u l d h e h a v e b e e n t r i a g e d a s d e a d o r n o t ? -- a .
No, i f s o m e o n e u n d e r w e n t a r e s u s c i t a t i o n a t t e m p t h e w o u ld
not have b e e n .

He w o u ld n o t h a v e b e e n t r i a g e d a s d e a d . That i s n o t s a y he
was n o t i n f a c t d e a d , b u t you w o u ld n o t h a v e t r i a g e d him a s
s u c h ? - A. No.

Now, t r a u m a t i c a s p h y x i a i s n o t s o m e t h i n g ,     fo rtu n a tely ,   you
h a v e many c a s e s . o f ? - A. No.

B u t yo u had       q u i t e a l o t on t h i s d a y ? - A. Y e s .

And I t h i n k y o u o b s e r v e d t h a t from r e c o n s t r u c t i o n s       o f w h a t y ou
h a v e s e e n - w hat w as y o u r o b s e r v a t i o n w i t h r e g a r d t o p e o p l e
who came i n i n c a r d i a c a r r e s t , t h a t i s w h at I w a n t t o a s k ? -
A. Some p e o p l e who came i n i n c a r d i a c a r r e s t we w e r e a b l e t o
g e t t h e h e a r t g o i n g , b u t u n f o r t u n a t e l y i n t h e t h r e e c a s e s we
d id t h a t none o f t h e s e p a t ie n t s s u r v iv e d .         The l o n g e s t t h a t
o n e s u r v i v e d was t h e y o u n g b o y , Lee N i c o l , who u n f o r t u n a t e l y
was b r a i n d e a d .

Would i t b e f a i r t o s a y t h a t e v e r y b o d y who cam e i n i n c a r d i a c
a r r e s t i n f a c t d i e d ? - A. Y e s .

We a l l know a b o u t c a r d i a c a r r e s t and h e a r t m a s s a g e .        Are you
s a y in g th e n t h a t i f a person i s in ca rd ia c- a r r e s t t h e r e i s not
a n y p o i n t i n a t t e m p t i n g i t ? - A. No.          T h e r e i s a g r e a t move
a f o o t a t t h e p r e s e n t t o encourage p eo p le t o perform c a r d ia c
a r r e s t ( s i c ) b e c a u se i n a p a t i e n t h avin g a c a r d i a c a r r e s t in
th e s t r e e t , fo r in s t a n c e , th en given th e i d e a l c ir c u m sta n c e s
then t h e r e i s a r e a so n a b le chance o f t h a t p a t i e n t b ein g
r e s u s c i t a t e d , b u t i t d o e s r e q u i r e a l o t o f e f f o r t and a l o t o f
i n f r a s t r u c t u r e i n t h e com m u n ity t o b ack t h a t u p .

So w h a t y o u a r e s a y i n g , i t c a n work i n i d e a l s i t u a t i o n s ?         - A.
In i d e a l s i t u a t i o n s i t can work, y e s .

I s t h e r e a n y d i f f e r e n c e b e t w e e n a p e r s o n who a r r e s t s , s a y ,
b e c a u s e o f m y o c a r d i a l i n f a r c t a s o p p o s e d t o s o m e b o d y who
a r r e s t s b e c 'a u s e o f t r a u m a t i c a s p h y x i a a s t o t h e c h a n c e s o f
r e s u s c i t a t i o n ? - A. I would s a y t h a t I h a v e n o e x p e r i e n c e
p e r s o n a l l y o f r e s u s c i t a t i n g a n y o n e from t r a u m a t i c a s p h y x i a who
h a s had a c a r d i a c a r r e s t , b u t i t i s a v e r y r a t e c o n d i t i o n .
B u t a l s o I know o f no c a s e r e p o r t s i n t h e l i t e r a t u r e w h e r e
t h a t has o ccu rred .            I t h in k p erh a p s t h e o t h e r s i t u a t i o n where
                                                          616
                                                                                                   79
                                                                       J. WARDROPE


         : n e h a s a s i m i l a r c l i n i c a l p r o b l e m w o u l d be t h a t o f a bad
         a s t h m a t i c who c a n ’ t g e t a i r i n t o t h e i r c h e s t f o r o t h e r
        [reasons.          In my e x p e r i e n c e I h a v e b e e n a b l e t o r e s t a r t t h e
        h e a r t in t h e s e c a s e s , but a g a in i f t h e a r r e s t has occu rred
        o u t w i t h h o s p i t a l t h e s e p a t i e n t s h a v e d i e d from t h e e f f e c t s on
        t h e b ra in o f th e h yp oxia.

    o. I n o t h e r w o r d s , w hat you a r e ' - s a y i n g i s i f y o u h a v e a c a r d i a c
     B a r r e s t w h i c h i s a s s o c i a t e d w i t h h y p o x i a t h e n t h a t i s a much
       m ore s e r i o u s s i t u a t i o n t h a n c a r d i a c a r r e s t o n i t s own? - A.
       Y es .

                THE CORONER:             Mr. F r a s e r ?

                                 C r o s s - E x a m i n e d bv MR. FRASER:

        J u s t v e r y b r i e f l y , o v e r w h at p e r i o d d i d t h i s d i s a s t e r p l a n
        w hich t h e h o s p i t a l p u t i n t o e f f e c t l a s t ?    O b v i o u s l y we know
        you a r r iv e d a t t h e h o s p i t a l s h o r t l y a f t e r 3 . 3 0 .     At what t i m e ,
        i f a t a l l , was t h e d i s a s t e r p l a n s t o o d d o w n , a s i t w e r e ? - A.
        The d i s a s t e r p l a n was n o t o f f i c i a l l y s t o o d down a s f a r a s I am
        aware.

        I t was an o n g o i n g t h i n g i n t e r m s o f t r e a t m e n t ? - A. Y e s .

Q.      Do y o u know w hat t i m e i t was p u t i n t o e f f e c t ? - A. The
        h o s p i t a l d i s a s t e r p l a n was p u t i n t o e f f e c t a t I S . 2 7 .

Q. S o w i t h i n 2 0 m i n u t e s o f t h e game h a v i n g b e e n s t o p p e d so m e
   l i t t l e d i s t a n c e away t h e h o s p i t a l was i n f u l l s w i n g ? - A. Y e s .

        I am s o r r y , I w i l l r e p h r a s e t h a t . The h o s p i t a l was a l e r t e d
        t h a t i t was g o i n g t o g o on t o f u l l s w i n g ? - A. The h o s p i t a l
        was a l e r t e d a t t h a t t i m e t h a t a m a j o r i n c i d e n t was t a k i n g
        p la ce.

O. And y o u w e r e c a l l e d         i n ? - A. I was a c t u a l l y c a l l e d       in p r io r to
   th at.

I       I a p p recia te th a t.        Once t h e d e c i s i o n i s made how l o n g d o e s i t
        t a k e t o p u t t h e p l a n i n t o e f f e c t ? - A. T h a t w i l l d e p e n d o n
        circu m stan ces.        I n t h i s c i r c u m s t a n c e w e h a d t o t r y and p u t
        t h e p la n i n t o e f f e c t a t t h e sam e t im e a s h a v in g t o t r e a t
        l a r g e nu m b ers o f s e r i o u s l y i l l p a t i e n t s , w h i c h d o e s
        com pound t h e p r o b l e m .

        I a p p r e c i a t e t h a t , and h e n c e t h e l e a r n e d C o r o n e r ' s com ment
        a b o u t p a p e r w o r k c o m i n g a p o o r s e c o n d , an d I t h i n k on b e h a l f o f
        th e f a m i l i e s t h a t i s u n d erstan d ab le i n t h e c ir c u m s ta n c e s .
        What c o m e s o v e r c l e a r l y i s t h a t t h e r e w a s a d i s a s t e r p l a n p u t
        i n t o e f f e c t w i t h i n 20 m i n u t e s o f t h e d i s a s t e r , and i t w a s o n e
        w hich h o p e f u l l y o p e r a te d t o t h e b e s t o f t h e r e s o u r c e s
        a v a ila b le.       Can y o u t e l l me b r i e f l y ’ w h a t e x t r a s t a f f i n g i s
        brought in once th e d is a s t e r p lan i s pu t in to e f f e c t ?                      Can you
        g i v e u s a n i d e a o f t h e numbers i n v o l v e d ? - A. The n um b ers
H       in v o lv e d i n t h e h o s p i t a l plan o v e r a l l a r e r e a l l y enorm ous.              I
        t h i n k g i v i n g an i n s t a n c e ; t h e r e werj$423 a n a e s t h e t i s t s i n v o l v e d
                                                                      1 I
                                                      O “7
                                                                                                           80
                                                                      J. WARDUOPF.
                                                                      r.~ir—-----—---- *-=-

! in     a v e r y s h o r t s p a c e o f tim e- i n t h e d i s a s t e r p l a n , and t h e s e
| v e r y s k i l l e c i d o c t o r s were e s s e n t i a l i n t r e a t i n g th e e f f e c t s o f
! h y p o x i a e s p e c i a l l y i n t h e i n t e n s i v e c a r e u n i t , and t h e r e a r e
j n o t many h o s p i t a l s h a v e 25 a n a e s t h e t i s t s i n t o t a l .     So we w e r e
 I f o r t u n a t e i n h a v i n g th e m , b u t t h e nu m b ers who r e s p o n d e d t o t h e
 1i n c i d e n t ra n i n t o h u n d r e d s .

 I am m o s t g r a t e f u l t o y o u .'- Thank y o u .

                                 F u r t h e r bv THE CORONER:

 So w i t h i n a v e r y s h o r t t h e r e w e r e an a w f u l l o t o f p e o p l e
 t h e r e ? - A. Y e s , s i r .

 W ell,    a r e l a t i v e l y s h o r t tim e,       anyway.        - A.     Yes.

 Can we be a b i t more p r e c i s e .                   When d i d y o u h a v e 25
 a n a e s t h e t i s t s p r e s e n t , a p p r o x i m a t e l y ? - A. A p p r o x i m a t e l y
 w i t h i n two h o u r s .

 W i t h i n two h o u r s .   So i t d i d t a k e a l i t t l e w h i l e               toget a f u l l
 c o m p l e m e n t ? - A. Y e s . T h e r e w o u l d b e an i n i t i a l              r u s h and t h e n
 I    am n o t s u r e when t h e l a s t a n a e s t h e t i s t a r r i v e d .

         THE CORONER:        Is       e v e r y t h i n g c l e a r , members o f t h e J u r y ?
 Y e s ? When we a r e a t t h e M e d i c o - L e g a l C e n t r e I w o n ' t h a v e t o
 s i t w i t h my b a c k t o y o u .      I am v e r y s o r r y a b o u t t h a t .

           L a d i e s and g e n t l e m e n , w h a t we a r e g o i n g t o d o i s t o r i s e
 f o r a f e w m i n u t e s b e c a u s e we n e e d a b r e a k , and t h e n . P r o f .
 U s h e r , we w i l l l i s t e n t o y o u , i f we m ay, and g o from y o u r
 in tr o d u c tio n , so to speak, s t r a i g h t in t o th e In q u est.

                                    ( S h ort A djournm ent)

           THE CORONER:           Members o f t h e J u r y ,         I u n d e r s t a n d you h ad
d i f f i c u l t y h e a r i n g me.   I a p o lo g ise.        At t h e M e d ic o -L e g a l
c e n t r e i t w i l l be e a s i e r f o r a l l o f u s , b u t i f y o u c a n ' t h e a r
t h e n - who i s t h e Foreman - t h e n g e t o u t and s h o u t .                       Do
s o m e t h i n g t o a t t r a c t my a t t e n t i o n , b e c a u s e I w a n t y o u t o b e
a b l e t o p a r t i c i p a t e and t o h e a r .

          R igh t,    P rof.    Usher?

                                PROF. ALAN USHER Sworn

                                        Bv THE CORONER:

Good a f t e r n o o n , P r o f . U s h e r , b e f o r e we b e g i n I w a n t t o t e l l
you o n e t h i n g .    You h a v e j u s t t a k e n t h e o a t h , b u t i n a f e w
m i n u t e s I am g o i n g t o a s k y o u t o t a k e a n o t h e r o n e , b e c a u s e
w h a t I am a s k i n g you t o d o now i s t o t a l k i n g e n e r a l t e r m s ,
and t h e n I w a n t y o u t o t a k e t h e o a t h i n r e s p e c t o f t h e PMs
w h i c h you d e a l t w i t h , j u s t s o t h a t y o u know why I am d o i n g
t h a t . - A. Y e s .

P rof.     Ushesr,     you a r e A l a n U s h e r ,        thjvt* ^ s r i g h t ?     - A. Y e s .     sir.

                                                                                                         81
D r .E d W a l k e r




11 November 1997

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 1106,
50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
LONDON SW1H9AT.




Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,

I have received from Mr. Bone a copy o f the transcript o f our meeting on the 22nd o f October,
for which I am grateful. At that time you suggested that if upon reading the transcript I felt there
were any further points I should like to make, I could do so in writing. I should like to take up
that offer by outlining the following.
The most striking aspect as far as I am concerned is how differently to other medical witnesses
I appear to have been treated. On page 6, line 7 o f the transcript (o f the meeting on 22nd
October) you say "..it is unfortunate that you weren’t given the credit..." to which I respond "It
is more than that." I should like to magnify this reply.
Every other medical witness I have come across was interviewed, often on more than one
occasion, by West Midlands police, and these interviews involved production o f photographs o f
the deceased for identification purposes.
It is a matter o f some distress for both myself and some families that I am still even now unable
to identify positively any o f the victims I worked on. Had I been shown photographs like others,
I would not have had to answer a string o f questions from you about the identity o f victims in the
negative (page 9 line 17, page 11 line 22, page 11 line 32, page 12 line 24, page 13 line 34, page
14 line 16.) I would also have been able to discuss victims' terminal treatment with their family
members. This would at least have been a source o f some comfort to them. As it is, thanks to the
lack o f attention afforded me by the investigating force, I shall never be completely satisfied about
the identity o f the victims I dealt with.
You also raised the point (page 6 line 29) that I have not in fact given evidence at any other
inquests, and that the consultants concerned are usually called upon to appear in person, as
happened at the Hillsborough inquests. I agree that it would not be unusual not to call a junior
member o f medical staff to appear personally, but I find it very odd indeed that even my written
evidence was not made available to the inquests.
 Once again I am brought back to the references to me as "unidentified." My feelings about this
 are not merely prompted by pique at not receiving recognition - it is more accurately described
 as incomprehension. I cannot state strongly enough that I was not "unidentified" at any stage. If
 anything, I was one o f the members o f medical staff most easy to identify.
 It is o f course correct that I wrote out a statement on a West Midlands police statement form,
 which as you say (page 3 line 17) presumably found its way to someone in authority. After this,
 however, the statement seems to have disappeared until early 1997.1 also have to say that I was
 surprised that you did not feel the addition o f the signature o f a West Midlands officer (Julie
 APPLETON) was significant (page 4 line 29) She has added her name to every page o f the
 statement in a way as to suggest that she was a witness to the statement, which she was not. This
 is surely at the least irregular. The statement was just as valid as evidence without the addition
 o f her signature. The only reason I can see that she would have done this is to deliberately mislead
 in some way.
 I should also like to mention that the copy o f my police statement that I saw earlier this year had
 obviously been typed up by South Yorkshire police recently, and prepared on a word processor.
 All other copy statements I have seen are on West Midlands paper and typed on machines
 contemporary with the time. This leads me to believe that my handwritten statement was never
incorporated into the evidence at the time.
For all the reasons above, it is transparent that I was not followed up in the same way as every
other medical witness. The question "why" arises. It may o f course simply have been oversight,
but given the inordinate lengths to which the authorities went to track down and interview all
other witnesses, I find this explanation unlikely.
I am forced to the conclusion that my evidence was deliberately overlooked, and possibly
suppressed. Again one must ask "why", as there is nothing particularly unique about my evidence.
After all I have heard I believe that I was simply an inconvenience. Producing my evidence at the
inquests would have led to awkward questions about how someone like me who was not
employed at the hospital came to be there before the first victim arrived. It may also have meant
that criticisms made in my hospital report (particularly concerning the delay in activation o f the
major accident plan) would have been made public. I am unable to come realistically to any other
conclusion.
My final point concerns page 22 o f the transcript, from line 15 onwards. This is discussion about
the timing o f death, and what was being done in terms o f ‘first-aid.’ On line 8 o f page 23, you
make the point that people on the pitch were trying “to get the heart going again” .. “By manual
massage.”, and I agree to this. I should have stressed more strongly that what the victims needed
was expert intervention, with proper equipment and above all oxygen. N ot attempted cardiac
massage by a fellow fan; not first-aid by a St. Johns ambulance person (however well-meaning);
and not even help from a fully-trained, but ill-equipped doctor. What would have saved lives was
help from the expertly trained and fully-equipped paramedical personnel, who were sitting outside
the gates in their ambulances.
I am aware that under the terms o f reference o f the Scrutiny what I am saying may be o f doubtful
significance. However, if it is accepted that my evidence was deliberately suppressed (and as I say
I am unable to reach any other reasonable conclusion), and if the jury had been aware that the
evidence o f someone like myself had been treatedin this Way, it maysurefy have had some bearing
on their deliberations. For this reason I believe my evidence now can indeed be said to be relevant
to the processes o f the Scrutiny.
f
«


    Page 3




    Finally there are one or two typographical errors that I should like to correct for completeness’
    sake.
    Page 8 line 35
            For “crack(?) thyroidotomy” read “cricothyroidotomy”
    Page 21 line 26:
            For “growing” read “groin”
            For “act(?)” read “carotid”




    Yours sincerely,




    Dr. Ed W   alker
D r .E d W       a l k e r




24 November 1997

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 1106,
50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
LONDON SW1H9AT.


Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,

    I have received into my possession copies o f two statements made by James
WARDROPE. The first is undated, and the second is dated 06/06/89.

        The first begins:
                “James WARDROPE will say as follows:- ”
but is unsigned, undated, and unwitnessed.

       In this statement, he says the following beginning at the bottom o f page 2:
                “A Senior House Officer from Rotherham, who had ju st been passing the
                       hospital, was resuscitating another patient and one o f my SHOs was
                       working on the third patient. ”

        Although this statement is undated, it was obviously made after the date o f the
disaster, by which time Mr. Wardrope was aware that I had not ju st been passing the
hospital. I had travelled specifically to the hospital after witnessing the scenes on television. I
told him this in conversations afterwards, and o f course in my account prepared for him, for
which I received a written acknowledgement dated 3rdMay 1989.

         On the 6th o f May that year, Mr. Wardrope makes his second statement, which differs
somewhat from the first, and is witnessed by Julie APPLETON (PS7844), who as you will
recall is the West Midlands officer who added her name to my statements after they had been
written. In this statement there is no reference at all to me.

        I felt this should be brought to your attention.

Yours sincerely ^
