             F r o m              J E F F         R 0 0 K E »                    M P                     f'Jrtf' fllgc


   Cc
                                                             ’     t k f                           -   j w     cacJ j v y    ^

                                                                                           ckfi^Cr                       k
                             HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
                                    LONDON SW1AOAA
                                                                                /^AioL^ae .
                                                                           9th MAy, 1989                         • /0 )<5~
                                                                    »-yr.. w yrsaggj
Rt Hon Dougl a s Hurd MP
Home S e c r e t a r y                           E i E S f ! ® ® /                      ccMsfy^^                         -
Home O f f i c e ,                                   1 ^    v\? 1 3 2 0     ■              / 77/~' o fc u & ^ S
                                                                 ;4 -» 7
Queen Annes G a t e ,
London S W 1                                                                 -           ffrr&o                          7>v-


                                                                                        /t o r ~ k O * * & / / < L
Dear Home S e c r e t a r y                                                            rnr"


HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY * POLICING COSTS OF JUDICIAL
INQUIRY

I am e n c l o s i n g a l e t t e r I have r e c e i v e d f r o m t h e W e s t
Mi d l a n d s P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y .


T h e G o v e r n m e n t will be seen as s h o r t c h a n g i n g t h e W e s t
M i d l a n d s a g a i n u n l e s s a s p e e d y p o s i t i v e r e s p o n s e is f o r t h c o m i n g
I h ope y o u will s e e t h a t it is.

I look f o r w a r d to h e a r i n g f r o m you.
 WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                          Police Headquarters
Clerk                                                     Room 8 1 9 Lloyd House
                                                          Colmore Circus Queensway
A. V. ASTLING LL.M., M .Soc.Sc
                                                          Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                          Tel. No. 021 -236 5 0 0 0
                                                          Ext. I            I
Please ask for: Mr C Tomlinson
Tel: 021 236 fiOOO
Our Reference: CT/EYP/VAR2/13
Your Reference



5 May 1989



Dear Member

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY - POLICING COSTS OF JUDICIAL INQUIRY

You will no doubt be aware that the Vest Midlands Police are carrying out
an inquiry, headed by the Chief Constable, Mr Geoffery Dear, in support of
the judicial review into the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

The Authority has been seeking assurances from the Home Secretary that it
will be fully reimbursed for the costs incurred. No such confirmation has
been received to date.

In the circumstances, the Police. Authority held a special meeting yesterday
and passed the following resolution, namely:--

(a)     That   the determination that no costs arising out of the Hillsborough
         Inquiry    shall fall on the Vest Midlands Police Authority be
         confirmed.

(b)     That  representations, in the light of (a) above, be made to the Home
        Secretary and he be asked to receive a deputation from the Authority
        as a matter of urgency to discuss the matter.

(c)     That  the deputation comprise the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the
        Authority, a representative of the Conservative Group and of the
        Magistrates, to be appointed by the Clerk through the usual channels.

(d)     That   West Midlands Members of Parliament, constituent District
        Councils and Local Police Consultative Committees be told of this
        Authority’s determination and asked for their support in relation to
        it.

(e)     That the appropriate officers be authorised to enter into discussions
        with regard to methods of recoyering this Authority’s costs; that
        additionally officers be authorised to seek counsel’s opinion and
        initiate legal action, if apropriate, to determine the legal basis on
        which this Authority is committing expenditure in connection with the
        Hillsborough Inquiry in the absence of a satisfactory outcome of
        discussions with the Home Secretary.

(f)     That: a clear timetable for recovering costs incurred be drawn up
         including an initial payment to recover costs already incurred and
        monthly payments to this Authority thereafter.
2

5 M a y 1989



A   copy   of the report considered by the       Authority   with   background
information is attached for your information.

The Authority would welcome your active support of their decisions.

Yours sincerely




ClerTT: Police Authority

TO:- THE VEST MIDLANDS MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT
                                                       Agenda Item No. 4


                      WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY

                              4th MAY, 1989

              HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY JUDICIAL ENQUIRY

   Joint Report of Chief Constable, Clerk, Solicitor and Treasurer



  PURPOSE OF REPORT

     To set out the position with regard to the financing of the
 enquiry by the West Midlands Police in support of the judicial review
 into the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

 BACKGROUND

     Members will be only too well aware of the tragic circumstances
 which took place at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield on 15th April
 and of the fact that the Chief Constable has been asked by the Home
 Office to assist with the judicial review.

     The    Finance and Management Committee at its meeting on 20th April
 received    an informal report from the Chief Constable and at that time
 it was     understood by the Chief Constable that the full costs of the
 enquiry    and consequential costs for maintaining the current level of
 policing   of the West Midlands would be met from central funds.

      In the light of this confirmation was sought from the Home
 Secretary that the cost of seconded officers and the additional costs
 incurred by the West Midlands would be reimbursed in full.

     This was reported orally to the meeting of the Police Authority at
 its meeting on 27th April when the matter was touched on as part of
 the Chief Constable's operational report. The Authority took the view
 that, if it appeared that costs arising from the enquiry would fall on
 the West Midlands,     a   special   meeting   would be called.     The
 Vice-Chairman following the meeting agreed, in the absence of the
-Chairman, to the calling of a special meeting on 4th May to consider a
 report of officers on the latest position with regard to the funding
 of the enquiry.

HOME OFFICE VIEW

    In a written reply to questions raised by West Midlands Members        of
Parliament the Home Secretary has stated no additional costs will          be
borne by the West Midlands.

    Whilst no formal reply has been received from the Home Secretary
to the Clerk's letter referred to in paragraph 2.3, informally it is
understood that the basis for payment may be under the mutual aid
arrangements which will mean South Yorkshire Police Authority will
have the financial burden placed upon it in the first instance.
      However, as explained in the financial implications section of
 this report the mutual aid basis of payment does have its limitations
 and in normal circumstances is not likely to allow for this Authority
 to be fully reimbursed.

 MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS

     The curfent arrangements for mutual aid are      contained   in   Home
Office Circular No 38/89 issued on 28th April


PROPOSAL

     That consideration be given to the action, if any, the Authority
would wish to take in the light of the contents of this report.

FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS

     * \ thlS early ^ a g e of the Judicial Enquiry an accurate assessment
or the total cost can not be made.

    r,Bfsed on the Chief Constable's best assessment (as mentioned' to
the Police Authority on the 27th April) an average of some 350 seconded
police officers and related costs over the next two months could result
in additional direct expenditure of some £2.4m representing overtime
working, expenses, accommodation, travelling, etc.

     There would also be consequential costs to the West Midlands
Police Authority arising from overtime worked by police officers to
cover the loss of the officers on the Enquiry. Based on the Chief
Constable's best assessment to date that cover will be necessary at the
rate of 8 hours per day for five days a week for each officer seconded
to the Enquiry, the additional costs over the next two months would
total some £l.lm.

     The most difficult additional costs to assess at this early stage
are temporary civilian staff support, computer, telephone, office
accommodation, printing, stationery and other administrative costs.
But the position is being closely controlled and monitored and an
estimate will be made as soon as possible. Although there will be
considerable costs involved they are not expected to be on the scale
of the employees costs etc. mentioned above.

     One of the major factors still to be determined relates to the
basis of paying overtime to officers who are required to serve away
from their normal place of duty and are not allowed to return home.
The Police Negotiating Board is being consulted on this matter and
legal opinion may also be required.

     There will clearly be considerable additional costs still to       be
incurred over the remaining months of the Enquiry which can not         be
assessed at this stage.
                                          -3-

)




    6.7        Initial indications from the Home Office are that these additional
          costs should be recovered on a "Mutual Aid Basis" from the South
          Yorkshire Police Authority who have already informed the Secretary of
          State that they do not consider that such costs should be incurred by
          their Authority.

    6.8        A new Home Office Circular has been issued on the 28th April, 1989
          on "Mutual Aid Arrangements". As outlined in Appendix     attached the
          Home Office formula outlined in this Circular would not recover the
          level of costs mentioned above in this report.

    7.    LEGAL IMPLICATIONS

    7.1        The liability for costs depends upon whether the Chief Constable's
          involvement is seen as "mutual aid" as part of the Home Office inquiry
          and at the direction of Lord Justice Taylor.

    7.2        Normally inquiries of this sort are undertaken by the Police Force
          for the area and borne by the Local Police Fund. Section 14 of the
          Police Act, 1964, enables a Chief Constable of one area, on the
          application of a Chief Constable of another, to provide constables or
          other assistance for the purpose of enabling the other Force to meet
          any special demand on its resources. This is generally known as
          "mutual aid".    In such cases the Police are under the direction and
          control of the Chief Constable of that other Force. If "mutual aid" is
          applicable in the present circumstances it follows that the Chief
          Constable of the West Midlands is acting under the direction and
          control of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.

    7.3        The Home Secretary has set up an Inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor
          the costs of which are being met from Central Government Funds.     The
          Chief Constable of Lancashire is assisting this Inquiry as an assessor.
          The Chief Constable along with every police constable has jurisdiction
          to act as a constable throughout England and Wales. By virtue of this
          it is possible for him to undertake Police Inquiries outside the West
          Midlands.   The costs would then be met either by the West Midlands
          Police Authority or in accordance with such agreement which the Chief
          Constable may have with the Home Office. For the latter to apply, it
          follows that the Chief Constable is acting other than under the
          direction and control of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.

               There are no other provisions for one force to investigate
          incidents in another force area at the expenses of that other force
          except under the complaint procedures in the Police and Criminal Evidence
          Act, 1984, which do not apply here.
                                            -4-
s


     8.    RECOMMENDATION

                (a)    That the determination that no costs arising out of the
           Hillsborough Enquiry shall fall on the West Midlands Police Authority
           be confirmed.

                (b)     That West Midlands Members of Parliament be told    of   this
           determination and asked for their support in relation to it.

                (c)      That representations, in the light of (a) above, be made
           to the Home Secretary and he be asked to receive a deputation from the
           Authority.

                (d)       That the appropriate officers be authorised to enter into
           discussions   with regard to methods of recovering this Authority's
           costs.




               G J DEAR                                   A V ASTLING
               CHIEF CONSTABLE                            CLERK




               A.E.G. WILLIAMS                             L.T. BARNFIELD
               TREASURER                                   SOLICITOR




    Contact Officer
    Mr C Tomlinson,
    Assistant Clerk.
    (021) 236 5000 F -
    RPA45/EYP
                                                                         APPENDIX


                                HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

                   Estimated Costs for 350 officers for 2 months




Recovery on New "Mutual Aid" Formula Basis


                                                 Estimated          Estimated
                                                  Actual             Recover
                                                  Costs            H.O. Formula
                                                    £m                   £m


1.      Staff Costs
         Direct overtime        )
         Consequential Overtime )                  2.7                 2.3
         National Insurance etc.)

2.      Other Direct Costs
        Travel, subsistence/lodging etc,           0.8                 0.8


                                                   3.5                 3.1




3.      Administration Including -                       These figures are not
        Office accomm, admin, support,                   yet known, but the 5Z
        telephones (inc. freephone),                     administration charge
        printing, stationery, use and                    allowed for in the
        enhancement of computers,                        Home Office Circular
        equipment etc.                                   on these basic costs
                                                         would only give £,0.15m.
                                                         This is very unlikely
                                                         to cover all additional
                                                         costs involved.




0591f
