"T 'T ” "

            NEWS RELEASE                        50 Q ue en An n e's G ate London S W 1 H 9A T
                                                (N ig h t line 01 - 2 7 3 45 95 )
                                                Contact N u m b e r :

                                    HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

                             STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY


            Commenting today on the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's
            report, the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP said:-

            "i am grateful to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for completing
            the first part of his inquiry in time to produce an interim report
            before the start of the football season.

            Mlt is an excellent   report which pulls no punches            about the causes
            of the disaster.

            "The Government welcomes the thoroughness of the report and its
            recommendations. They include a number of matters which should be
            dealt with without delay pending the longer-term findings of the
            inquiry which will be published in the final report.

            "A Home Office circular* is to be sent out immediately to local
            authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned with
            the organisation of football matches, urging them to take action
            on the report's recommendations so as to put as many of them into
            effect as possible before the beginning of the season. Similar
            steps are being taken by the Secretary of State for Scotland.

            "I am satisfied that the interim report has not identified any
            major shortcomings in the law on safety in sports grounds, though
            clearly the Government will look at the Safety of Sports Grounds
            Act and the Home Office and Scottish Office guide to safety at
            sports grounds ( The Green Guide) in the light of the inquiry.

            "Most of the problems which contributed to the disaster at
            Hillsborough had been recognised in the past. The report reveals
            serious shortcomings in applying those lessons on the part of the
            police, of the club and of the local authority responsible for
            the safety certificate.

            "The report reveals clearly that there are major deficiencies in
            the layout and organisation of the Hillsborough ground which
            should have been recognised and corrected."




            * A copy of the circular is attached.
The South Yorkshire Police


"It will be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to
consider  the  conduct   of  individual officers  and  the  South
Yorkshire Police collectively in the light of the inquiry and the
investigation carried out by the West Midlands Police. I shall
look to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire initially for a
report on the action he proposes to take."


Supervision of Safety Certificates

"Powers recently proposed by the Government in the Football
Spectators Bill will permit the setting up of a new authority
with powers to supervise the way in which local authorities carry
out their responsibilities for the safety of sports grounds if in
due course this is considered necessary in the light of Lord
Justice Taylor's final report.

"The tragedy would not have occurred if lessons learnt in the
past had been properly applied. It is for everyone concerned to
ensure they are applied in the future."
Note to Editors

Following the disaster at Hillsborough stadium on April 15, when
95 people were killed, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the
Home Secretary

"To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
ground on April 15 1989 and to make recommendations about the
needs of crowd control and safety at sports events."

Lord Justice Taylor was assisted by two Assessors: Mr Brian
Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University
of Newcastle upon Tyne. The secretary of the Inquiry was Mr Robert
Whalley from the Home Office. The investigation of the disaster
and the gathering of evidence was carried out by the West Midlands
Police under their Chief Constable Mr Geoffrey Dear, who appointed
Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full time charge of
the investigation. Counsel for the Inquiry were led by Mr Andrew
Collins QC. Technical tests and studies were carried out at the
Health and Safety Executive's Research and Laboratory Services
Division in Sheffield.

The hearing began on May 15 in Sheffield Town Hall, and continued
for 31 days concluding on June 29. 174 witnesses gave oral
evidence. Transcripts of the evidence came to over 3,800 pages,
and some one and a half million words in all. Lord Justice Taylor
also received some 1550 letters.
