        HOME OFFICE
        Operational Policing Policy Unit
        50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SWIH 9AT
        Direct Line 0171 273 3612        Fax 273 2703




FAX
To:     Ian Horton

From:    Mike Ward

Date:   2 July 1997                                     Time: 10:31

Recipient’s Fax Number:    0151 224 6471

Number of pages (including this one): 4

PETER KILFOYLE - HILLSBOROUGH BRIEFING

The first page contains the terms of reference for the forthcoming scrutiny announced on
Monday 30th, together with issues raised in the subsequent debate. The following two pages
are the appropriate extracts from a Q and A briefing prepared for the Home Secretary, and
should suffice.


Please let me know if you have any further queries.




Mike Ward




                      IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                         PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 3612
CONTRIBUTION TO BRIEFING FOR PETER KILFOYLE ON
HILLSBOROUGH

The independent scrutiny

• Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s terms of reference are:

        To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
        Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

        a) To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or
        b) To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the
           purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or
        c) To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to police
           disciplinary matters;

        And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
        is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for
        the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c)
        to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
        which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there is
        any other action which should be taken in the public interest.

• The Home Secretary indicated that travelling and incidental expenses would be
  refunded where applicable. When asked about the possibility of legal aid, the
  Home Secretary said that he had not, as yet, had any calls for legal aid, and that he
  was unable to commit himself. This remains the line to take on this issue.

•   The review will examine evidence relating to the time of death.

•   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith intends to start proceedings in September, and it ishoped
    he will produce his report by the end of the year.

• The Home Secretary has undertaken to publish the advice he receives from Lord
  Justice Stuart-Smith, but cannot guarantee he will be able to publish all the
  evidence considered; this may not be possible in certain circumstances, for
  example in the event that criminal or disciplinary proceedings are pending.

• The families and others will be able to make representations, although the exact
  proceedings of the scrutiny are a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to decide.
                        HILLSBOROUGH Q & A BRIEFING


 The independent scrutiny

 Did the Taylor inquiry get it wrong?

 I don’t believe so. LJ Taylor carried out a full and through inquiry which identified
 the causes of the disaster at Hillsborough and made important recommendations to
 prevent such a tragedy happening again


 Why have you ordered this independent scrutiny if you are not prepared to
 order a new inquiry?

As I explained in my statement, we need to establish conclusively that no material
evidence has been overlooked in establishing the causes of the Hillsborough disaster.
This is what LJ Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny will do.


What are your reasons for not ordering a public inquiry?

We have examined closely the material submitted to us but we have been unable to
identify any significant new evidence which was not available to LJ Taylor’s original
inquiry.


What about the new evidence uncovered by the Granada
programme/Hillsborough Family Support Group?

LJ Stuart-Smith will be examining the material submitted to determine whether it
constitutes new and significant evidence.


Why have you selected LJ Stuart-Smith?

LJ Stuart-Smith is a senior and respected figure from the Court of Appeal whose
experience will be invaluable in assessing the evidence presented.


When will the LJ Stuart-Smith begin work?

I expect LJ Stuart-Smith to begin work in September when he has fulfilled his current
commitments. This will allow those who wish to make representations time to prepare
them.
How long will the scrutiny last?

I hope LJ Stuart-Smith will report by the end of the year.


What will the scrutiny be examining?

LJ Stuart-Smith will look at all the written evidence and other material which has
been submitted to us. He will also be able to consider further material which
interested parties wish to submit.


Will the scrutiny take evidence in person?

That will be for LJ Stuart-Smith to decide.


Will former Ch Supt Duckenfield or any other officers be required to give
evidence?

This is not an investigative body. No-one will be required to give evidence.


Further action

What action will you take if the review finds that there is new and significant
evidence?

If LJ Stuart-Smith finds that there is new and significant evidence not available to LJ
Taylor’s inquiry which brings the findings of the original inquiry into question, I shall
order a new public inquiry. The Attorney-General and the Director of Public
Prosecutions will consider the relevance of that evidence to their statutory
responsibilities.


Could Duckenfield or any other police officers face prosecution?

That will be a decision for the Director of Public Prosecutions in the light of LJ
Stuart-Smith’s findings.
