E.R.
                                                      ma
                                            cc.   Ms Craig
                                                  Ms Rex
                                                  Miss Nicholson
                                                  Mr Yates
                                                  Mr Chilcot
                                                  Mr Hammond
                                                  Mr Moriarty
                                                  Mr Turney
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                                  HMCIC
                                                  HMCIFS
                                                  Mr Bolton
                                                  Mr Goddard
                                                  Mr Lidington
                                                  Mr Yeo




   Mr Mower                                                        10   %*,
        HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY:   PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION



       You recommended that the Home Secretary1s letter to
   Mr John Carlisle MP should not, after all, be publicised and
   the Home Secretary accepted this. Mr Yeo has had a word with
   Mr Carlisle to say that we do not see advantage in
   publication. Mr Carlisle said that he would not publish the
   letter either, unless we saw any need for this in the future.
   I attach a copy of the letter the Home Secretary
   has sent.




   Private Office                           MISS C J BANNISTER
   6 October 1 989                          Private Secretary
                                                           October 1989




                     "J uV v,v^
        You asked me whether the Home Office was satisfied with the response
of the football clubs, local authorities and others to the recommendations in
the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the Hillsborough
tragedy. I should perhaps first set out what we expected people to do, or be
doing.


        You will know that our immediate action on the day of publication of
the Interim Report on 4 August was to issue a circular letter with copies of
the report to the police, local authorities, other emergency services,
football clubs and to sports organisations urging them all to take the action
required in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's recommendations
without delay. The circular letter also reminded local authorities of their
power under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) to prohibit
or restrict the use of a ground if there is judged to be a serious risk to
spectators in any part of a sports ground.

        Since that time we have been checking the progress made, first through
the police and the fire service but also through the local authorities
responsible for safety certificates.     The results we have had so far are
encouraging. There has been a widespread, positive response indicating that
all or nearly all the urgent recommendations have been implemented. In some
cases all of the remaining recommendations have also been put into effect.

        That does not mean there have not been problems.     Some areas of
practical difficulty still exist;    for example, on the nature of written
agreements between some clubs and the police. We shall be issuing advice on
this shortly.


         On safety issues, the indications are that local authorities have
acted quickly, that there have been few problems in implementing the urgent
recommendations of the report, and none which give us serious cause for
concern.   For our part, we are following up any instances where, from the
information obtained, there is doubt as to whether the improved safety
arrangements intended by the Interim Report recommendations are being met in
full.


        I have the power to make a statutory instrument requiring mandatory
terms and conditions to be contained in safety certificates.  I would use




John R Carlisle, Esq., MP.                                     /over
this power if it emerged that this would be helpful, but it could not be
aimed at individual clubs; it would still depend on implementation by local
authorities, and I doubt at present ifit would add anything practical.  But
I am keeping a close eye on the possibility.

        Whether further measures are    necessary to secure improvements in
public safety at sports grounds will     be a matter for decision when Lord
Justice Taylor has published his final report.
