Mr D Brummell
                                                 MQxx^/i    1
                                                                     v>vi

Assistant Treasury Solicitor




                                                                1 1 , -S T ' 8 ^


Following our first day the following issues have been raised for action
by me, together with a few points which you may care to consider:-

1.   COMPILATION VIDEOS

I    As you know I have already supplied seven additional copies of the
"    video compilation for Counsel.   Now that South Yorkshire Ambulance
      Service have been granted representation I understand that all future
      requests for copies for Counsel will be in multiples of eight.   I have
      arranged for another four copies of the video to be made available to
      you.  Please can I ask that when you distribute these you keep a
      record of to whom you pass them.   I have also been asked by South
      Yorkshire Police for a compilation video to be supplied to them - Can
      they have a copy?

2.   WEST MIDLANDS POLICE STILL PHOTOGRAPHS

      As you know I have already prepared twenty copies of these two
      albums, marked RAH/HILL/1 - Q and RAH/HILL/2 - S. You have now
      requested a further twenty albums, which are being prepared and which
      you will have as soon as possible.  As I have asked for the video
      compilation tapes to be listed when you distribute them I would also
      like you to do the same for these albums.  I am a little concerned
      that there is a suggestion that some of the albums have already been
      distributed to the press.  If that is so, it is rather unfortunate
      because the normal copyright protections have not been added and also
      I am concerned that some of the photographs may well have an
      evidential role in the forthcoming Coroner's Inquest on the
      ninety-five deceased.
                                     -   2   -




      PLANS

      I have also had prepared six drawings by our West Midlands Police
      Plan Drawers.  These show various scale plans around the terraces,
      turnstiles, tunnel etc. Twelve copies of these will be made
      available to you today - Tuesday, 16 May 1989.                 S '
                                                                   AJb     i X i S' K v 3 .
b.   SITE OF MODEL IN INQUIRY

      I have had a number of approaches about the model being "upside
      down".  Certainly the model indicates that it would perhaps be better
      for the North Stand to be at the top and for the South Stand to be at
      the bottom.  This then will coincide with the plans that will
      subsequently be produced which show the North Stand at the top of
      the paper.  I leave it to you to make the decision based on my
      recommendations.

5.   INQUIRY LIAISON OFFICER

|    Mr Geoffrey Dear and myself will be    regularly inattendance at the
*    hearing.  However, because of hiscommitments    and also mine in
      managing the investigation, there will be times when neither of us
      will be present.   In order to ensure continuity I have arranged for
      the Chief Constable's Staff Officer, Chief Inspector Nick Dickerson,
     ^tcTalways be present with a Secretary to record salient points, as
      well as to deal with specific requests which he will refer to me
      before action.   I trust this is helpful to you.

6.   STATEMENT LIST AND STATEMENTS

      At the end of the day's proceedings I know you produce a list of
      witnesses for the next day, together with copy statements.  In order
      for myself, the Chief Constable and Chief Inspector Dickerson to be
      fully prepared it would be helpful if I could be on this distribution
      list for one set of copies.  This is particularly important for my
      Incident Room at Nechells so we can keep track of the evidence
      received by the enquiry and link it to the wealth of information we
      have in the HOLMES computer.

Yours sincerely




Assistant Chief Constable
