                                             7 December 1996
Mr Michael Howard
Home Secretary
c/o House of Commons
London SW1


Dear Sir,

We, the family of Graham John Roberts, killed at Hillsborough, 15
April 1989 - aged 24 years, are writing to you to ask if you will
reopen the inquiry into this disaster? We feel that so far there
has been no justice. As well as the concerns already highlighted
by the TV programme "Hillsborough", and the comments expressed by
Mr Trevor Hicks, Chariman of our Support Group, we have a number
of further points we wish to bring to your attention.

This first information we received in April 1990 regarding Graham
was "A Report into the death of.." which states Graham died at
16.25 hours - the 3.15pm   cut off time for information would mean
that Graham was not dead   for his inquest. We received two
conflicting reports frompolice constables who thought    they dealt
with Graham. One stated Graham was wearing a sleeveless T shirt,
the other that Graham had no shirt on at all. Neither of these
descriptions fit with the clothing Graham was wearing on the day.
We have no information what-so-ever regarding what happened to
Graham on that day once he had been forced apart from his
friends.

In spite of phoning the emergency numbers continually, and,
although Graham was identified by one of his friends at 2.00am on
the Sunday, we were not informed of Graham's death until his
friends had driven back from Sheffield at 6.00am. In fact it was
Graham's friends who had to break the tragic news to us,even
though they had pleaded with the Sheffield police to let us know,
as they did not feel able to do so themselves.

Please, please will you allow us and all the other bereaved
families to find out what happened on that day? I'm sure you can
understand why we need to know the truth.  It is within your
power to insist on the reopening of the inquiry, and we all
sincerely hope and pray you will do so.

Thanking you in anticipation for your attention to this letter.

Yours sincerely,




Stanley Roberts          Daphne Roberts      Sue Roberts
(Graham's Father)        (Graham's Mother)   (Graham's Sister)
DRAFT LETTERS FOR THE HOME SECRETARY'S SIGNATURE
Mr anH Mrc S_




Thank you^for your letter about the tragic events at Hillsborough
in which you called for the inquiry to be reopened. I would like
to say first of all how saddened I was by this terrible disaster
and     I     fully         understand         your    desire       to    reach    a     better
understanding of how it was that Graham met his death.


In    the    House      of    Commons         I gave    an      undertaking   to       consider
carefully the representations that have been made to reopen the
public inquiry. I emphasised that I would not take the decision
to reopen the inquiry lightly: I would need to be convinced that
it would be in the public interest to do so.


I explained that in coming to a decisional would consider whether
there is any new evidence,                      and if so,         whether that evidence
appeared to be of such significance that had it been put before
Lord Taylor or before the coroner,                          either the outcome of the
Taylor      inquiry         or   the        verdict    of    the   jury   wold    have           been
different.
                                       IA                   t
                                                            *
The television programme Hillsborough made a specific allegation
that a video camera trained on the central enclose was working
when the Taylor inquiry was told that this was not the case. It
was further suggested that this film might have represented vital
evidence.         The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has informed
me that both the video tape and the transcript of that tape were
made available to the Taylor inquiry. This is a matter that I
                                                                                        K -a -
have promised to look into. I have specifically asked that South
Yorkshirelshould provide me with a copy of this videotape.
                  PdUoc
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has also undertaken to
provide me with a detailed report of all the points raised                                         by
the programme. I will consider his report carefully. I fear that

K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
there may remain matters about which we will never be certain.
                                       ix jjr
In a tragedy of such a magnitude I feel ^.t is sadly inevitable,
though deeply distressing,         that there will be confusion about
some aspects of what occurred. What I must consider is whether
a further inquiry,          if it were to take place, would be able to
provide greater certainty about what happened than we have at
present.


I shall reach a decision on any further action to be taken as
soon as I have been able to consider all those issues. Meanwhile
I would like to offer you my deepest condolences for your sad
loss and the knowledge that my thoughts will be with you and all
the bereaved families during what I know must be a particularly
difficult time of the year.




K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
