                                                                                i *'*



          46-7.AH

          From:        R P Rhodes                 CC   Mr Boys Smith (o/r)
                       F8 Division                     Ms Nicholson
                       Ext 2367                        Mrs Evans
                       30 July 1990                    Mr Goddard )o/r)
                                                       Mr Cogbill
                                                       Miss Goose
                                                       Mr Le Vay
                                                       Mr Simmons
                                 A
                               ?>


          Mr Storr


          ENFORCEMENT OF FOOTBALL EXCLUSION ORDERS

          1.      At last week's meeting on the proposed new Taylor
          offences I undertook to provide a note on the enforcement of
          football exclusion orders.


          2.      In 1985 when these provisions were first considered it
          was envisaged that they would operate in tandem with a
          voluntary national membership scheme to be set up by the
          football authorities.       Such a scheme would have assisted the
          police in keeping out of football grounds those subject to
          exclusion orders.     However, while the football authorities
          were resisting the institution of a membership scheme,       it was
          decided nevertheless to proceed with the inclusion of a
          statutory exclusion order procedure in the Public Order Bill.


          3.      The Association of Chief Police Officers were not at that
          time in favour of a national membership scheme but
          nevertheless were in favour of exclusion orders.       The
          circulation of photographs of those subject to orders and the
          increase in use of CCTV at football grounds were expected to
          assist with enforcement although ACPO accepted that they were
          unlikely to achieve 100% success.      They pointed out that there
          are other situations where it is difficult to enforce court
          penalties (for example, driver disqualification) and yet the
          penalty is considered to be worthwhile and has a deterrent
          effect.




 JUL 90
9b
4.   Whereas exclusion orders are designed to prohibit
attendance at all Football League matches in England and
Wales, restriction orders prevent attendance at key matches
abroad.   Restriction orders work by requiring an offender to
report to a police station at a time to coincide with the time
the match is being played; if he is in this country he cannot
be at the game.   Such a requirement will not place great
demands on the police since the number of those reporting is
not expected to exceed 2,000 nationwide at any one time.     (At
present 15 people are subject to such orders.)    And the
occasions on which restriction orders will come into play will
be confined to the times teams from England and Wales, whether
at national or club level, compete abroad.


5.   The exclusion orders scheme is an altogether different
proposition in terms of scale.   We believe that there are of
the order of 2000 people subject to exclusion orders now, a
figure which will increase with time.   There are matches
throughout the season (August to May) every Wednesday and
Saturday and also on occasions on Sundays and bank holidays.
On each of those days every person subject to an exclusion
order commits an offence if he enters any league football
ground.


6.   To apply to exclusion orders a scheme whereby offenders
would have to report to police stations would impose a large
administrative burden on the police.    Reporting would be
required even when only one match was being played anywhere in
the country.   A simple "signing in" works for a restriction
order because the game is abroad.   It would not work for
exclusion orders because the ground could be nearby and it
might be possible for a person required to sign in to go to a
match, leave at half-time to report at the police station, and
return to watch the end.   To stop that situation arising would
require that when the person reported to the station that he
staved there for the duration of the game, a consideration
which we believe makes the proposal a non-starter.
7.   As is the case with restriction orders it would have to
be made an offence not to report;   it would be necessary to set
up a scheme where dispensation from reporting could be
granted; and it would be necessary to set up an appeals system
against the non-grant of a dispensation.


8.   Despite the seeming ease with which reporting
requirements could be applied to exclusion orders as they are
to restriction orders we would suggest,    for the reasons given
above, that such a scheme is not a practicable proposition.


9.   As for the exclusion order scheme as it now is we are
looking to ways to improve its effectiveness and increase the
number of times the courts make such orders.     We shall submit
for Ministerial approval a circular which we propose to issue
at the beginning of next season which will remind courts of
these orders, highlight how the National Football Intelligence
Unit can help individual forces with information and encourage
forces to use CCTV to identify and prosecute people who attend
a match in breach of an order.




                                           R. P. RHODES



                                           R P RHODES
