                       10 DOWNING STREET
                             LONDON SW1A 2AA

From the Private Secretary         v           19 Apr i 1 198 9

                                                       C C f7



       I attach a letter which the Prime Minister
  has received from Mr. Aaron Siegel of Spectator
  Management Group International.

       I should be grateful if you would arrange
  for either a Minister or Private Secretary
  in your department to reply to Mr. Siegel
  on the Prime Minister's behalf.




                                          c
                                       (D.C.B. MORRIS)




  Miss Catherine Bannister,
  Home Office.
                                 SPECT71COR
                                 MANAGEMENT
                                 G RO UP
                                 IN T E R N /IT IO N /IL
                                                                                      &
17 April 1989



The Rt. Hon. Margaret Thatcher,                  M.P.
Prime Minister
10 Downing Street
London SW1



Dear Prime Minister

I,  like most    people, was shocked and appalled at the loss
of  life that occurred on Saturday, 15 April at Hillsborough
Football  Ground   in   Sheffield.   The  loss  of   life, for
whatever  reason,   is   always  a great tragedy, but when it
occurs    at   an     event   which  is   considered    family
entertainment, it is an even sorrier tragedy.

I am writing      to you to offer whatever assistance I and my
company may be      to you and members of your Government.        I
have   been  involved   in   the management    and   operation of
public   assembly   facilities for many years and was asked by
the United     States  Government Bureau of Standards to serve
on   a    seven-member     advisory   committee     to establish
architectural     guidelines    and   standards    for   the   safe
operation   of   public assembly    facilities   in   the    United
States.

It was,   therefore,  an  unhappy coincidence that I arrived
here  in London yesterday in preparation for a meeting with
the London Docklands Development Corporation to discuss the
development  of  the  Londondome  Complex,   a  large public
assembly  facility to be built in the Royal Docks, and to be
managed   by our UK company     Spectacor  Management  Group
International.

Spectacor   Management Group     International    (SMGI)  is  the
London-based division      of  Spectacor Management Group (SMG)
which has    been   working   in   this  country   and Europe for
several   years to introduce the American concept of stadiums
and  arenas.      SMG   is  currently recognised as the largest
private operator      of public   assembly   facilities   in  the
United   States.      In our   role   as operator,    we  provide
security    and    crowd    control   services   to our managed
facilities.

lOur  first  arena  project  in Europe   is the new Sheffield
lArena,  being  constructed for the World Student Games to be
theld in Sheffield    in 1991.  SMGI has been selected as the
peveloper and operating manager of the facility.   In the

   35 Dover Street, London, W1X3RA, U.K. 01-408 1225/01-491 0252        Fax:01-629 0406

                  A DIVISION OF SPECTACOR MANAGEMENT GROUP
           Corporate Headquarters • 230 S. 15th Street • Philadelphia, PA 19102
                        ( 21 5 ) 875-5230 • Fax: ( 215 ) 732-5022
Page 2
Letter to Margaret Thatcher
17 April 1989



planning   of    the   Sheffield    Arena,  SMGI,   working with an
American   architectural firm, HOK, has taken strong measures
to   address      items   such   as   safety,   comfort  and crowd
control.      As     pointed out    in the    London "Sunday Times"
yesterday,     American-style       facilities    rarely encounter
problems   like    those   associated    with   European  football.
Much of    this      has   to do  with the proper planning of the
facility and the skills of the facility's operator.

I come   to London frequently for our many European projects
and  I would be delighted to make myself available to you
for  whatever    help  or information I may be able to provide
and which   could prove   useful in your investigation of this
tragedy.

If my services are required,     I can be reached at our London
offices.

Yours faithfully,




Aaron Siegel
Executive Vice-President
Chief Operating Officer
Spectacor Management Group
