hs . 10.6/fsb2.peb



                                              cc   Mr   Yates
From:   P E Bolton                                 Mr   Hammond
        G2 Division                                Mr   Boys Smith
        Ext 3322                                   Mr   Turney
                                                   Mr   Clayton
        6 October 1989                             Mr   Goddard
                                                   Mr   Osborne
                                                   Mr   Mould
                                                   Mr   Lidington

Miss Bannister
Ms Rex
Miss Nicholson



FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL: SAFETY ISSUES

This submission seeks the views of Ministers on what should be
the effect of the Football Spectators Bill on the avenues of
appeal which are available in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1975 (as amended) against the terms and conditions of safety
certificates36 At present the Bill is silent on these issues and
some provision is necessary in order to make matters clear.

2.     The analysis of Home Office officials is that the purpose of
the   Bill (insofar as it affects the safety of sports grounds)  is
to permit the Football Licensing Authority to supervise the
manner in which local authorities exercise their responsibilities
in connection with safety in sports grounds.       It has not been
suggested that those who are affected by the terms and conditions
of safety certificates should not continue to have the same
avenues of appeal as exist at present under the 1975 Act.

3. Under section 5   of that Act, an interested party may appeal
to the Magistrates' Court against the inclusion in or omission of
anything from a safety certificate or the refusal of the local
authority to amend or replace a safety certificate; and the local
authority and any interested party can appeal to the Crown Court
against any Order made by a Magistrates' Court.       "Interested
party" means the holder of the safety certificate, any other
person who is or may be concerned with ensuring compliance with
the terms and conditions of a safety certificate, the Chief
Officer of Police, and either the building authority or the fire
authority.

4.   There is a counter argument which DOE officials feel that Mr
Moynihan would hold:  that the purpose of the Bill is to provide
powers of supervision to a national authority (the Football
Licensing Authority) and that the existence of an avenue of
appeal to what, although a judicial body, is in fact a local
inexpert body, could result in a dilution of the authority's
powers and responsibilities.   It could also inject an element of
del a y into    the   p r o ce s s   of   s e cu r i ng   cha n g es   in   safety
certificates.

5.     We think that the arguments in favour of preserving the
rights of appeal are stronger.     The purpose of the FLA is to
supervise the local authority, not to alter the rights and
safeguards of those who are affected by the terms and conditions
of safety certificates.    We would not propose, in this context,
that the local authority should have an avenue of appeal against
a requirement from the Football Licensing Authority but it might
be necessary to provide, for the purpose of clarification, that
the ^ Football Licensing Authority should be heard in any appeal
against terms and conditions of a safety certificate where those
terms arose from a requirement made by the FLA; and it might also
be necessary to make clear that the FLA, as an interested party,
has a right to appeal to the Crown Court against any order issued
by a Magistrates' Court.

6.   So far as we know, there are not many appeals against terms
and conditions of safety certificates.     In the 10 years or so
when appeals were made to the Secretary of State (between 1977
and 1987)   some 6 or 7 were started, but all of them        were
withdrawn following local agreement before any deliberation was
necessary.  We have no information about the number of appeals to
the Courts since    the system was changed   by our 1987 Act, but if
there were any, we think we would have heard about them.      The
effectiveness of an appeals system does not depend on the number
of times it is used.    The mere fact that it exists provides a
strong incentive to get decisions right in the first instance or
by agreement.    It is a safeguard against the arbitrary use of
authority.

7.   We do not think that maintaining the avenues of appeal will
water down the authority of the FLA.  It may serve to ensure that
the FLA does not act unreasonably or ride roughshod over points
raised in consultation.   If that is the case, actual resort to
the appeal procedure should continue to be minimal but the
reputation of the FLA is likely to be higher than if there are
unresolved grievances against arbitrary decisions.

Summary

8.    Ministers are asked to agree to the continuation of the
existing avenues of appeal against terms and conditions of safety
certificates.    This does not amount to a change of policy but
minor   amendments   to the  Football  Spectators  Bill will   be
necessary in order to establish, beyond doubt, the position of
the FLA in relation to the appeals procedure.

9.   A similar note will be put to DOE Ministers and it seems at
least possible that Mr Moynihan will take the view suggested in
paragraph 4 above.



                                                   P E BOLTON
