                                            HmaU C
            :“l?8r ltm0re              ^ C v U *c     jo r d ^ r r e r ,
                                                      Mr/'Moriarty
                                                      Kfx Boys Smith
                                                      Mr Turney
                                                      HMCIFS   #
                                                      Mr Mower
                                                      Mr Goddard
                                                      Mr Watts
                                                      Mr Lidington

                                                                           ■'       ■.




              INQUIRY                                      '                    ’   id ^
I spoke to Lord Justice Taylor and Mr Whalley on 4 July about
progress on the Inquiry.

How that the hearings have temporarily ended - they reconvene on
14 July to hear Counsels' closing submissions - Lord Justice
Taylor has been able to take a more considered view of how long
it might take him to complete his interim report.      As a result
he is more cautious than was originally reported to me.        He
declined to mention'a specific date.  He told me that.he hoped
to complete the interim report this month but that it was
possible that it might not be ready unti l .aaxl3E-.Auq.ugt . . I think
it unlikely that we will receive the report until after
Parliament rises for the recess.

I do not think this matters greatly.             Lord Justice Taylor
confirmed that the interim report will not say anything of
relevance to the arguments for or against identity cards for
football supporters.         He is also fairly certain that none of his
recommendations will be of a kind which would ideally require
physical work at grounds before the start of the next football
season.   Rather he expects his interim findings to deal with
matters such as crowd control and the content of safety
certificates.      Thus I see no pressing need for a statement to
the House; on the contrary there may be advantage in a low key
 reception involving simply a press statement.            Lord Justice
Taylor did warn me that the interim report is likely to be
 critical of South Yorkshire police and to a lesser extent the
"todtbali c l u b . W e w i l l n e e d to consider carefully what we
 should say on this aspect once we have the text of the report.
