J MERVYN JONES MSc                                         FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                  Furnival Gate
 H IL L S B O R O U G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M              Sheffield S1 4QN           \
                                                           Telephone: 0742 727593
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ
                                                           SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                     Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                   Telephone: 051-709 7190/7231      \
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025
                                                           Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                              Our Ref:
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 021-359 3332                                    Date:       19 July 1989



 Mr R M Whalley
 Room 662
 Home Office
 50 Queen Anne Gate
Jfe p d o n                                     I   > 1'
W 1H      9AT




 Dear Mr Whalley

 I enclose a copy of a report forwarded to me from the Metropolitan Police which
 was originally requested by South Yorkshire Police.

 The document is self explanatory concerning Police and Stewards
 responsibilities at London Football Grounds. I believe this is a document that
 may assist Lord Justice Taylor in his interim report.

 Yours faithfully




 M J FOSTER
 DETECTIVE CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                                                                 METROPOLITAN POLICE OFFICE


                      Det. Chief Superintendent FOSTER           NEW SCOTLAND YARD
                                                                 BROADWAY LONDONSW1H0BG
                      Nechells Green Police Station
                                                                 Telephone 01—230 1212 Extn^j-----
                      Fowler Street
                      Birmingham   B7 5DA                         Your ref.:                  Our re f .:




                  Form 7110

                                                                                                     11th July 1989




                      Dear Mr FOSTER,


                      The South Yorkshire Police Enquiry Team have asked this ^force for information                                                 -
                      on the respective responsibilities of police and stewards in connection with
                      the packing of spectators into terraces and monitoring the capacity of stands
                      and terraces.

                       I am enclosing a copy of the letter and report
■V ;. ■

:                     Please contact me if you require any further
                                                                                                 ■ ■■                :
                                                                                                                     ■■
                                                                                                       -    '   ••        -;;' v

                       Yours sincerely

                                                       ■ '
                                                             -          ■
                                         tk   .




    ' ■ : =




              .             .. .

                                                  ■•
                                                                   -     ■■■;Tv
                       13     m r

                       Chief Inspector
                       Public




                        £NCI~.
                                                                                                                                      ...

                                                                                                                              .    . . .         ,

                                                                                                                                            ■■
                                           METROPOLITAN POLICE OFFICE
The Chief Constable
(Attention of Chief Superintendent WAIN)
                                           NEW SCOTLAND YARD
South Yorkshire Police                     BROADWAY LONDON SW1H OBG
Police Headquarters                        Telephone 01—230 1212 Extn.
Snig Hill
Sheffield S3 8LY                            Your ref.:             Ou r re f .:




Form 7110
                                                                  11th July 1989




Dear Sir

On Monday 10th July 1989 a request was received from Chief Inspector BROOKS of
the South Yorkshire Police Enquiry Team seeking Metropolitan Police assistance
concerning information about the respective responsibilities of police and
stewards employed inside 1st Division London football grounds.          It is
understood that the information is requried by Mr WOODWARD Q.C. to assist in
presenting the case for South Yorkshire Police to the Hillsborough Inquiry.

The request seeks to clarify what duties are performed by police officers and
stewards in the 'packing' of spectators on the terraces and monitoring the
capacity of stands and areas of terracing.

I enclose a copy of a summary setting out the required information. Please do
not hesitate to contact me if you require any further assistance.


Yours sincerely




                                    ■
B. EVANS
Chief Inspector
Public Order Branch
                    DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS AND STEWARDS

              RESPECTING 'PACKING' AND MONITORING OF CAPACITIES

             OF TERRACING AT LONDON 1ST DIVISION FOOTBALL GROUNDS


ARSENAL

Up until the end of the 1988/89 football season working practice and verbal
agreement between police and Arsenal Football Club has been that stewards are
responsible for showing spectators to their seats in the stands.

On the terraces, however, police have taken responsibility for         packing
spectators into 'pens' and directing them to the appropriate area      of the
ground. Stewards do assist with this task but they are ineffective     without
police backing; it has been found impracticable to make them            solely
responsible as they lack the authority to deal with non-compliant      crowds.
Stewards are now responsible for manning the perimeter of the pitch.

Following the Hillsborough Disaster, from the start of the 1989/90 season
police. Arsenal FC and the London Borough of Islington have drafted a
statement of purpose which includes the duties of police and stewards. The
number of stewards will be drastically increased.


CHARLTON AND CRYSTAL PALACE

Duties of police officers inside the ground are primarily associated with the
presentation of public order, segregation of supporters and maintenance of a
sterile area. There is no formal agreement with the Club on the packing of
spectators, although verbally it is accepted as a steward's responsibility and
not police.   Stewards are present at all games, they are not particularly
effective in packing spectators into terraces and usually rely on police to
initiate requests for action or to actually undertake this task.      Charlton
Athletic stewards are noticeably more effective than Crystal Palace stewards,
but this is due mainly to smaller crowds and a more flexible allocation of
accommodation to away support for Charlton games.

In the absence of electronic counters, monitoring of crowd capacity is done by
the ground's turnstile counters although the numbers are received by police
will seme Caution.


CHELSEA

Police search at two sets of turnstiles and private security officers at the
remaining three, but with police in attendance to assist.

Police do not pack spectators on the terraces, this is the responsibility of
stewards who are also required to keep gangways clear, man exit and pitchside
gates and 'police' the crowd.    The stewards radio system is monitored by
police in the control room and close liaison maintained with senior stewards
and section leaders.

There is a written agreement between police and Chelsea FC setting out the
number and duties of stewards at various parts of the ground including the
stands and terraces.
MILLWALL

Searching of spectators entering the grounds is carried out by police alone.

The more able stewards are employed on the perimeter track, manning the
additional pitch emergency exit gates which have been constructed since the
Hillsborough Disaster.

Due to previous crowd disorder, the east stand of the ground is manned solely
by police who are responsible for all crowd control including packing of
spectators. The north stand spectators although less volatile still requires
police officers to maintain the main gangway and assist spectators.        The
underlying problem is the general standard of stewarding; the recruitment of
acceptable personnel is difficult, bearing in mind the low remunerative reward
and potential danger to such persons from crowd disorder.


QUEENS PARK RANGERS

Police duties are primarily    to preserve   public   order   and        to       assist        in
searching at turnstiles.

Stewards are responsible for most tasks within the ground including the
marshalling of crowds into the stands and terraces.    However, because of
previous problems in the 'away' terracing, police officers undertake the
packing of spectators into this section of the ground.

Monitoring of the capacities of sections of the ground is carried out by means
of a computerised counter which can be monitored in the police control room.
As a section of terracing approaches capacity the officer in charge of the
serial at the appropriate turnstile is advised to close it.

There is no written agreement between Q.P.R. football              club       and       police
concerning the respective duties of police and stewards.
                                                ■              .    ■'        -     ■   '   .
                                                                                                   ;'/.V-
TOTTENHAM HOTSPUR

There is close liaison between senior stewards and officers in
serials employed in the stands.

Police are employed in the vicinity of turnstiles to assist the secu:
employed to carry out searches of spectators entering the ground,
stewards are employed together in packing the terraces and keeping
gangways clear.

A computer is installed to monitor the number of spectators enteri:
the turnstiles, this is linked to the police control room. When
terrace reaches 200 below capacity the officers in charge of seri
turnstiles are instructed to close them.

There is no laid down agreement between police and the club rej
employment of stewards and their responsibilities.




                                                                                            .v .   .. ,
WIMBLEDON

Police duties are to maintain public order and uphold the ground rules.

Packing of spectators in the terraces, marshalling of crowds and manning of
emergency exits and gates is carried out by stewards, who would also assist
police in the event of an emergency evacuation. Packing of spectators on the
terraces is not a police duty.

Monitoring of capacities of sections of the ground is carried out by means of
digital counters linked into the control room.

Police duties are as determined in the Special Service Agreement; police are
not involved in the private arrangements made between the club and stewards.


WEMBLEY

Police officers are no longer posted to the pitch perimeter; they sure posted
to the inside of turnstiles, the circulating corridor of the stadium, on the
terraces or on reserve. Their primary function is to maintain public order.
Police also assist stewards in searching the prohibited circles and preventing
alcohol being taken into the ground.

Stewards sure primarily responsible for the distribution and packing of
spectators within the terraces. Police monitor the situation and report any
build up of supporters at any particular bay to the control t o o ® , assistance
to stewards with the packing of bays is carried out only by prior request from
Wembley Stadium other than in those cases where there is an immediate risk to
public safety.    The ineffectiveness of stewards in packing the standing
terraces has resulted in overcrowding when supporters with incorrect tickets
have been allowed into standing bay areas which is aggravated if other
stewards have not properly distributed the supporters in the bay.

There is no written agreement between Wembley Stadium and police with regard
to the individual duties of police and stewards. There is a reluctance on the
part of Wembley Stadium Security to allow police an input into stewards
briefings concealing their powers, deployments and responsibilities; relying
solely on the knowledge and expertise of former police officers in their
employ. '                                \,

There is at present no mechanism                      capacity at the stftdjLum,
Wembley Stadium rely on the number of tick      soxu *pr an event.




                                                                          :X ; :   ::
                                                                                    v


                                                      S':    ■               v;     -
