        •
                                                                                            (ID
    .
i
            h s.8.2/hillsbl.peb
                                                                                             -a




            HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY - DRAFT PRESS STATEMENT


            In a statement today the Home Secretary said that he was grateful
            to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for completing the first part
            of his     inquiry   in time to produce an interim report before        the
            start of the football season.


            It was     an excellent report which pulled no punches about the
            causes of the disaster.


            The Home Secretary said that the Government welcomed the broad
            thrust  of thereport and supported the principles of       the
            recommendations. They contained a number of matters which should
            be dealt with without delay pending the longer term findings of
            the inquiry which will be published in the final report.


            The Home Office^ was c lrculatmg the report^ immediately to local
            authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned with
            the organisation of football matches urging them to take action
            on the report1s recommendations so as to put as many of them into
            effect as possible before the beginning of the season.

            The Home Secretary said that he was satisfied that the report had
            not identified any major shortcomings in the law and safety in
            sports grounds, though clearly the Government would look at the
            Safety of Sports Grounds Act and the Home Office guide to safety
            at sports grounds in the light of the final report of the
            inquiry.

            He said that most of the problems which had contributed to the
            tragedy at Hillsborough had been recognised in the past.                 The
            tragedy revealed by the report was that there had                       been
             shortcomings in applying those lessons not only on the part of
            the   pol ice,   but    of   the   club   and   of   the   local   author ity
             responsible for the safety certificate.
The report he said revealed quite clearly that there were major
deficiencies in the layout and organisation of the Hillsborough
ground which should have been recognised and corrected.


He also said that the beh^^atir of the fans outside the ground
which led to the policy*'''gaining the gates was not excusable but
it was predictable.      -.
                                    V
                             J it         ■
The South Yorkshire Police
                                    ",
The Home Secretary said that it would be for the Chief Constable
in the first instance to consider the conduct of individual
officers and the South Yorkshire police collectively in the light
of the inquiry and the investigation carried out by the West
Midlands police.    The Home Secretary said that he would be
looking to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire initially for a
report on the action he proposes to take.


National Police Intelligence Unit


The Home Secretary said that steps to set up the national
computer based police football intelligence system referred to in
paragraph 2.20 of the report are already in hand but steps were
being taken to see if it could be brought into operation sooner
than had been intended.


Supervision of Safety Certificates


The Home Secretary also pointed out that powers recently taken by
the Government in the Football Spectators Bill will permit the
setting up of a new authority with powers to supervise the way in
which   local authorities carried out their responsibilities for
the safety of sports grounds:
