 PETER WILLIAM JACKSON



                         HILLSBOROUGH STATEMENT



                    and am the Vice Chairman of the Merseyside
Branch of the Football Supporters' Association. I am a Se*£>n Ticket
holder for the Main Stand at Anfield and have followed football
regularly since I was a small boy. On 15th April 1989 I attended
the semi-final of the F.A. Cup between Liverpool and Nottingham
Forest at Hillsborough, Sheffield.


I travelled to the game by car and was accompanied by Rogan Taylor,
Peter Garrett, both of whom are National Officers of the Football
Supporters' Association, and                                 We an
had tickets for the Main Stand. We left our final pick-up point in *
Hough Green at approximately 10.45 a.m. We had all travelled to      JJ
the semi-final in 1988 together and had all been to Hillsborough
many occasions. Out of experience, we had decided to avoid the M 6 2 w
and intended to travel through Glossop and on the A57, the$3nake   >§11
Pass.


We went by way of the M56 onto the M63 and encountered a major
hold-up at the end of the M63 prior to the roundabout outside         y J j aglL

Stockport. We were held up for about 45 minutes at this point.
After that point there was a line of slow moving traffio^Up'to
roundabout at the end of the M67 where there ware ’            -• y
hold-ups and where we were detained for approximately half an hour
We then proceeded along the A616 and took the right hand fork to
Glossop onto the A57. From that point on we had a clear run to
Sheffield and we arrived in the vicinity of Hillsborough at
approximately 1.30 p.m. As I said earlier, we knew the ground well
and we managed to park very close to the spot we parked last year
which is approximately 10 minutes from the ground. We walked from
the street where we had parked the car to a pub we had found last
year. This pub was the Freemasons's Arms and is situated by the
bridge over the river. Last year this pub had been frequented by
supporters of both Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, and I was
                              -   2   -




somewhat surprised to find this year that there was a bouncer on
the door who was only allowing Liverpool Supporters to enter.


Rogan Taylor left us in the Pub after approximately 15 minutes as
he had to meet another friend of ours, John Williams, outside the
ground and collect his ticket. Peter Garrett, Larry Moran and I
stayed in the pub until just after 2.00 o'clock. I remember
distinctly hearing the radio announcement that Alan Hansen would be
playing. This was prior to the 2.00 o'clock news. As we left the
pub the Liverpool fans were noisy and a little rowdy, but there was
no violence or drunkenness that I could see.


We then walked up the hill towards the ground, knowing from
experience that it would take us approximately 10 minutes. When we
arrived at the other side of the hill, immediately outside the
stadium, it was clear that a large crowd was gathering. I noticed
that there was no filter system at the first set of gates as there
had been at the corresponding fixture on the previous year. The
time of our arrival at the stadium was 2.15 p.m. We approached thev;
turnstiles to gain access to the North Stand and could see at that
stage that there was no semblance of an orderly queue being formed.’
We stood alongside a concetina gate leading into the North Stand
and could see that there was only one policeman on each of the
turnstiles. We could see Rogan Taylor and John Williams
approximately 10 yards in front of us but could not manage to
contact them through the sheer volume of people trying to get into
the ground. At this stage, although it was crowded and the crush
was building up, it was no worse than I have previously encountered
at other football grounds.   However, as the minutes ticked away
prior to kick-off the crush did get worse and I remember one
woman standing alongside me becoming very concerned and upset.
Upon seeing her concern, the crowd made space for her and she was
pushed through the turnstiles. One elderly gentleman in the queue
said that he felt faint and forced his way out to the side. People
were screaming at the police officers to open the concetina gate
and allow those with tickets into the stand through that entrance.
I could see many people climbing the walls into the ground. The
police officers were actively assisting people to gain entrance
that way.



                                                              3   -
                                     -   3   -




          and I were eventually forced together through the turnstiles,
    although we lost Peter Garrett at that point. Inside the ground
    people were remonstrating with several police officers asking them
    to go outside and form some sort of orderly queue. None of the
    police officers appeared to be taking any notice whatsoever.


          and I then tried to make our way to our seats, but we could
    not follow the signs to gangway C. We had already heard a roar by
    this time to indicate that the teams were out on the pitch. We
    walked the wrong way originally and found ourselves looking onto
    the entrance to the terracing. We realised that this way was wrong
    and walked back, eventually finding the sign indicating the way to


*   our gangway, j      and I had never entered the ground from this
    particular part before and       indicated that he wanted to go to
    the toilet. We could see that rather than going to the lavatories
    large numbers of people were urinating against a wall alongside the
    stand and        not knowing where the toilets where in any event, 5
    joined them. At that moment a large phalanx of police officers
    emerged from under the stand and were clearly moving urgently    ‘-,/r

    towards the turnstile. In my opinion they had clearly been alerted
    that there was a major problem. However, and despite this, one
    officer tried to arrest                   and several others who
    were urinating on the wall. I made my way to my seat in Row 5 of'Ml
    the stand and found that there was already somebody sitting there V
    who had obtained entry without a ticket. I moved him out of my    ^
     seat and advised him that the seat alongside me would also be used*
                                                                        ' - iff
    ______ then joined us and about two or three minutes later Peter     ,
     Garrett arrived. He forced the two young men without seats out of' ' ■ W t
     our area. At that point we could see that the middle of the
     Leppings Lane terrace was absolutely crowded, but were surprised to
     see that in both the wing elements of the terrace there were quite H I
     substantial areas of room. The teams were out on the pitch and the
     game kicked off and we could see that people were being pulled out 1
    of the terrace and were attempting to climb over the railings. I
    was more concerned as to what was happening behind the goal and did
    not really watch what was going on on the pitch. I heard a roar
    and I understand Peter Beardsley hit the bar at the other end of
    the pitch but I did not see that myself. After what appeared to
                                  -   4   -




    be four or five minutes I saw Bruce Grobbelaar and what appeared to
    be a senior police officer draw the referee's attention to what was
    happening, at which point scores of fans swarmed onto the pitch.
    The referee stopped the game and the Liverpool players were taken
    off the pitch together with those of Nottingham Forest. Police
    officers at that stage were trying to keep people off the pitch,
    although this proved impossible as more and more people spilled out
    from behind the terrace.


    I had a portable radio with me and listened to whatever I could
    from Radio 2's commentary. It was clear from Peter Jones' comments
    that nobody really knew what was going on at that point. Hundreds

#   of police officers then arrived and we could see that steps were
    being taken to assist the injured. We did not immediately
    appreciate that people had died. An ambulance arrived together
    with officers of the St John's Ambulance and fans started to tear
    down advertising hoardings to use them as stretchers. At one
    point, the Nottingham Forest fans who clearly did not know what was
    going on began jeering, at which point several supporters on the
    pitch ran to them in an attempt to make them understand what was
    happening. At that point the police placed a phalanx of several
    hundred officers across the middle of the pitch. We stayed in our I
    position on the seats and I heard over the radio commentary that
    people might have died. Soon after that we began to see the
    stretcher bearers walk instead of run across the pitch and that the
    bodies they were carrying were covered with coats. We could see
    that^ome of the bodies were small. Many police officers were not
    assisting in any way and were merely wandering round. I heard no
    Tannoy announcements until approximately 3.45 when Kenny Dalglish
    went up into the box alongside the Leppings Lane terrace and
    announce to everybody to keep calm and remain^in position.
    Approximately 15 minutes later an announcement was made that the
    game would not take place and the people should retain their ticket
    stub for use if the game were to be replayed in the future. A
    senior police officer then came round with a hand microphone to
    advise everybody to leave the ground quietly and slowly.
At that point we met up with Rogan Taylor and John Williams and
Rogan decided that we should hang around rather than leave the
ground and start talking to people as they came off the terrace in
the hope that we could pick up some idea of what exactly had
happened. All five of us then walked onto the pitch and started to
talk to the many people who were milling around. Many were in
tears or in shock.


The first people we spoke to seemed to indicate that a gate had
been opened by police officers to allow supporters in without
tickets. This was confirmed as we spoke to more and more people.
We then went to look at the terrace which was an horrific sight.
A part of the wire netting at the front had been cut away and the
gates had been opened to allow access to the terrace. One of the
crush barriers had been bent totally out of shape and was no
longer rigid at all. The terrace was scattered with shoes, scarves
and sunglasses. All of us wept as we stood on the terrace.


We then tried to talk to police officers who told us that they knew
of at least 50 deaths. People walking past were verbally abusing
the police to a certain extent, although there were no attacks of a
physical nature. I have to say that the police officers on the
terrace at that stage were calm and collected. Their senior
officer, an Inspector, indicated that his particular men had only
arrived at the ground after the tragedy had occurred.


We then walked through the tunnel from the terrace and noticed that
there were no lights whatsoever in the tunnel. We walked out into
the courtyard and noticed that immediately facing the entrance to
the tunnel was a concetina gate. We presumed that that was the
gate that had been opened. As we walked towards the gate at the
end of the terraces through which we had entered we were approached
by numerous supporters who were pleading with us to take
photographs of the various gates. They told us that as they had
been walking away from the ground, police officers had been
telling them that Liverpool supporters had been at fault for the
tragedy in physically forcing open the gate.   Several of the people
we spoke to were outraged at this suggestion and said that they
personally had witnessed the gate being opened by police officers.
I then physically checked the gate alongside the turnstile through
which I had entered and it was clear to me that it had not been
forced in any way. We did a similar check on the gate opposite the
tunnel onto the terrace.


At that point we all agreed that it might be useful if we were to
speak to our local radio representatives if it was possible for us
to get into the press box. We began to make our way towards the
entrance to the Club, although there were various ambulances
blocking our path into which dead bodies were being carried.

We asked a steward on the gate for directions to the press box and
                                                                    / ‘V

he ushered us straight into the main stand to find the box. Rogan f
Taylor was immediately taken away by Graham Beacroft of Radio
Merseyside who started interviewing him as to the events we had
witnessed. I asked for a representative from Radio City and gave
an interview immediately which I understand went out on the 5.00   >
o'clock news. After finishing with Liam O'Donague from Radio City/
I gave an interview to Independent Radio News. At that point we S
realised that none of us had made any attempt to phone our
relations in Liverpool, and I asked one of the pressmen, who turned
out to be Ken Montgomery from the Sunday Mirror if we could use hil
phone. When I actually got the phone in my hand I could not
remember my own phone number and then once this had come back to    m m ? *

the number was engaged. Ken Montgomery managed to find another         ll
phone and kept ringing through on the number whilst I phoned my



We could not get through to my wife, but         spoke to his who
agreed to phone round everybody in our party.


I then gave a long interview to BBC Radio Trent and the interviewer
lent me his personal phone to try and phone my wife again. I got
through to       who told me that the initial reports were that
everybody who I knew was alive.
We then went down to the Executive lounge as we were told that a
press statement would be released and that a press conference would
follow at which the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police
would attend. We spoke to as many people as we could in the lounge
to ascertain what was going on, including Peter Robinson and Tony
Ensa of Liverpool Football Club. Rogan Taylor gave interviews on
television and I was aghast to hear events described by the
Chairman of Nottingham Forest Football Club as "a pitch invasion".
The comments were immediately challenged by Rogan.


We went back out onto the pitch and spoke to Patrick Barclay, a
sport journalist, and eventually ascertained that the press
conference would take place back in Sheffield at the headquarters
of the South Yorkshire police. We were also told that it was
unlikely that we would be able to gain entry to the press
conference. At that point we decided to go home and we made our
way back to the car. As we went away from the ground an elderly
local lady asked us whether we were alright and whether we wished ||
to go into her house for a cup of tea. We thanked her but
continued on our way. We were back at the car just in time to hea|j
the 7.00 o'clock news on BBC radio Sheffield.
