 C J Anderton Esq CBE CStJ QPM CBIK                                         273 2746
 Chief Constable
 Greater Manchester Police
 PO Box 22 (S West PDO)
 Chester House
 Boyer Street
 MANCHESTER Ml 6 ORE                                             16 February 1990




 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S FINAL REPORT

•On 29 January the Home Secretary made a statement in the House
 about the final report of Lord Justice Taylor1s inquiry into
 the tragedy at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989. In
 M s statement the Home Secretary referred to a schedule placed
-in the Library of the House setting out the Government1s
 response to -each of the "recommendations set out in -Chapters 3,
-4 and 5 of the report--.-.',.! enclose ^:a-;icopy of -the -schedule,.
 T h e p u r p o s e o f this '.letterVis 'to'-ask;you, f o r m a l l y t o b r i n g the
 x e c o m m e n d a t i o n s - :and;-;t.he-Government*S;-response t o t h em t o the
;
■attention^, of/ACPO-.^I'^ayerJao^Ofubt^tha't A C P O / will -wish t.o-
.encourage.chief officers t b .proceed ^quickly -4:b take any " '
-necessary .action to implement -the recommendations directed at
 the -police service.'-:'.Many of the recommendations substantially
 repeat those jmade      the interim report to which the police,
 service made a notably-'prompt and" positive''’response for which ■
 the Home Secretary was grateful.

There are a number of recommendations to which I wish to make
particular reference.

 Recommendation 11 revises to some extent interim
 recommendation 4. It is now made clear that the agreement
 setting out the club's and the police's respective functions
,as to crowd safety and control is seen as a statement of •
 intent, not a binding contract;'Paragraph T214 of the report
 says explicitly, ml am content that {the document] can be
 subject to alteration without breach of contract should
 circumstances so demand." I hope that the re-formulation of
 this crucial recommendation will ease the problems that I know
 were seen to arise from the wording of the interim
.recommendation.
 Recommendations 19 and 20, dealing with the closure and
 manning of gates provide greater flexibility than did the
 earlier interim recommendations (9 and 10). It will now be at
 local discretion whether the perimeter gates are left fully
 open, partially open or closed but unlocked. Also for local
 decision, by the Police Commander, will be whether the manning
 of a perimeter gate should be by a police officer or a
 steward. This new flexibility is no doubt desirable for
 operational reasons but it does underline the need for a clear
 agreement about such matters to be embodied in the statement
 of intent agreed between the police and the club.
 Turning to the batch of recommendations (44-58) covering
 police planning .and communications, these will no doubt all
 receive careful consideration, but I pick out three which are
 of particular concern to the Home Office.
 IRecoramendation 52 dealing with the training of present and
  future Police Commanders is a key one in this group. I
 presume that your own sub-committee and the Training Committee
 have an interest here. I understand that the Police Staff
 College at Bramshill is planning to hold during 1990 a
 conference which will have as its theme the operational
 .management of football matches. Within the Police Department
 Gay Catto will be following up this recommendation with you or
 whoever you advise her _is the appropriate contact.
VJRecommendation53deals.with charging for police services.
 Barnes.Addison.will3be:following up the Government's response
  to -this recommendation through Jbis normal contacts with the
^ p c ^ c ^ ^ e i ^ c e r ^ a d p c ^ i c e l ^ t h o r i t i e s = ..
  ^ecommendatioh 55 vforVth<s provision of a dedicated command
"channel seems to 'be-crucial to effective police control. The
  Home Officehas therefore made extra channels available for
f^se"at:peyents including a channel for command purposes .:
 ^Information-about these channels has recently been circulated
 [/to forces.:/                     .'------ — -— ------- — -

•.Recommendations 59-r63 cover co-ordination of the emergency
  services. . I simply wish to reiterate the Government’s
' response that those concerned will be urged to comply with the
  one recommendation (61) which was not in the interim report.
:There:are two more general matters which*call JEor some
Icomment^iTJ-rstlyiixecommendation 42, directed at clubs, calls
 ;for a significant change in the recruitment, training and
  eventual quality of stewarding. There are obvious
  repercussions here for the call on police resources. The Home
  Secretary made this connection in his response ‘to a question
following his statement when he said, "l therefore wholly
applaud Lord Justice Taylor1s recommendation that stewards
should be trained -so that fewer police officers are required
at grounds".

Second, Taylor's recommendations (70-73) for some new offences
and penalties call for careful study. The Home Secretary has
said that he will be examining these recommendations as a
matter of urgency. John Goddard will shortly be writing to
you separately about this but I can say now that we shall want
to take careful account of ACPO's views on the enforceability
and resource implications for the police of implementing these
recommendations.

If you think^it would be helpful to discuss .any of the matters
raised in this letter or any other issues arising from -the
Taylor report I should be glad to arrange a meeting here with
those concerned. We shall, of course, be reporting back to
Ministers on the response by the police service to Taylor in
due course and a meeting with you at that stage, perhaps after
Easter, would provide a convenient opportunity for you to
bring us up to date. In the meantime, we will be meeting at
the NFIU Steering Committee on 26 February, and you might like
a preliminary informal word then.




           •y-,-----                          '
                       .   .       .               .   - - --   -   - -    «*. ; ■' ~-               '.-'•--'r-- *-; •
              •* ••            •       - ■-                                 ■' ' • f i r :   ■*, •   ;• v- v>*




                                                                                                                         .



 Mr Chilcotr                                      ■ " .•
 Mr H a m m o n d                                  .■ . . r               -Y\v;;                                               .r'j'-'-'•.
 HMCIC     - ■- Y •~ " : .                        -:                                                                     -v-    - •
 Mr Addison : : ■                                                                                                                     ■

 Mr Goddard ’■   ■ -
 Mrs Reisz
JMr-s Catto
Mr Cane .• -         ■ ■ 'v                       ' ::
Miss Goose
Mr Cogbill
