                                                                                                      l(y



                                                   Association of          35 Great Smith Street
                                                                           Westminster
                                                   Metropolitan            London SW1P3BJ
                                                   Authorities              Telephone
                                                                            01-222 8100
                                                   Secretary AlunGronow     Facsimile receiver only
                                                   Deputy Joan Jones        01-222 0878




           Mr R M Whalley                                   S/CB          26 May J 989
           Secretary                               yourmf
           Inquiry into the Hillsborough
             Stadium Disaster
           50 Queen Anne's Gate
           London SW1H 9AT




           Dear Mr Whalley

           HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

           Thank you for your letter of 23 May.   My Association is grateful for the
           approach you have made and would like to register its wish to submit
           written material to the Inquiry.   This submission will relate to the more
           general part of Lord Justice Taylor's terms of reference, namely the issues
           of crowd control and safety at sports grounds.

           I note that you are hoping written submissions could reach the Inquiry by
           12 June.   I fear it may be particularly difficult for us to meet that
           date; as a national association of local authorities we are required to
           consult broadly within our membership before making representations on
           behalf of the-full Association.   I know there will be particular interest
           in this matter, since most of the major football grounds and sports stadia
           in the country are housed within the areas of my authorities and of course
           both Liverpool and Sheffield are within our membership. Accordingly, I
S|^ '      would be grateful if Lord Justice Taylor could see his way to giving us a
           more generous deadline; perhaps you could indicate; how far such generosity
           might extend.
r   im .
           Yours sincerely
                                            Association of         35 Great Smith Street
                                                                   Westminster
                                            Metropolitan           London SW1P3BJ
                                            Authorities            Telephone
                                                                   01-2228100
                                            Secretary AlunGronow   Facsimile receiver only
                                            Deputy Joan Jones      01-222 0878




Mr R M Whalley                              c""'              SSB/RG/4/11B
Secretary to the Inquiry
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON SW1A OAT                                               3 July 1989




Dear

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

In response to your letter dated 23 May, inviting the Association to
submit evidence to Lord Justice Taylor' Inquiry into the Hillsborough
disaster, I attach 6 x copies of the Memorandum of Evidence on the
Association's behalf with an appendix, "Football Violence: The
Metropolitan Viewpoint".

I have been asked to add that the Association has been giving
consideration to the wider issues of peacetime emergency planning for some
time now; and to let the Inquiry have a copy of AMA document "Local
Authorities and peacetime Emergency Planning: A Review of Current
Arrangements and Proposals for Improvement". This document was adapted by
the Association following wide consultation within the AMA and with
concerned outside bodies. It sets out the results of a review which
detected serious gaps in the present arrangements, and contains proposals
which are designed to place peacetime emergency planning by local
authorities on an acceptable footing. Unfortunately, its relevance has been
highlighted by a number of peacetime disasters, and most recently by
Hillsborough.

The Association would also like to submit a paper prepared by the
Emergency Planning Unit of Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority
which builds on the document referred to above. The Paper emphasises the
need for legislation to establish a statutory general peacetime plan which
would require local authorities to draw up comprehensive emergency
response procedures. These would involve co-ordination of local authority
service - including liaison with police and fire services - adequate 24
hour call-out and stand-by systems for minor emergencies, and hazard
appraisals which would list all major risks in the area. The AMA believes
that metropolitan districts and London boroughs - normally in the
frontline when it comes to coping with emergencies - should each have at
least one full-time peacetime emergency planning officer to complement
those at county level. Their work would be backed up by the creation of
an Emergency Planning Inspectorate and an Advisory Committee on Emergency
Planning, whose role would be to investigate disasters, publish their
findings and provide training packages and models.
The Association is very willing to provide Lord Justice Taylor with any
further information that might be required during the course of the
Inquiry.


Yours sincerely




P MICHAELSON
25^
MEMORANDUM TO THE TAYLOR INQUIRY



1.   The Association of Metropolitan Authorities represents the 36

Metropolitan District Councils, 31 London Boroughs, the City of London, the

Inner London Education Authority and the Joint Authorities responsible for

Police, the Fire Service and Public Transport in the Metropolitan Areas.

The Association's role is to promote and protect the interests of its

member authorities and the community they serve, to provide a forum for

member authorities to discuss and act collectively on matters of common

concern and to provide a service to member authorities, including the

dissemination of good practice.    The county of Merseyside includes the

districts of Knowsley, Liverpool, St Helens, Sefton and Wirral where the

majority of the dead, the injured, their families, friends and neighbours

lived.   The county of South Yorkshire includes the districts of Barnsley,

Doncaster, Rotherham and Sheffield.   The district councils appoint the

elected members to the Fire & Civil Defence Authorities and Police

Authorities.



2.   Since March 1983, the Association has maintained a Working Party on

Football, which is now called the Football Development Working Party.      In

1984,' the Association published "Football Violence : The Metropolitan

Viewpoint" (copy appended) and the Association also gave evidence before Mr

Justice Popplewell in 1985.   The Association provides joint secretariat

services for Football’s Family Forum which will submit evidence separately

to the inquiry.



3.   The Association recognises that it would be possible for the Inquiry

to interpret narrowly its second term of reference "to make recommendations
                                                                                “1




about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports grounds".     The

Association urges the Inquiry to adopt the broadest approach because



      (a)   "the needs of crowd control and (crowd) safety" go beyond

            issues of movement, density, policing and building materials into

            areas of public policy such as responsibility for organisational

            procedures, co-ordination and liaison in the aftermath of

            disaster and medium to long-term commitments to victim support;

            and



       (b) "at sports grounds" interpreted narrowly would preclude the

            Inquiry from making recommendations on crowd control and safety

            at other large scale events such as pop concerts held elsewhere

            than in sports grounds.



4.   The Association recognises the necessity to balance the maintenance of

public order at large scale events with preserving the personal safety of

individual spectators.     It recognises the difficulties faced by the

police, but it believes that considerations of public order and control can

at times overshadow the issue of spectator safety.     Measures to promote

public order and public safety are not always identical.



The Association also accepts that the operational considerations relating

to any sporting event are unique.     Each football ground is different in

terms of construction and environment, while crowd size and demeanour are

affected by many different factors such as the weather, the importance of

the match and the relationship between the clubs involved.     In these

circumstances local knowledge is as crucial as any set of centrally agreed




                                          -2-
guidelines.      Nevertheless, principles relating to the growth of community

involvement in football set out in "Football Violence: The Metropolitan

Viewpoint" remain as valid today as they were in 1984 and the document was

publicly endorsed by the then Minister for Sport, Neil MacFarlane MP within

weeks of publication.      The Association would ask the Inquiry to give due

weight to these principles in any recommendations which it makes about the

general context of the Hillsborough tragedy.



Furthermore the Association has long held, and will continue to take, the

view that any member of the public should have the same expectation of

safety at a public event whether this be an enclosed premises (such as a

theatre) in the open air, (a pop concert for example) or a sporting stadium

(football, cricket or rugby eg).



5.   With specific regard to the circiaistances at Hillsborough, the

Association's position is clear and Has stated in a previous inquiry to Mr

Justice Popplewell.     At any football natch, the playing surface can

constitute a major place of safety for spectators in the event of an

emergency.      Whilst recognising the need to maintain public order, the

Association said that:



      (a)    there should be a choice of alternative means of escape from

             a stand which would provide so far as is reasonably practicable,

             for spectators to turn their back on the source of the fire or

             other problem and travel to a place of safety.   Such means of

             escape would require effective policing/stewarding on the spot;




                                       -3-
Bi                                              _   ..^.wm>r-tii^ihii^winwifriiftiv^^to^Ti.>wa<h*wwia^^riaa8^*jiiftha«M beg^




          (b)   each exit should wherever possible have direct access to open air

                and should be separated from other exits to avoid funnelling

                people into a congested area;



          (c)   many seated stands are constructed so that people have to move

                forwards and downwards in order to get out.                     This means that

                they may have to go towards the source of danger before reaching

                safety.     This is contrary to the interests of public safety, and

                the guidance document, (Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds) should

                be updated to limit the forward travel distance where there is no

                alternative means of escape at the rear of the stand;



          (d)   the training and number of stewards at public events requires

                scrutiny.     Most are casually employed.               Measures are necessary

                to ensure that their knowlege of the ground, its safety systems

                and the correct procedures are of the highest order because of

                the public responsibility which they carry;



          (e)   specific measures which should be taken in respect of enclosure

                fences include:    the siting of emergency gates in fences, such

                gates to be secured by suitable quick release mechanisms; such

                gates to be manned by sufficient stewards; stewards to be trained

                (see above); stewards to have independent communication with a

                central control point, and to be trained in the system used.



     These points, which arose from the Bradford fire disaster are equally

     applicable to the Hillsborough tragedy.




                                          -4-
6.   Since Hillsborough, the Association's secretariat has inspected the

anti-panic barrier now installed at the municipal stadium in Nimes, in

operation at a match.      Although the system has only recently been

introduced, it does appear to. provide a means of maintaining public order

and safety at the same time.      The Association would hope that the system

could be given an early trial in England to see if it would be appropriate

here.



7.      At this stage in the acquisition and evolution of experience from the

recent spate of major disasters including Hillsborough, the Association

urges the Inquiry to build into its report and recommendations positive and

forward-looking views on a number of issues:



        (a)   The powers, practices and systems of local authorities' planning

              for major disasters and responses to them.     These are addressed

              in detail in two documents accompanying the covering letter,

              "Local Authorities and Peacetime Emergency Planning: A Review of

              Current Arrangements and Proposals for Improvement" (November

              1988) and an amended version of the Association's final submission

              (June 1988) to the Home Office in an endeavour to influence

              the latter's Review of Peacetime Disasters;



        (b)   Counselling and support for victims and carers/rescuers:    the

              Association firmly believes governmental initiative and

              commitment are necessary in two major areas.    First, there is

              a need for guidance and training packages to be promulgated to

              local authorities and District Health Authorities (the

              Association is represented on the Department of Health/CRUSE




                                     -5-
.-.isaMfe




                  Working Party).     Secondly, long term victim and rescuer/carer

                  support is expensive.     The Association understands Liverpool

                  City Council's additional commitment is around £2 million; and

                  other Merseyside authorities will also have heavy costs in this

                  area.   The Association therefore urges the Inquiry to recommend

                  prompt and full reimbursement by government to local authorities

                  faced with the consequence of disaster among their people,

                  families and communities.     The Association is aware that the

                  Local Government and Housing Bill, clause 133 at Report Stage,

                  enables the Minister to codify the so called "Bellwin Rules" but

                  is unconvinced that government has any commitment to meeting in

                  full the financial costs of disaster.



            (c)   Major disasters generate public appeals.    The law's complexities

                  and inequities are well known from the experiences of recent

                  disaster funds.    The Association does not consider it necessary

                  for every local authority to have a Disaster Appeal discretionary

                  trust on the shelf, updated as experience and case law develop.

                  However, the danger of buying in the state of the art after the

                  next disaster is that irrevocable decisions can be made early on.

                  The Association accordingly believes it would be sensible and

                  prudent for government to issue guidelines on the establishment,

                  administration and termination of disaster appeals.



            (d)   The Association is aware that currently some building control

                  departments in local authorities are moving by virtue of their

                  responsibilities for safe structures and buildings into the area

                  of training stewards and assisting the police on crowd movement

                  and dynamics.     Because these departments know how crowds behave




                                                -6-
in tight spaces, before during and after a major event (like a

semi-final or a Michael Jackson concert), the Association

considers this emerging trend should be encouraged by Government

and standards approaches promulgated.       Equally, on-site match

day "spot checks" by appropriate officials from building control

and fire prevention should also be encouraged.       A vital issue

is the need to drastically review the recommendations of the

method of calculating the safe ground capacities for terraced

areas and viewing slopes as outlined in the Home Office guide to

Safety of Sports Grounds.      The term "peak viewing" area should

be further defined and given a maximum size and arrangements made

for a maximum number of persons based on 54 per 10m2 to occupy

that part of the faciliites.      All other areas should be

classified as requiring a substantially lower density factor

(possibly 40 per 10m2) yet maintaining the need for 6kn/m tests

to be achieved on all crush barriers.       (This maximum calculation

should be reduced, as in the current guide, depending on the

state of the terrace or viewing slope).



The figure of 54 per 10m2 is used throughout the terrace and

therefore must be an average figure.      This average is exceeded

in peak viewing areas and therefore any safety factors are

reduced proportionately.



It is also important in the light of Hillsborough, not just to

calculate terrace capacities but also to ensure that there is on

the spot monitoring that the capacities are not exceeded or at

least to keep a close eye on the crowd to ensure that they are

not too tightly packed.




                            -7-
           In self-contained terraces it might be possible to monitor

           capacities by means of a turnstile.      Where the terrace is not

           self-contained and there is the possibility of movement by fans

           in and out of the terrace or to other parts of the terrace the

           only control possible would seem to be effective supervision by

           Police or stewards whose task is to ensure proper "packing" of

           terraces.



           Where the playing area is considered to be a safe place for

           evacuation from stands, and there is a standing paddock or

           terrace area between the stands and the playing area, the

           packing density for this terraced area should not exceed the lower

           figure of 26 persons per 10m2 to reduce the risk of crushing in

           the event of forward evacuation from the stands towards the

           playing area.



     (e)   The incoming calls at Casualty Bureaux and hospital switchboards

           frequently cause the system to collapse.      This is because the

           public telephone network does not have the capacity to absorb a

           huge and unanticipated increase in calls.     The Association

           recognises that the perfect answer is unobtainable but recommends

           the Inquiry to take evidence on forthcoming proposed improvements

           and assess their likely effectiveness.



8.   In conclusion, the Association believes that public safety and public

order can be exercised to a high degree of compatibility in football

stadiums provided that the principles set out above are applied to the

particular circumstances of each individual ground and each event.

Improved standards of construction and training should assist the control




                                    -8-
stadiums provided that the principles set out above are applied to the

particular circumstances of each individual ground and each event.

Improved standards of construction and training should assist the control

of each match, but this will need funding.    The funding required could be

provided by using a small percentage of the duty currently collected by the

Treasury from football pools.   This is a small sum to pay for ensuring

public safety.



The Association will be pleased to present more detailed technical or other

arguments to the Inquiry as appropriate.




                                    -9-
REPORT BY MERSEYSIDE PCDA. EMERGENCY
PUNNING UNIT


 HOME OFFICE REVIEW OF PEACETIME DISASTERS

 Introduction

 This paper expends on a recent resolution by Merseyside FCDA and
 is designed for submission to the Home Office as a last-ditch
 endeavour to influence the Home Office review.    This is believed
 to be imminent, perhaps timed around the Home S e c r e t a r y ’s address
 to the ACZoPO conference in Coventry 27-28 June.

 Following the civil emergencies seminar at the Civil Defence
 College in November 1988, the outcome of the review was expected
 in February 1989 but Lockerbie, Clapham, Kegworth and
 Hillsborough have delayed its release. A Parliamentary Answer on
 2 May stated "We hope to make an announcement on the result of
 the review as a whole shortly."

      report is substantially based on the AMA review "Local
 Authorities and peacetime emergency planning - a Review of
 current arrangenents and proposals for improvement."

 Peacetime Emergency Planning

The need to improve peacetime emergency planning and arrangements
to mitigate the effects of disasters - whether natural
technological or social - stands o n its own. Public expectations
are at a high level and are reinforced by each disaster as it
occurs-   There is a general public perception of a very real
threat from peacetime disasters and of the need to give greater
priority to emergency planning and disaster management     in
contrast, and irrespective of political policies on civil defence
and local authority war planning, -the new climate of East/West
relations has made the prospects o f wax more remote and hence has
made possible consideration o f a change in priorities for
planning needs. This latter point: is indirectly supported by

Home Office Circular ESI/89 which gives less priority to civil
defence activity overall than its. predecessor in 1986.

In addition to improving international relations, and increased
public awareness, EEC initiatives on industrial and environmental
regulations and the HSE’s proposal for civil nuclear
installations to be brought within the CIMAH regime are further
examples of the way the wind.is blowing. The Local Government
and Bousing Bill's proposal to codify the provision of financial
aid to local authorities in post-disaster clean up operations
points in the same direction.

The Association urges the Home Office to take account of these
new realities and, even at this late stage in formulating the
results of the review, not to miss the opportunities they afford.

Major disasters in recent years, including King's Cross,

AMA EMERGENCY PLANNING SUB COMMITTEE
2 June 1989       " '~            '  .
                                                                   •   «• .*w-




                                  1
Zeebrugge and Bradford, have highlighted the need for a
coordinated response to disasters, and drawn attention to the
weaknesses in existing emergency planning arrangements.    While
both Europe and UK legislation require emergency plans for
certain industrial major hazard sites, sports grounds and
transport systems, there is no single piece of legislation to
cover t.-.e emergency planning arrangements for major disasters in
the United Kingdom.         •

Emergency planning for major accidents and disasters should be
given increased emphasis and financed accordingly.

The Home Office review of emergency planning and disaster
response arrangements in the UK should incorporate:-

1-    Establishment of emergency planning on a statutory basis

2.    Improving the practice of Local Authority planning in a
      number of key ways.

3.    Adequate resourcing of Local Authority emergency planning

4   . Creation of a new Emergency Planning Inspectorate and
      establishment of an Advisory Committee on Emergency Planning.

These four topics are summarised below and more detail is in the
AMA s Review which was sent to the Home Office in November 1988.




      Legislation should be introduced imposing duties upon
      appropriate public and private organisations to undertake
      comprehensive peacetime emergency planning, which would be
      supervised by an Inspectorate. Local authorities would be
      required to prepare two types of emergency plan; general and
      specific.

     The general plan would establish on a statutory basis an
-    organisation at local authority level which can. be mobilised
     flexibly in support of the emergency services to meet a wide
     range of peacetime emergencies- The Major Disaster Plan
     would describe the main features for co-ordinating centrally
     local authority services and for liaising with the Police and
—    * lre Service,. In addition, statutory.provision would require
     local authorities to operate adequate 24 hour call-out and
     stand-by systems to respond to small scale incidents.
     Satisfactory ’minor emergencies* schemes are the basis for a
     sound response to a major disaster.

     Once the general scheme was in place, local authorities would
     be required to undertake a hazard appraisal, assessing the
     major.risks, in their area.. From the hazard appraisal,
     p   rities for specific (or contingency) plans should be
                              2              -   -   ,
       developed.    Three broad categories of specific plan are
       proposed:

              fixed location
              unpredictable location
              arec-wide

       Th e following arc proposed     for inclusion in l e g i s l a t i o n : -

       i)    statutory general peacetime plan, including             provision
              for comprehensive local authority emergency            response
              procedures.

      ii)    statutory hazard appraisal.

     iii)    statutory requirement to address three categories of
             specific emergency plan

      iv)    specification of the organisations on whom the duty to
             plan or assist in plan making falls.

2.    Improving the Practice of Local Authorities

      There is a need to review the roles of District and
      County-level authorities in the preparation of peacetime
      emergency plans and the co-ordination of disaster response.

      Districts, particularly in metropolitan areas (and the
      Boroughs in London), will normally be in the frontline when
      it cooes to operational response in an emergency. Districts
      should prepare the general and specific peacetime emergency
      plans outlined above, with assistance from county-level
      authorities. It is argued that all metropolitan districts
      and London Boroughs should have at least one full-time
      peacetime emergency planning officer, who would complement
      those at county level.

      County level authorities should;-

      i)    liaise with and assist districts in preparation of
            appropriate general district and departmental plans

     ii)     conduct the statutory hazard appraisal

.iii)       ..consider.with the.Inspectorate the.need,for specific
             emergency plans

     lv)    prepare county—level peacetime plans as necessary

      v)    ensure that the emergency plans of different districts
            dovetail with each other and the emergency services

     vi) ..on the basis of lppal risk appraisal, advise the
           Inspectorate on the need for regional or national
                               3
            planning, including mutual aid arrangements with
            neighbouring authorities, and initiate appropriate
            arrangements

     vii)   organise and assist in the training of district staff
            and volunteers involved with peacetime emergency plans

 viii)      organise and assist in the conduct of regular exercises
            of these plans

      ix)   co-ordinate emergency response on behalf of a district
            whose resources are inadequate, or where an emergency
            involves a number of districts.

      It is recognised that where appropriate organisational
      arrangements can be agreed between District and County level
      authorities, the planning and other functions described above
      can be mutually accommodated.

3.    Proper resourcing of Local Authorities

      People expect their local authorities to act quickly and
      responsibly once disaster strikes. The financing of local
      authority emergency planning should be given a firmer basis.
      Among the options, the provision of specific grant or
      penalty-free revenue support grant could with advantage be
      adopted. The Government's decision on clean-up operations
      should be applied to planning, particularly where it can be
      shown that pre-planning, training and exercising have enabled
      more expeditious and more effective disaster response.

4*    Creation of Emergency Planning Inspectorate and Establishment
      of an Advisory Committee            "       —

      An Emergency Planning Inspectorate and Advisory Committee on
      Emergency Planning should be established to ensure adequate
      development of a new statutory emergency planning system, to
      investigate disasters and publish a report of the findings,
      and to provide training packages and models. These latter*
      aspects are supported by the Fennell Report into the Kings’s
      Cross disaster, which recommends that "consideration should
      be given to a national disaster planning desk where
      experience gained from disasters and their investigation, and
      civil emergencies can be retained."    The CIMAH Regulations
      specify the Health and Safety Executive as such an
      inspectorate which is independent from Local Government and
      able to exercise its powers effectively in accordance with
      the law and central government policy.




                                4
