  INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
         STADIUM DISASTER




                With the Compliments of
               the Secretary to the Inquiry

       ( i r t c tp U L o C        tT V w o O
c h x x jt       CkrcX t o            C u
                             •   oJ^ T       5c^o

        Vv>^o


                        /|/1
   W                                  2,-lj/O

               7 .V 3'»ju.         - u/\V^V
 50 Queen Anne’s Gate        W ^ tV              I'®
 London SW1H 9AT         ,      ' J    nl)      . ,    <1J
 01-273 3602                            ^       ^       l
                             Cxt
                                                   k     Ct;    Aj .
    vIoU-w                        t-i
    Russell Jones & WaJLker                                                            Your Ref:
    Solicitors                                                                         JMW/MIS
    Swinton House                                   'vcfcfc
    324 Grays Inn Road
    LONDON                                                      >     >     r
    WC1X 8DH
                                                         *F U u /
                                                                                        OCtOber 1989


                                                                    ’ /<*



    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


    Thank you for your letter of 9 October to Lord Justice Taylor in
    which you raise two issues. The first concerns the request -fey W U w C
    the Police Federation-LliaL they be cjfunUud separate
    representation at the oral hearings in Sheffield.


    As you rightly say, Mr Browne's application to that effect was
    refused by Lord Justice Taylor on 15 May 1989     In doing so,
    ■
    hovfovea?, he emphasised that, should any conflict of interest
    emerge subsequently, it would be open to those acting for the
    Federation to make a further application for representation.
                       ¥ specifically-stated that:-
             "You are free to come back at any time and, of course, there
             is nothing to stop the Federation from having someone here
             with a watching brief ___*' (Transcript Day 1 15 May 1989 p.

                                                   fcb                    j VA*>£ CC T " c U v y w j       ttl'^ A ^ C A ^ c J L r


                                                               I«--feho •oiroumo-toncoa, no critioi-am
    ■a,a.r» hra    1      ~
                          | efl   ah    the*   T nrpilr-y                       hanrlling   nf   hh*>   mifl-nr



    Your second point concerns evidence relating to the behaviour of
    Liverpool fans which you say has been overlooked. I have— to oay

^                 M r,            ft/v A   C oV lvivfl jfw      ^                                   t
    fypV \ u has                                             no coA.f-1; \)c oj^ |/\V^V , kvtk                           on
                            \\^ y
                                   "tlwj
    feha% Lord Justice Taylor finds youg assertion surprising.
    Throughout the course of the oral hearings, he made clear that
    every opportunity would be afforded to any of the represented
    parties to have any witness called whom they wished. He
    expressed that view at the outset of the hearings on 15 May
    (Transcript Day 1, 15 May 1989 p.11 F-H) and it was reiterated on
    a number of occasions^ If such evidence existed, fehen it should
    have been brought to the Inquiry's attention at that stage.


    Lord Justice Taylor feels that ample opportunity has already been
    given to present all relevant evidence, and is not prepared at
    this stage to consider the matter further.




*
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370

M D B Sinclair Esq                             Your Ref: MDBS/RAS
Chairman
York City Association Football &
 Athletic Club pic
Bootham Crescent
YORK
Y03 7AQ                                    Date
                                            3 November 1989




                      ;
Thank you for your letter of 6 October to Lord Justice Taylor
about the recommendations in his Interim Report. He has read
your observations with interest and was grateful for your
constructive comments. He appreciates your concern and is now,
as he has always been, particularly conscious of the burdens his
interim recommendations might impose on smaller clubs.
Nevertheless, the recommendations were what he thought was
necessary to ensure safety in the short term, and he saw little
scope in interim recommendations for exceptions and modifications
between different clubs.

When he comes to consider his final recommendations, Lord Justice
Taylor will have in mind whether it is possible to draw any
distinction between different circumstances and different classes
of grounds. Meanwhile, he is not prepared to make any variation
to his interim recommendations.
                                       OU.yo




                                          'RHW w,
                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                                                     l a r r a
                                                     YORKCITY FC
                                                                  F o u n d e d 1922
                                        Y o r k C ity A s s o c ia tio n F o o t b a l l & A th le tic C lu b Pic
                                                       Bootham Crescent, York Y 0 3 7AQ
          MDBS/RAS                                          T1 ,                                              6th October 1989
                 '                                          Telephone 0904 624447




          Rt. Hon. Sir Peter Taylor
          Supreme Court Department and Office
          Royal Court of Justice
          London
          WC2A 2LL



           Dear Lord Justice,

           I am writing to you as Chairman of the Associate Member Clubs of the
           Football League.   Since the publication of the Interim report arising
           from your Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, the Football
           League, including the Associate Members of the Football League, that
           is the Clubs forming the 3rd and 4th Divisions, have been endeavouring
           to comply with what we believe to be the intention and the spirit of
           your interim recommendations.

           Unfortunately we have been faced by wildly varying interpretations of
           these interim recommendations by the Licensing Authorities and the Police.

           We for our part have started from the basic premise contained in Paragraph
           311 of your Report in which you state "...the real cause of the Hillsborough
           disaster was overcrowding and it is against that danger that my interim
           recommendations are primarily directed".   We have also had in mind
           that the "main thrust of the interim recommendations as a holding exercise
           is to reduce numbers on the terraces to increase vigilance and to achieve
           a proper balance in crowd control between prevention of disorder and
           maintenance of safety".

           It has become apparant that most of the Licensing Authorities and the
           Police are working on the principle that every match at each 3rd and
           4th Division ground is going to be attended by a capacity crowd for
           that particular ground.   The average attendance in the 3rd Division
           last season was 5500 and the average capacity is 20,000.   In the 4th
           Division the average crowd last season was 3200 and the avarage capacity
           is 12,000.

           On the basis of these figures it is clear that at an average 3rd or
           4th Division game there is not the slightest chance of a disaster occurring
           due to 'overcrowding1.   In our opinion there is a need for a degree
           of applied commonsence but we fear that this will not prove possible
           unless some guidance is given by you in due course.


                                                                                                                    cont....


                                   Registered office as above address Registered number 183969 England
Directors: M.D.B. Sinclair (Chairman) D.M. Craig OBE JP B.A. Houghton J.E.H. Q uickfall FCA R.B. Strachan M A LLB FCIS E.B. Swallow C. Webb

                           President: J.R. Greenway MP Club Secretary: K. Usher Company Secretary: I.R. Fowler

              Team M anager: J.C. Bird Telephone 32858 Lottery O ffice: Telephone 52409 Commercial O ffice: Telephone 645941
                                                                    2   .
The following   examples are typical of what is happening

1.   Additional police officers (i.e. additional to the numbers who
      have previously been allocated to the category of game involved)
      are being drafted in to stand at gates in perimeter fences where
      there is seated^ccomnodation despite the fact that your report
      is concerned with the terracing.   Frequently police officers         —*
      are standing at gates where the spectators occupy only a small
      percentage of the seats available.

2.   Aditional police officers are being drafted into games to stand
      in front of perimeter gates where the number of standing spectators
      is on average less than 20% of the permitted capacity even after
      the 15% reduction contained in your recommendations.   These gates
      are also being kept fully opened when with the crowd involved
      it would really be better to have it unlocked rather than standing
      open bearing in mind it is important "to achieve a proper balance
      in crowd control between prevention of disorder and maintenance
      of safety".

3.   Additional police officers are being drafted into games to stand
      in front of gates contained in boundary fences fronting the home
      spectators area.   The boundary fence in these cases being in
      the order of just over one metre high, as distinct from perimeter
      fences to prevent unruly crowds getting onto the playing area
      which are over 2 meters high.

When there is a possibility of a capacity crowd or a crowd approaching
capacity in any section of the ground there is clearly a need to have
in being your interim recommendations but surely there is a need for
discretion and common sense during the other times which after all make
up over 90% of the games in the 3rd and 4th Divisions.

On behalf of the Associate Members of the Football League I would therefore
ask you consider the above and, if you feel it appropriate, make a distinction
between recommendations which are unqualified and applicable to all
matches and those which are dependent on certain specific relevant factors
such as:-

      a) the likely attendance at the match
      b) the height of the boundary fencing
      c) whether or not a particular section of the ground is for
         standing or seated spectators

It is the opinion of the Associate Members that if the recommendations
were to take account of these factors the conclusion of agreements between
Clubs and their police authorities would be greatly facilitated.   Indeed
it would be of considerable assistance if you felt able to issue supplementary
guidelines relating to such agreements at an early stage rather than
wait until the final report is published.


                                                       cont.
The Associate Members are very mindful of the need to ensure the safety
of spectators within their grounds and to establish appropriate agreements
with the Police and the purpose of this letter is to draw your attention
to the practical problems the Clubs are experiencing because in some
instances Police Authorities are not prepared to take into account the
factors we have outlined above when seeking to implement your interim
recommendations.

If it would assist you in considering this matter you would be very
welcome to visit either my own Club at York City or any of the other
Associate Member Clubs and if you wish to accept this invitation please
let me know and I can make the necessary arrangements.




                          Yours sincerely




                          M D B Sinclair
                          Chairman
                          Associate Members
