          edge hill
U N IV E R S IT Y COLLEGE




           Centre for Studies for Crime and Social Justice


           Direct Line:               01695 584305

           Our Ref:                   PS/BH

           20 October 1997

           Lord Justice Stuart Smith
           The Hillsborough Scrutiny
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne’s Gate
           LONDON S W 1H 9A T

            Dear Lord Justice Stuart Smith

            Ref: Supplementary Submission

           Following your recent visit to Liverpool and my attendance at the general
           meeting with families and at several of the family sessions I enclose a
           supplementary submission. This expresses some of my concerns arising from
           those meetings and some further developments which, hopefully, will form part
           of our meeting on Friday 24 October.

            It is my intention, with your approval, to revisit the key points raised in my first
            submission and to develop issues advanced in the supplementary submission.
            I would be grateful if you could provide me with some indication at the meeting
            of whether or not you consider that each matter of concern falls within the
            Scrutiny’s remit. Further to this, it would be helpful if you could indicate what
            are the boundaries of "action ... in the public interest”.

            As mentioned in the enclosed brief supplementary, I expect to be
            accompanied by a former member of the South Yorkshire Police.            It is
            intended that this former officer will provide documentary material and oral
            comments concerning the disaster, the immediate aftermath and the nature of
            the initial inquiry and statement-taking procedures adopted by the South
            Yorkshire Police prior to submission to the West Midland® investigators.

            I look forward to meeting with you again on Friday.

            Yours sincerely




            Professor Phil Scraton PhD MA AdvDipEd BA
            Centre Director



          D r Jo h n C ater Chief Executive   St Helens Road, Orm skirk,   Telephone: 01695 575171
                                              Lancashire L39 4Q P          Facsim ile: 01695 579997
                                                                           Internet: http://w ww .ehche.ac.uk
   CENTRE FOR STUDIES IN CRIME AND SOCIAL JUSTICE


           EDGE HILL UNIVERSITY COLLEGE




INDEPENDENT SCRUTINY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
      CONDUCTED BY LORD JUSTICE STUART SMITH




                  Supplementary Submission




        Professor Phil Scraton PhD, MA, AdvDipEd, BA
                   The Hillsborough Project


                              and


                        Centre Director
         Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice
                  Edge Hill University College
              ORMKSIRK, Lancashire L39 4QP


                Tel: 01695 584305 (direct line)
                Fax: 01695 579997
                Em: Scratonp@staff.EHCHE.AC.UK
    Terms of Reference

    As indicated in my previous submission and my comments during the Scrutiny’s open
    meeting, I am most concerned over the limitations of the Scrutiny’s terms of
    reference. It has been my contention all along, and I made this clear to the Home
    Secretary in a Radio 5 interview on the day after he announced the Scrutiny, that the
    issues are as much about the quality, presentation, selection and limited disclosure of
    existing evidence as they are about ‘new’ or ‘fresh’ evidence.

    At the time of his announcements the Home Secretary commented that concerns
    “have remained whether the full facts have emerged” and that he intended “to get to
    the bottom of this once and for all”. One immediate effect of the Scrutiny has been
    the release to families of a whole range of statements, photographs and other material
    previously not seen my them. However incomplete or partial, most families for the
    first time have received body files on their loved ones. It has been difficult for
    families to accept the many inaccuracies, inconsistencies and apparent contradictions
    in much of this material.
#   The Mini-Inquests and the Summarising of Evidence

    What this raises is not only the broader issue of disclosure, but the procedure adopted
    for the presentation of evidence at the ‘mini-inquests’. The summarised evidence,
    written and presented by West Midlands Police investigating officers, was not an
    appropriate means of dealing with oral evidence. Most significantly, it denied
    interested parties the right to hear the evidence under oath and have it cross-examined.

    The 3.15 pm Cut-off

    Further concern surrounds the 3.15 pm cut-off. While I fully appreciate Lord Justice
    Stuart Smith’s comment that the Scrutiny cannot be a court of appeal for the
    Divisional Court, serious matters remain unresolved as to how the Coroner decided on
    that time and its implications for examining the actual circumstances in which people
    died.

    The Coroner employed a logic derived in medical opinion that by 3.06 all who died ^
    had suffered irreversible injuries due to the fixation of the chest in accordance with j
    traumatic asphyxia. He allowed four minutes for death post unconsciousness, took j         '


    the ambulance’s arrival on the pitch at 3.13 as the marker and ‘rounded up’ to 3.15.           '»
    Whatever the logic, and its acceptance by the Divisional Court, it was flawed. It is
    now widely accepted that many of the deaths were not due to traumatic asphyxia, but
    to crush asphyxia. The distinction is crucial. The former, consistent with a single
    immense pressure, usually would be considered irreversible. The latter, a gradual
    pressure which waxes and wanes, does not necessarily lead to an irreversible
    condition. This was always evident in that some people recovered consciousness in
    minutes, others in hours or days and, in the case of Andrew Deviffe, after years:




                                               1
Necessary and Appropriate Medical Intervention

It is, therefore, safe to conclude that an unknown number of those who died might
have lived had they received necessary and appropriate medical intervention. Surely
it is imperative to establish, in each case as far as is possible, whether any act or
omission within the context of a duty of care contributed to the death. This can only
be achieved through consideration of the evidence, much of which only recently has
become available to families, after 3.15. The implications are self-apparent,
particularly insofar as families need to know that their loved ones received the best
possible medical attention. Sadly, some of the statements suggest that in some cases
this did not happen as individuals were pronounced dead or assumed to be dead on the
most cursory of examinations.              ~             ^
                             ,                                .
Liability

Throughout the Liverpool meetings Lord Justice Stuart Smith went to some lengths to
explain to families the distinction between civil liability in negligence and criminal
liability. He indicated that although the South Yorkshire Police Authority and its
Chief Constable have never formally accepted liability the award of damages
constituted a technical acceptance. Hence the comments in rulings in compensation
cases, in the Divisional Court and by the Attorney General, that the police have <
admitted ‘blame’. It is difficult for families to accept this, given the strength,
persistence and public proclamation of denial of negligence made by the South
Yorkshire Police. It also relatesTolRe DPP’s decision ncTto“p fo ^aite“^ 5^ f f ic e ^ .
because of msiifficiency of evidence and the eventual avoidance by senior officers of
disciplinary action for neglect of duty. This whole sorry state of affairs has been
exacerbated by the seemingly obstinate refusal by anyone in authority to offer families
and survivors any jjpolqgy for their contribution to the tragic circumstances in which
people died or were injured.

The Preparation of Statements by the South Yorkshire Police

The deep sense of injustice has been further compounded by a growing awareness of
how the South Yorkshire Police prepared its evidence for the West Midlands
investigation. Without doubt, normal procedures were dispensed with. Officers were
advised not to write up their pocket books, a most unusual instruction, and were
required to provide a written account - their recollections - of what on the day. This
they did, with some officers writing graphic accounts.

These recollections were submitted to senior officers who then took legal opinion on
their content. It appears that in some cases, and without access to all original
recollections it is impossible to provide a figure, substantial changes in content were
made. I will provide one example of such changes which will show not only changes
in style or expression but also changes in content or fact. In at least one other case,
which I raised at one of the family sessions, there was significant variance between
the initial recollection (where the police officer concerned appeared to have minimal
involvement) and the later statement (in which he was very active in helping with the
dying and injured).


                                          2
* I «*.




          It is my conclusion, and this will be supported by a former South Yorkshire Police
          Officer who will be with me at the 24 October meeting, that the above procedure was
          systematic and constituted a major departure from police practice. If this is so, and I
          believe that it is, it suggests that the reliability of many of the statements made to the
          West Midlands Inquiry is under question. Placed in the broader contexts of secrecy
          and intimidation, which seemingly surrounded the internal handling of police
          evidence, this matter is of the gravest concern.




                                                      3
