From:        J L Goddard                        cc: Mr Chilcot
             F8 Division                            Mr Hammond
             Ext. 3313                              HMCIC
                                                    Mr Addison
             15 February 1990                       Mrs Reisz
                                                    Mrs Catto
                                                    Mr Cane
                                                    Miss Goose
                                                   tHr Cogbill



Mr Bovs Smith




TAYLOR REPORT:     POLICE ISSUES


I attach a draft letter to Mr Anderton for your signature
asking him formally to bring the recommendations in Taylor's
final report and the Government's response to them to the
attention of ACPO.


2.      The draft has been cleared with those copy recipients who
have a direct interest.




                           }, I. GODDARD



                            J L GODDARD
    42-2.JS

    DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY MR BOYS SMITH




    C J Anderton Esq CBE CStJ QPM CBIM
    Chief Constable
    Greater Manchester Police
    PO Box 22 (S West PDO)
    Chester House
    Boyer Street
    MANCHESTER M16 ORE



•
    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT


    On 29 January the Home Secretary made a statement in the House
    about the final report of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into
    the tragedy at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989.      In
    his statement the Home Secretary referred to a schedule placed
    in the Library of the House setting out the Government's
    response to each of the recommendations set out in Chapters 3,
    4 and 5 of the report.     I enclose a copy of the schedule.


    The purpose of this letter is to ask you formally to bring the
    recommendations and the Government's response to them to the
    attention of ACPO.    I have no doubt that ACPO will wish to
    encourage chief officers to proceed quickly to take any
    necessary action to implement the recommendations directed at
    the police service.     Many of the recommendations substantially
    repeat those made in the interim report to which the police
    service made a notably prompt and positive response for which
    the Home Secretary was grateful.


    There are a number of recommendations to which I wish to make
    particular reference.
Recommendation 11 revises to some extent interim
recommendation 4.   It is now made clear that the agreement
setting out the club's and the police's respective functions
as to crowd safety and control is seen as a statement of
intent, not a binding contract.   Paragraph 214 of the report
says explicitly, "I am content that [the document] can be
subject to alteration without breach of contract should
circumstances so demand."   I hope that the re-formulation of
this crucial recommendation will ease the problems that I know
were seen to arise from the wording of the interim
recommendation.


Recommendations 19 and 20, dealing with the closure and
manning of gates provide greater flexibility than did the
earlier interim recommendations (9 and 10).    It will now be at
local discretion whether the perimeter gates are left fully
open, partially open or closed but unlocked.   Also for local
decision, by the Police Commander, will be whether the manning
of a perimeter gate should be by a police officer or a
steward.   This new flexibility is no doubt desirable for
operational reasons but it does underline the need for a clear
agreement about such matters to be embodied in the statement
of intent agreed between the police and the club.


Turning to the batch of recommendations (44-58) covering
police planning and communications, these will no doubt all
receive careful consideration, but I pick out three which are
of particular concern to the Home Office.


Recommendation 52 dealing with the training of present and
future Police Commanders is a key one in this group.     I
presume that your own sub-committee and the Training Committee
have an interest here.   I understand that the Police Staff
College at Bramshill is planning to hold during 1990 a
conference which will have as its theme the operational
management of football matches.   Within the Police Department
Gay Catto will be following up this recommendation with you or
whoever you advise her is the appropriate contact.


Recommendation 53 deals with charging for police services.
James Addison will be following up the Government's response
to this recommendation through his normal contacts with the
police service and police authorities.


Recommendation 55 for the provision of a dedicated command
channel seems to be crucial to effective police control.        The
Home Office has therefore made extra channels available for
use at events including a channel for command purposes.
Information about these channels has recently been circulated
to forces.


Recommendations 59-63 cover co-ordination of the emergency
services.     I simply wish to reiterate the Government's
response that those concerned will be urged to comply with the
recommendation (61) not repeated from the interim report.


There are two more general matters which call for some
comment.     Firstly, recommendation 42, directed at clubs, calls
for a significant change in the recruitment, training and
eventual quality of stewarding.     There are obvious
repercussions here for the call on police resources.        The Home
Secretary made this connection in his response to a question
following his statement when he said, "I therefore wholly
applaud Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation that stewards
should be trained so that fewer police officers are required
at grounds".


Second, Taylor's recommendations (70-73) for some new offences
and penalties call for careful study.     The Home Secretary has
said that he will be examining these recommendations as a
matter of urgency.     John Goddard will shortly be writing to
you separately about this but I can say now that we shall want
to take careful account of ACPO's views on the enforceability
and resource implications for the police of implementing these
recommendations.


If you think it would be helpful to discuss any of the matters
raised in this letter or any other issues arising from the
Taylor report I should be glad to arrange a meeting here with
those concerned.   We shall, of course, be reporting back to
Ministers on the response by the police service to Taylor in
due course and a meeting with you at that stage,   [perhaps
after Easter,] would provide a convenient opportunity for you
to bring us up to date.
