           <L   yw
                 %> (fiU&u
                    a                              2 7JUl19a4      14-ij~(p


                                      QUEEN ANNE'S GATE LONDON SW1H 9 AT
                hU/ Ctuylm*.                       2 5 JUL 1994



                        QexjJfe-
                        (bjAA&yvvy.


Thank you for your letter of 27 June on behalf of your
constituents Mr and Mrs Church who lost their son during the
Hillsborough tragedy.    You asked for a meeting to discuss the
difficulties which have been faced by'- your constituents in
getting answers to questions surrounding the tragic death of
their son, but you did not say what these difficulties have been.

You also referred to a recent "Cook Report" which dealt with
events surrounding Hillsborough. As I understand it, the concern
of the programme related to allegations that some witness
statements were altered under police pressure to conform to the
agreed time of death.

Should Mr and Mrs Church have a complaint to make concerning
police behaviour in this respect, it should be made, in the first
instance, to the Chief Officer of the relevant force under Part
IX of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.

Although I am responsible for coroner's law, coroners are
independent judicial officers and Home Office Ministers have no
power to interfere in their decisions. The Attorney General has
power under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 to authorise an
application to the High Court seeking a fresh inquest, but I am
aware that the Attorney General has declined such applications
because he concluded that they would have no reasonable prospect
of establishing that it was necessary or desirable in the
interests of justice for a fresh inquest to be held.

I am further aware that a number of Liverpool MPs have been in
touch with the Attorney General asking him to reconsider his
decision and that he has indicated that he remains of the view
that there is no basis for such an application to the High Court.

I understand that the Divisional Court, in considering an
application for judicial review relating to the inquest, took the
same view as the Attorney.




Joe Benton Esq JP, MP
House of Commons
London SW1A OAA
                                2




                    *




There has, as you know, already been an independent inquiry into
the Hillsborough disaster. The Lord Chief Justice, as he is now,
was appointed by the then Home Secretary to undertake this
inquiry because, at the time of Hillsborough, the Home Office had
responsibility for safety at sports grounds.             However,
responsibility for this matter now rests.with the Department of
National Heritage and so any decision to re-open the Inquiry
would be a matter for them to consider.

I appreciate the depth of feeling of those like Mr and Mrs Church
who so tragically lost members of their family at Hillsborough.
I can only express my sincere condolences to them. I am afraid,
though, that for the reasons which I have given, there is no
action which I can properly take in this matter and consequently
I do not think a meeting would serve any useful purpose.




                                    MICHAEL HOWARD
                            From : T h e P riv a te S e c r e t a r y



                                                                          H om e O ffic e
                                                                         QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                                         LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                                             25 JltL 1994


The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter of 28 June
requesting a meeting with him following a recent "Cook Report" concerning the
Hillsborough disaster. I understand that you wrote in similar terms to the
Attorney General and that you have received a reply from his Private Secretary
on 7 July.

As I understand it, the concern of the programme related to the allegations
that some witness statements were altered under police pressure to conform to
the agreed time of death.    As far as this issue is concerned, should the
families of those who lost their relatives at Hillsborough have new evidence
of police misdemeanors they should be reported, in the first instance, to the
Chief Officer of the relevant force under Part IX of the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 1984.

The Attorney General's Private Secretary has explained the Attorney General's
position in relation to this matter and there is nothing the Home Secretary
can add to this since it is purely a matter for the Attorney General to decide
whether an application should be made to the High Court for a fresh inquest
to be held.

There has, as you know,      already been an independent inquiry into the
Hillsborough disaster. The Lord Chief Justice, as he is now, was appointed
by the then Home Secretary to undertake this inquiry because at the time of
Hillsborough the Home Office had responsibility for safety at sports grounds.
However, responsibility for this matter now rests with the Department of
National Heritage and any decision to re-open the Inquiry would be a matter
for them to consider. I have therefore passed your letter to that Department.

In these circumstances, the Home Secretary has asked me say that he does not
think a meeting with a delegation of city councillors in relation to
Hillsborough would serve any useful purpose.




                                                          C C R HUDSON




Peter Bounds Esq
Chief Executive
The City of Liverpool
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool L69 2DH
