                                              pv/


From: Peter Edmundson                                             cc   Mr Michael
      Operational Policing                                             Permanent Secretary
                                                      fi*
      Policy Unit                                                      Mr Pugh
      Room 527, QAG                                        itji        Mr Granatt
      * 273 2621                                                       Mr Warner
                                                                       Mr Owen
            16 January 1998

Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - COLIN PICKTHALL M P




How to respond to Colin Pickthall, who recently passed you a copy o f Professor Phil
Scraton’s final submission to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny into the
Hillsborough Disaster.

Timing

2.        Your office has asked for a quick short reply.

Recommendation

3.        That you reply to Mr Pickthall along the lines o f the attached draft.

Consideration

4.      The Scrutiny team has confirmed that they have received Professor Scraton’s
submission. Professor Scraton’s involvement with the Hillsborough Family Support
Group stems from his role heading The Hillsborough Project, based at Edge HSU
University College where he is Director o f the Centre for Studies in Crime and Social
Justice. The Hillsborough Project is partly funded by Liverpool City Council. Professor
Scraton has been an active member o f the Family Support Group throughout the
Scrutiny, and accompanied a number o f the victims’ families at their meetings with
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in Liverpool in October.

5.     It is expected that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will complete his report shortly.
The consideration o f the evidence submitted to the Scrutiny is entirely a matter for the
Judge and it would not be appropriate for you to offer any comment at this stage.

Handling/presentation

6.        There are no additional handling considerations. . .




                                         PETER EDMUNDSON



f.\oppu\complnts'shortsub\mjw-0184.doc
DRAFT REPLY FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE

Colin Pickthall MP
House o f Commons
LONDON
SW 1A0AA



Thank you for passing to me a copy o f Professor Phil Scraton’s final submission to
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster.


My officials have contacted the Scrutiny team who have confirmed that they have
received a copy o f Professor Scraton’s submission.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has indicated that he hopes to complete his report shortly. I
do not know what he will conclude or recommend but his terms o f reference allow him
to recommend any action which he considers appropriate in the light o f the evidence he
has received. His advice will be made public.


I am sure you will appreciate that it would be inappropriate for me to comment at this
stage on the evidence under consideration.




£\oppu\coaiplnts\sho(tsub\iiyw-0184.doc
                                                                                                          Iig ?

,            ^           ^                                                              1 4 JAN 199!
rV            ? u J ^ r 2 .ft


                             fa litJ '& x to v fM -



fa           MOW ^                                          ^            +<5' ^ € "

<s„ / t * A / J               ^               < dw              1*          ^

      I,                                           M                        p W               ^
p fc M /-.          & M n a -Jk            O 'v      l 1^

©4          ^                       ^                       ^        ^                      c^

    k         cov^ov-             r t^ H          &^ M ^ r           o ^                ^         .


    fu S c          fiJ J L        y^vA

(P ^ y .          f r |U u^ - 4 ^              V W                   < R c /th ^                      U


    <J^ j L        U         fV         ? \x H lo U .                 , T W                 fr;


                                                                     pl ^       f   £ l>
flA x r tfr * L e O ^         ^
       tj4 - |<1 • ^*v-(^tw v-K

    Ju') ^ K aX >v—* 'i^1vjl-i                                        (3 /          i
    l^, &AAsc*s>*J. ,L-                            ■* "*
     %Ls&~—            <*~*- O-    A ^ ^ \r    c & f'ly
                           <£vs* I^C- t tA+J^. . .
        ^C ^u .   rtd-lrt~J»M .’? /V W-O W . J

                                     I ' 1*' »V
                                             IL . |
                  \ •^                        ^ ^                                                            ( p5j; M ^ u J u x ^ t^ \

  ^ Ih J                                  J    r-                                    p£L^Si                    ^ ,


   f       ( A ^ /v 'C '       ^4K >U >^        p^>                                                   te A u * .      .
                             CENTRE FOR STUDIES IN CRIME AND SOCIAL JUSTICE

 (f-sAV*      ^    C ^O V       CK) ivK-AAvP^A^!         y '       d t     s"
                                        EDGE HILL UNIVERSITY COLLEGE

0 « v A jN          u tv v _ ^ 0 ^       cy\A->X-                    ^              o-   ^ ^ - j^ M     Spv'“*' ^
IVOl              JxK^                        Q v^ q^, J                 ^      \        -— -\X               W-XJv-^-.

 Cvr-Ai^Vls^                             JVva> ' —             f         (V3K^___^X'           ^      vJ l    /           \

                  INDEPENDENT SCRUTINY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
                        CONDUCTED BY LORD JUSTICE STUART SMITH

           vAjn_^jj ,/t'—A* \> ^'xA X >             r^         ^                    \J*> w^vM2yvA5

                         i       1                  r                                                             .


                                                         Final Submission



           x / j -             ,vl,


                                     Professor Phil Scraton PhD, M A, AdvDipEd, BA
                                                The Hillsborough Project


                                                                     and


                                                     Centre Director
                                      Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice
                                               Edge Hill University College
                                           ORMSKIRK, Lancashire L39 4QP


                                               Tel: 01695 584305 (direct line)
                                               Fax: 01695 579997
                                               Em: Scratonp@ staff.EHCHE.AC.UK
INTRODUCTION

The previous two submissions were made early in the Scrutiny and before there was
opportunity to access and reflect on statements and other material made available by
the South Yorkshire Police. While the broader concerns raised in those submissions
still obtain, the Scrutiny has encouraged a sharper focus in terms of priorities and
direction. There remains a real concern over the conduct of the Inquests and the
conclusions of the Judicial Review. While some of this concern undoubtedly is
rooted in the adequacy and appropriateness of coronial procedure in such
circumstances, the conduct of the Hillsborough Inquests, from inception to
conclusion, denied the bereaved a full and thorough hearing of the evidence. This
issue and a range of others are well-documented in No Last Rights and there has been
no response to that critique suggesting that its conclusions should be revised.

As indicated in No Last Rights, the accidental death inquest verdicts sit uneasily
alongside statements of police liability, including Lord Justice McCowan’s ruling in
the Divisional Court. While understanding that the prescribed verdicts in the
coroner’s court offer no verdict (accommodating negligence or failure of a duty of
care) between accidental death/misadventure and unlawfully killed, the verdicts on
the 96 who died at Hillsborough are, at best, confusing and, at worst, contradictory to
the findings of Lord Justice Taylor and to all other rulings. It seems clear, given the
outcome and procedural irregularities, that the inquest verdicts should have been
quashed and the inquests revisited, possibly on a limited basis. The ruling in the
Divisional Court and the clear statement by Lord Justice Stuart Smith that the
Scrutiny could not challenge that ruling, suggests that a recommendation to leave the
verdicts ‘open’ would be appropriate in the circumstances.

This submission is not concerned with the matter of criminal prosecution and offers
no ‘new’ evidence towards that end. It remains a concern that the decision not to
prosecute was taken on the basis of insufficiency of evidence yet there was no
disclosure of the relevant evidence or of the advice taken by the DPP in coming to
that conclusion. This is a matter, however, much broader than Hillsborough. Given
that the intention appears to have been to initiate disciplinary proceedings, possibly
for ‘neglect of duty’, against two senior officers it does appear anomalous that there
was no criminal prosecution of equivalence. Clearly, the evidence of the video
technician, Roger Houldsworth, is important regarding potential prosecution. A
further issue of significance is that he was listed to give evidence at the generic
inquests yet subsequently appears to have been dropped. Who took this decision and
on what basis?

An issue raised on more than one occasion during the Scrutiny has been whether, after
almost 9 years, an inquiry should be initiated which would expect that witnesses
accurately recalled events and would face cross-examination on their statements. This
lapse of time, however, should not undermine or disqualify a full and thorough
hearing and cross-examination of relevant evidence. It is not unusual for criminal
cases to be heard long after an event (the current murder case regarding the body in
Coniston lake). The resumed Marchioness inquests, which resulted in unlawfully
killed verdicts, were held six years after the tragedy. In a matter of such seriousness
the passage of time should not hinder the best possible examination of the evidence.
Following written and oral submissions to the Scrutiny, the release of body files to
bereaved families and consideration of the material provided by a former South
Yorkshire officer, this final submission to the Scrutiny responds to Lord Justice Stuart
Smith’s question: “What sort of an inquiry do you suggest that I should recommend to
the Home Secretary?” (Scrutiny transcript, 24 October 1997 p33 lines 33/4).




                                           2
INQUIRY  INTO             THE       CIRCUMSTANCES              OF      DEATHS         AT
HILLSBOROUGH

As has been well established in the research literature, the inquest has become an
increasingly adversarial forum in processing deaths which occur in controversial and
contested circumstances. Invariably this problem is exacerbated when decisions are
taken not to prosecute because of insufficiency of evidence. Lawyers, coroners and
researchers have noted the institutionalised and procedural anomalies of conducting
an inquisitorial court which has a clear liability agenda. In such cases the inquest
bears the full adversarial weight. Inevitably, disputes centre on the construction and
meaning of ‘how’ (ie the precise circumstances) a person or persons died.

The decision by Dr Popper, the then South Yorkshire Coroner, to resume the inquests
with a jury and on a limited basis prior to a decision on prosecution by the Director of
Public Prosecutions was unusual, if not unprecedented. While accepting that the
Coroner’s Court is not a court of liability, in his own words, the decision restricted the
preliminary hearings to the ‘when’ and ‘where’ of the deaths, leaving the ‘how’ to the
generic hearing.

It appears that initially the Coroner was uncertain as to whether to hold the generic
hearing or the family hearings prior to the DPP’s decision. Correspondence with the
Solicitors’ Steering Group indicates that the decision to hold the family hearings as
the preliminaries was taken late. The conduct of these hearings remains a cause of
considerable concern. What did they establish? First, the existing medical evidence
relating to the pathological condition of each of the deceased together with
conclusions on the physiological cause of death. Second, as far as the West Midlands
Police investigation team could establish, the whereabouts of each person on the
terraces and subsequently. Third, a ‘story’ of each person’s movements on the day
from leaving home until the pronouncement of death, based on West Midlands
investigating officers’ summaries of the available witness statements.

The medical evidence, presented by pathologists in each case and largely uncontested
at the time, has since become an area of debate and dispute. Most of the pathologists
concluded that the deaths were caused by traumatic asphyxia. Initially this was
consistent with Mr Wardrope’s conclusions, as the senior accident and emergency
consultant at the Northern General Hospital. Many families were personally
reassured to hear that in the case of traumatic asphyxia, a condition consistent with a
sudden or violent pressure on the chest, unconsciousness occurred swiftly and death
followed within minutes. While this advice might have put minds at rest it was not
consistent with either the experiences of survivors who lost consciousness or with Mr
Wardrope’s eventual BMJ publication (Wardrope et al 1991). With colleagues, he
revised his opinion to that of crush asphyxia. While Professor Usher maintained that
traumatic and crush asphyxia “are synonymous” (undated, signed opinion) this is not
shared by other medical opinion. Further, the experiences of survivors suggest that
they struggled for breath for a considerable period of time as the compression on the
terraces waxed and waned. Unconsciousness was an eventual state on a gradually
developing continuum of discomfort. Crush asphyxia, a progressive compression,
would seem to offer a more accurate reflection of these circumstances. As Wardrope
et al (1991:1383) state: “The disaster at Hillsborough resulted in a gradual and
prolonged crush ... The patients presented with little evidence of the classic signs of


                                            3
traumatic asphyxia.” The authors conclude: “Although there were similarities to
traumatic asphyxia, the conditions differ in mechanism of injury, clinical findings,
main complications and outcome” (ibid: 1384).

Despite unconsciousness, a considerable number of people recovered, some having
been resuscitated by effective first aid and medical intervention. That they recovered,
some under their own steam and without resuscitation, is an indication that death was
not inevitable once unconsciousness had occurred. The case of Mr Eddie Spearritt is
particularly significant regarding the medical treatment administered following
evacuation of the pens. Both his son, Adam who died, and Mr Spearritt lost
consciousness around 2.55pm. Significantly Mr Spearritt’s last memory prior to
unconsciousness was imploring PC Illingworth, on duty at the perimeter gate of Pen
4, to open the gate and release fans from the pen. According to Mr Spearritt’s
evidence the police officer failed to respond, and he attempted to punch down the
perimeter fence with his bare hands. Mr Spearritt did not regain consciousness until
the following day. His hospital case notes, initially scribbled on an unheaded A4
sheet, Mr Wardrope’s records (published in Wardrope et al op cit) and a meeting held
between the Spearritts, their social worker and hospital staff at a later date, each
record Mr Spearritt’s admission to the Northern General at 5pm. It has remained
important to Mr Spearritt to try and establish his whereabouts throughout those two
hours. How was he evacuated? Where was he taken, the rear of Leppings Lane or the
gymnasium? The significance of Mr Spearritt’s case is not only that he lost
consciousness, was comatose for a lengthy period, yet survived. It also raises the
possibility that for a significant period he was assumed to be dead. Given that others
who survived were also placed with those assumed to be dead, Mr Spearritt’s case is a
further indication of the need to examine thoroughly the appropriateness and
adequacy of the emergency response and the failure to mobilise effective intervention
through the Major Incident Plan. Again, it raises the issue of duty of care.

There should be no question as to the significance of what happened to each person
who died between the point at which they lost consciousness and the point at which
they were pronounced dead. In each case this period constituted the precise
circumstances in which the person died. The appropriateness of the care provided, or
lack of care, has a direct bearing on each case. It raises the issues of duty of care,
adequacy of provision and the failure to activate the Major Incident Plan. It was the
Coroner’s interpretation of the medical evidence, together with the assumption that
those who died had received injuries prior to 3.06pm that were irrevocable and made
death an inevitable consequence, that led him to impose the 3.15pm cut-off in
evidence.     Consequently, many questions raised by families concerning the
circumstances of death could not be asked and remain unanswered.

The issue of unanswered questions relates also to the procedures adopted at the
preliminary hearings for presenting the evidence of witnesses. It is difficult to
conceptualise a process of presenting summarised evidence, using the words and
values of investigating officers and covering the movements of the deceased from
leaving home to their death, which could remain detached from the question of ‘how’
death occurred. In constructing the story, in selecting and prioritising the evidence to
which they had access, the West Midlands Police investigators placed a set of
seemingly reliable circumstances before the jury. Yet, because this was summarised




                                           4
evidence presented by a third party, thereby prohibiting the exploration questions of
‘how’, these constructed versions stood untested by cross-examination.

Wherever the responsibility lay, with the Coroner, with the Hillsborough Steering
Group of lawyers or both, the families were led to believe that their questions arising
from the summarised accounts would be aired at the resumed generic hearings. While
it appears that the Coroner provided no such guarantee, by implication the leaving of
the question of ‘how’ to the generic hearings was that unanswered questions would be
addressed. Indeed, this issue formed a considerable part of the families’ counsel’s
submission on Day One of the generic hearings (19 November 1990). On behalf of
43 families Mr King raised the issue of “a number of individual questions directed to
their own Inquest but also incorporating in their individual cases why they were
anxious to learn about what happened between the time there was a first sighting of
any loved one being brought off the terracing and the pronouncement of death” (p3
para E). The logic of Mr King’s submission was that if the Coroner was to pursue
with thoroughness “how” the deceased had come by their deaths (p54 para F), it was
imperative that questions concerning the specific circumstances of individual deaths
should be considered. The Coroner was not persuaded and a range of questions
significant to particular families were left unaddressed and the summarised evidence
in each case stood as the true yet untested account of the circumstances surrounding
each death.

Despite the time, effort and cost invested in these extraordinarily long inquests it is
disturbing that a combination of unusual procedure, summarised evidence and limited
scope (the 3.15pm cut-off) collectively worked against the interests of the bereaved,
denying them access to the specific circumstances of the deaths. This procedure also
denied access to the statements of the key witnesses. It has been only as a result of
the Scrutiny that much of this material has been recently disclosed.

As the body files have been released to families it has become increasingly apparent
that in some cases the West Midlands’ brief and highly selective summaries disguised
contradictions, uncertainties and ambiguities in the full statements. These problems
relate to timings, identification and witnesses’ involvement. While discrepancies are
to be expected, given the chaos and confusion of the rescue and evacuation of Pens 3
and 4, there are numerous examples which taken together raise serious doubts about
the reliability of summaries placed before the jury and offered to the bereaved as
factual and accurate accounts of the circumstances surrounding the deaths.

Further, the picture emerging from the recently released body files, and the still
limited disclosure of statements, is one of disorganisation and further chaos in the
gymnasium. In the initial important phases the procedures lacked co-ordination and
effective leadership. It is clear that no incident plan was operationalised and this led
to a reliance on ad hoc responses. Again, it is not difficult to visualise the problems
associated with managing such a desperate situation. That is why, however, major
incident plans are constructed and rehearsed. The lack of triage, the confusion of the
dead with the unconscious and the blocking of the concourse area outside the
gymnasium with vehicles, including a driverless ambulance, undoubtedly lost vital
time in identifying and transporting those who had lost consciousness.
Without effective organisation in the gymnasium and behind Leppings Lane as bodies
arrived it is possible that cursory examinations, whether by medical personnel or
others, generated an assumption of death. The preliminary hearing into the death of
Kevin Tyrrell heard from Dr Gumpert of the difficulty associated with establishing
life or death from a pulse in such circumstances. Yet there is now evidence indicating
that in certain cases death was pronounced following the briefest of examinations. It
remains a serious concern that only 14 of the 96 who died actually made it to hospital.
This places a responsibility on the investigation procedures to demonstrate that there
was no breach of any duty of care by those responsible for operationalising a major
incident plan and those authorities responsible for providing reasonable and adequate
medical services at a venue and occasion of such significance.

It was reasonable to foresee, especially following the 1985 Bradford stadium fire, an
incident at a packed stadium which might have resulted in multiple death and injury.
An interview with Alan Hopkins, the Deputy Chief Officer of SYMAS, confirmed
that such an incident had been discussed and prepared for within South Yorkshire
immediately after the Bradford disaster. Given the recent emergence, through
disclosed statements, of serious deficiencies in planning, preparedness and
appropriate responses, it is vital that the events on the pitch and in the gymnasium are
considered and examined as the circumstances in which many of the 96 died.


RECOMMENDATION

It is recommended that a further Home Office inquiry is held to establish the
specific circumstances in which people died as a result of the Hillsborough
disaster. The inquiry should focus on: the evacuation of pens 3 and 4; the
medical services available and the treatment provided on the pitch, behind the
Leppings Lane terrace and at the Hillsborough gymnasium; the operational
effectiveness, or otherwise, of the Major Incident Plan; the transportation of
priority cases to hospital; agencies’ ‘duty of care’; immediate aftermath (use of
gymnasium as a temporary mortuary; taking of blood alcohol levels; the process
of identification; the taking of statements).




                                           6
THE IRREGULAR PROCEDURES ADOPTED BY THE SOUTH
YORKSHIRE POLICE IN REVIEWING AND ALTERING ‘STATEM ENTS’
MADE BY OFFICERS INVOLVED AT HILLSBOROUGH

Sometime in early 1996 the Sefton family received police officers’ statements. These
statements had formed part of the summaries provided for the preliminary hearing
into Andrew Sefton’s death. Two of the statements were made by PC Ian Shipley.
The first is unusual as it was written as a personal account of ‘Duties for Saturday 15th
April 1989’. It is in PC Shipley’s own handwriting, is three A4 sides long and is
signed at the close of the final paragraph. It appears to be unwitnessed, has no
counter-signature and is undated. It provides a commentary mainly on potential
hostilities between fans, noting PC Shipley’s attempts to ‘calm’ “several groups of
angry males” and mentioning his participation in forming a police cordon across the
pitch. He also states: “At some stage I assisted in getting injured supporters onto
hoardings for transportation towards any available medical facilities.” Although
undated it is fair to assume that this account was written soon after the event.

The second statement is dated 13 September 1989. It was dictated onto West
Midlands Police CJ Act Statement paper and witnessed by PS J Killoch of the West
Midlands Police.      The opening comment is “Further to previous statement
(recollections) undated.” PC Shipley, prompted by photographs which placed him
close to groups of supporters carrying hoardings as makeshift stretchers, went on to
elaborate a more active part in the removal of bodies and to make a positive
identification of Colin Andrew Sefton. Whatever the reliability of these two
statements and the actual sequence of events surrounding PC Shipley’s actions, the
submission of his ‘recollections’, given the form in which they were presented, as a
formal statement was a departure from usual professional practice.

It has since transpired that police officers were instructed by senior officers to write
up personal accounts, or recollections, during the days that followed the disaster.
These often emotional and graphic recollections were collected by senior officers and
scrutinised. The eventual justification for this departure from normal practice has
been that the submission of recollections was simply a procedure to “make sure that
the statement was in proper form ... that anything which was not admissible as
evidence could be cut out of it and things of that sort” (Lord Justice Stuart Smith,
transcript of meeting with Sefton family 8 October 1997 pl8 lines 23-26). Lord
Justice Stuart Smith commented that after his initial examination of some of the
changes what had been removed were “observations of comment or opinion, which it
may have been perfectly proper to have been cut out” (ibid pl9 lines 4-6). He went
on to acknowledge this adopted procedure as forming “an important aspect of my
Scrutiny”.

There are several distinct but related causes for concern: why recollections were
requested rather than proceeding with the statutory process of statement-taking; the
pressure exerted on officers to make significant alterations or to make different
statements to those contained in their recollections; the relative status afforded to the
recollections and further or alternative statements; the fate of those recollections
where alterations had been requested or suggested but the officer refused to comply;
whether officers would have written such personal, emotional and subjective accounts
for submission had they realised that they were to be used as the basis for objective


                                           7
statements to be put to Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry, the West Midlands Police
Inquiry and the Inquests.

The experiences of PC ‘A ’ provide confirmation of the seriousness of the
irregularities inherent in the procedures adopted by South Yorkshire Police in the
processing of evidence submitted by its officers. As requested by senior officers, he
wrote a personal account which included his emotional reaction to trying to save life
on the Leppings Lane terrace. He considered the request for recollections to be
unusual but at no point thought that their submission would form the basis of a
statement to any investigation. His hand-written submission was returned to him in
typed or word-processed form. While all that he had written was contained in the
printed script it was severely edited. Words, in some cases whole sentences, had a
line drawn through them with other words added in handwriting. In all, of 156
sentences 81 had been altered and of these 56 had been removed altogether.

Attached to PC ‘A” s returned ‘statement’ was the front page of a letter from
Hammond Suddards, the South Yorkshire Police solicitors. It was dated 15 May 1989
and headed Hillsborough. As the letter was incomplete there was no signature. The
reference, however, was PCM/PAB. PCM would appear to be Peter C Metcalf, listed
as one of Hammond Suddards’ partners. It appears that the letter was faxed to D
Denton Esq, of South Yorkshire Police Management Services. A further reference
indicated that this was a fourth fax. This one page commented on three officers’
‘statements’: PS ‘B ’; PC ‘C ’; PC ‘A’. They were part of Serial No 21- and were given
the reference ‘9 ’ suggesting that 8 serials were dealt with in previous
communications.

The opening sentences read: “We have the following further comments on statements
requested by the West Midlands Inquiry. As before, the mention of a name without
comment means that the statement has been read and that we have no suggestions for
review or alteration.” What this establishes is that South Yorkshire Police
Management Services and their solicitors set up a procedure for ‘reviewing’ and
‘altering’ officers’ recollections which transformed personal recollections into formal
statements then put before the West Midlands Police investigation. Of fundamental
concern here, however, is the use of the terms ‘review’ and ‘alteration’. ‘Review’
suggests a range of possibilities and could be interpreted as no more than an exchange
of general advice. ‘Alteration’ is less ambiguous. When attached to a document
which contained so many specific changes it transmitted a directive and instructive
tone. In fact it was ‘suggested’ to Mr Denton that PC ‘A” s “personal and graphic
account” was “not necessarily suitable in its present form for submission as a factual
statement to the West Midlands inquiry”. PS ‘B ” s ‘statement’, in contrast, was
considered “Good ... but he may wish to reconsider some of the comments on pages
3/4, as to his views prior to realising the seriousness of the situation.”

In a matter of such controversy, where police actions on the day were under
considerable scrutiny and where criminal prosecution was a possibility, it was vital
that the statement-taking procedure was beyond reproach. Effectively, senior officers
of the South Yorkshire Police in consultation with the Force solicitors took part in a
process of review and alteration of officers’ submissions thus developing statements
from recollections. When Lord Justice Stuart Smith repeatedly asked PC ‘A’ which
of the deleted words or sentences he would have left in, the former officer replied that


                                           8
        t

*   *




        he would not have written such a text in the first place had he realised the intention to
        adopt it as the basis of a formal statement. Further, it is clear that the police were
        afforded an opportunity to resubmit their reviewed or altered statements in accordance
        with instructions, while other witnesses were given no such opportunity. This
        suggests that a privileged status was afforded to police witnesses.

        The procedures adopted by the South Yorkshire Police in this matter were, at best,
        irregular. It is not known what happened to the recollections of police officers who
        refused to alter their statements. For those statements which went to the West
        Midlands Police, to the Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner but were altered versions of
        officers’ recollections there is an important issue to be resolved. Presumably these
        statements were submitted, purporting to be a full account of each officer’s testimony.
        Yet, in some cases, they were versions of that testimony influenced by a review and
        alterations procedure involving senior officers. This raises the question of whether
        the adopted procedures amounted to tampering with evidence and a potential breach
        of the Force disciplinary code, the criminal code or both.

        RECOMMENDATION

        It is recommended that a thorough investigation is undertaken into the
        procedures adopted by the South Yorkshire Police for the taking o f statements
        from their officers in the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster.         This
        investigation should be conducted by another Force and should consider whether
        the adopted procedures breached either criminal or Force disciplinary codes.




                                                   9
