                         M     A B IF       INTERNATIONAL
         #                 (R.J. Halsey and M. Stewart)
    A*
                 P.O.Box 306            Cambridge            CB38TX

                                 Telephone: 0954 82371




r                                       i

THE F-RIME MINISTER                                      17th April 1989
Rt HON MRS M THATCHER. M.P.
10 DOWNING STREET                                   ft
LONDON W.l.
L                                       J



    j FOOTBALL. STADIUM SAFETY


As a small electronics company based in Cambridge, we-? have ted two years
negotiations with the d.t.i„ asking for permission to have a         radio
frequency especially allocated for football events.

The operating basis of this request has many applications primarily aimed
at entertainment for the spectators and safety.   The entire "Match" would
be broadcasted to a very local area in and around the stadium only, and
received by a supporters radio carried on the person built into their hat,
scarf, watch or any other miniature electronic enclosure, and Listened to
through an individual earpiece.

We have repeatedly requested this for many reasons :

Foremost the safety aspect,, ifsupporters were to have a radio which was
capable of receiving all the local information relevant tea that particular
football match it would take a   lot of the pressures off the Police because
they could have a. direct, link   to the central control to advise fans of
blocked roads, restricted parking, congestion at turnstiles arid any
relevant information that the authorities may consider to be of any
importance to safety.

Implementation of such equipment will give a new entertainment aspect to
football and encourage a much wanted family audience.

Match day commentaries would be run by professional commentators and could
carry pre-match interviews with players,, coaches, managers -and of course
updated information from the authorities, as well as advertising from the
sponsors

The cost of these purpose designed miniature radios would be paid for by
the sponsors possibly badqed to carry their own advertising logos. On the
outside a small cost would happily be? b o m by the fans.
The broadcasting equipment we have developed would be provided to all the
clubs in England., Scotland and Wales entirely Free Of Charge.

As an English! Football supporter myself I would personally welcome any new
innovation to show the rest of the world that we are doing something
positive about, the image of 'hooligans and thugs' that the English football
supporter has unfortunately earned. This image being c:r-eat.«?d by a minority
of hooligans and thugs.

Mrs Thatcher now is the time to show the world that not only do we
acknowledge that we have? a problem but we? are doing something about it.
LETS SHOW THE WORLD THAT WE ARE THE FIRST TO DO SOvETHIM3 FOR THE REST OF
THE WORLD TO FOLLOW.

We have carried out an extensive survey asking supporters if they would
■lake to receive match day coimKa-itari.es and the typical comments are
®fcpderful idea", "We would love it",, I real ly miss the commentary that you
cjH: on the television" etc., etc.

I will forward for your perusal photocopies of tine correspondence to date
with the d.t.i. showing the red tape I have encountered and include
confirmed orders from Football Clubs.

To date I have approval from every football club I have spoken to,,

All I ask for is one universal frequency that may be used by all football
grounds.


Yours sincere1y




Mr M Stewart
Director
