,M s   {ZJLK R             mr Vato,                  far C s b e r n e & % ' V , M r £©ck fa - r d f t S 4 -0 , M r ^ h su tity ^ 2 .
M r    SrvufrRS?*,           f f f r tc v iU                          Jo^c     £ 5 ^ 6 ,      Mr    H a l e £ 14-   1


                 No. 146                                                                                                1981
                                                                                                >NOV isgg -joasvf
                                           HOUSE OF LORDS
                                      MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS

                                           Die Mortis 31° Octobris 1989
                                                 The House met at half-past two o’clock.

                      PRAYERS were read by the Lord Bishop of Liverpool.
                 1. Command Papers—The following papers were pr ssented to the House by command of Her
                       Majesty and ordered to lie on the Table:
                        1. Works of Art—Report of the Reviewing dommittee on the Export of Works of Art for
                           1988-89;                                                                  (834)
                        2. Broadcasting—Report of the Broadcasting Standards Council for 1988-89.     (—)
                 2. Negative Instruments—The following negative in truments were laid before the House and
                       ordered to lie on the Table:
                         1. Plant Health (Forestry) (Great Britain) (Amendment) Order 1989, laid under the Plant
                            Health Act 1967;                                                                   (1951)
                                                            ries
                         2. Social Security (Industrial Injuries and Dise ases)
                                                                     Disdases)  Miscellaneous Provisions
                                                                                              Pro        (Amendme*rt|
                            (No. 2) Regulations 1989, laid under the S >cial Security Act 1986.
                 3.   Papers not subject to Parliamentary proceedings—H e fo llo w in g p a p e rs were laid before the House
                          and ordered to lie on the Table:
                           1. Statement of salary of a new member of the Scottish Tourist Board, laid under the
                               Development of Tourism Act 1969;
                           2. Report of the Scottish Hospital Trust for 1^88-89, laid under the National Health Service
                               (Scotland) Act 1978;
                           3. Report and Accounts of the Historic Buildi lgs and Monuments Commission for England
                               for 1988-89, laid under the National Herit; ige Act 1983;
                           4. (i) Report and Accounts for 1988-89 of th ; following Residuary Bodies:
                                         (a) Merseyside—
                                         (b) London—
                                         (c) West Yorkshire—
                                         (d) Greater Manchester—
                                         (e) South Yorkshire—
                                          (f) West Midlands—
                              (ii) Re]  art  of the Greater Manchester R< siduary Body for 1st April to 31st October

                                          laid under the Local Govemmen Act 1985.
                 4. Greater Manchester (Light Rapid Transit System) ] till [h .l.]—The petitions against the billfrom
                        Trafford Park Estates pic and the Trafford Pa rk Company; and Stockport Petrol & Diesel
                        Engineering Company Limited and Stockport I iesel limited were withdrawn; the order made
                        on 17th May last was discharged and the bill wai committed to an Unopposed Bill Committee.
                 5. Great Yarmouth Port Authority Bill tax.] formerly 3reat Yarmouth Port and Haven Bill [h .lJ—
                        The Queen’s Consent was signified and the >ill was reported from the Unopposed Bui
                        Committee with amendments.
                 6. Brunei (Appeals) BUI [h .l .]—The bill was returned: rom the Commons agreed to.
                 7.    Football Spectators Bill [h .l.]—The bill was returned from the Commons with amendments and              Cc
                         with a privilege amendment; it was ordered that the amendments be printed. [H.L. Bui 98]
                 8. Science and Technology—The Report of the Selei t Committee on the Greenhouse Effect was
                        made, and ordered to be printed [6th Report, I [L Paper 88]
                                       H.L. 31° Octobris                                        1983


           N O T I C E S A N D O R D E R S OF T HE D A Y
                         Notices marked t are new or have been altered.
                    Bilk marked § have been set down before the expiry of the
                         recommended minimum interval between stages.

                       WEDNESDAY THE 1s t DF NOVEMBER
                                At half-past two o’clock.
*The Lord Hatch of Lusby—To ask Her Majesty’s Government what is their policy towards the
     building of new nuclear power stations and Jvhether it will be influencea by the reports of
     public enquiries.
*The Lord Swansea—To ask Her Majesty’s Govern nent whether their attention has been drawn to
     the article “Pigs in the Machine” in the coloar supplement of “The Correspondent” of 1st
     October, and other similar articles, and whether they are satisfied that the present system for
     inspection of “factory farms” is adequate.
*The Baroness Gardner of Parkes—To ask Her Me jesty’s Government what provision is made in
      the proposed new NHS contract for general <lental practitioners to ensure that NHS dental
      treatment will continue to be available to pati ;nts in high-cost areas such as die major cities.
T h e Baroness Strange—To ask Her Majesty’s Gov smment when they will consider a moratorium
      on the fishing of sand eels.
 Local Government and Housing Bill—Third Reading
      [THE LORD HESKETH]                            ^

                          THURSDAY THE 2n d OF NOVEMBER
*The Viscount Hanworth—To ask Her Majesty’s Government whether the relative allocations by
     the Independent Broadcasting Authority of br >adcasting time to Greek and Turkish language
     programmes are in accordance with the respoi sibilities of the Authority, especially in view of
     the current political situation in Cyprus.
*The Lord Jenkins of Putney—To ask Her Majestj’s Government whether they have yet decided
     whether it is in the public interest that the Wa jes Councils be retained.
*The Lord Orr-Ewing—To ask Her Majesty’s Government what are the current regulations
     concerning the release of information about p ist Cabinet proceedings.
*The Lord McCarthy—To ask Her Majesty’s Gove mment when they intend to publish the article
     containing the full analysis of the National Opi aion Poll survey summarised in paragraph 2.22
     of the Green Paper Removing Barriers to Emp oyment.
 Opticians Bill Fh l .]—Third Reading.
     [The Lora Chancellor] (Consolidation).
Employment Bill—Third Reading.
    [The Lord Strathclyde]
tFootball Spectators Bill [h .l   .]— Consideration   of Commons Amendments.               cc
     [The Lord Hesketh]

                            MONDAY THE 6t h OF NOVEMBER
*The Lord Molloy—To ask Her Majesty’s Govempiiient whether they will now bring the law of
     England ana Wales regarding confessions ini o line with Scottish Law, in the light of the
     miscarrage of justice concerning the “Guildfoi d Four”.
*The Viscount Brentford—To ask Her Majesty’s Gc vemment whether they will set up one central
     register for all missing young people througho it the country.
*The Lord Dean of Beswick—To ask Her Majesty s Government what sums have been allowed
     under the Global Housing Investment Prograriiiime in each year since 1979.
*The Lord Tordoff—To ask Her Majesty’s Gov©r iment how many escalators on the London
     Underground have been out of service during the most recent period for which a figure is
     available, and what was the average length of i i:ime spent out of service.
 Self-Governing Schools etc. (Scotland) Bill—Third (Reading.
      [The Lora Sanderson of Bowden]
                                                                       i'1 NOV      iS39

75-10.JS


From:         J L Goddard                                      cc    Mr   Osborne
              F8 Division                                            Mr   Mould
              Ext 3314                                               Mr   F Smith
              31 October 1989                                        Mr   P Lee (DoE)




Ms Nicholson




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS             BILL:     LORDS   CONSIDERATION        OF     COMMONS
AMENDMENTS


I    attach    notes     on    Commons    amendments     for    Lord      Ferrers     in
preparation for Lords Consideration of Commons Amendments on
Thursday of this week (2 November).


2.      The amendments provisionally comprise four main groups:


        (i)   Clauses 2.5.9 and 10: emergencies.               These amendments
              are   in   relation to       Part   I    (the    national      football
              membership        scheme)    and    make    some      provision        for
              emergency admission of spectators without triggering
              the criminal offences in Part I.


      (ii)    Clauses 12,13 and 14: enforcing authority.                  This group
              deletes         all   reference     to     'designated        reporting
              agencies' and inserts reference to a central 'enforcing
              authority' for the purpose of Part II and restriction
              orders.         The reporting point        for offenders becomes
              explicitly stated as a police station.                   Lord Ferrers
              wrote to Lords Graham, Harris, Knights and Bethell on
              15 September to explain this and the next group - a
              copy is attached.
     (iii)   Clauses 16.17 and 18: supervision of reporting.            This
             group of amendments allocates responsibility for the
             supervision of reporting between local police stations
             and the enforcing authority created by the previous
             group.


      (iv)   Clause 20: corresponding      offences This group relates
             to the provision to make a restriction order in England
             and Wales following conviction elsewhere for an offence
             corresponding    to   a   football   related    offence.     In
             particular     the    two   amendments     provide     for    a
             'certificate' reporting such a conviction to be assumed
             to be valid proof unless the contrary is proved.


3.    Some amendments we would otherwise expect Lord Ferrers to
take are, it appears, being accepted by Lord Hesketh because they
can most conveniently be grouped with DoE             amendments.       This
includes extending the definition of football related offences
in the Schedule to include being drunk in a public place or
driving while unfit through drink or drugs; and a procedure for
waiving the requirement for giving notice that a declaration of
relevance may be imposed.


4.     Final confirmation of handling arrangements must await the
print of Commons amendments for Lords consideration.              This has
not yet reached us.       Similarly, we will then correct the line and
clause references on the attached notes which have been rather
rapidly prepared after Report and Third Reading last night.


5.     Officials are available for a briefing meeting tomorrow if
Lord Ferrers requires.



                                             J. L. GODDARD


                                                  J L GODDARD
