  IMMJIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                    *n»eRt Hon Lord Justice Ikylor
  s H d iu m DISASTER
                                                   50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                   London SW1H9AT
                                                   01-273 2577/3602/2370

NOT FOR PUSUCATiOli BROADCAST, OR USE ON
OLUB TAPES BEF0 n EJ .   .-.3 0 . . . .   .9 .0
THIS DOCUMENT 13 ISSUED IN ADVANCE ON THE
STRICT UNDERSTANDING THAT NO APPROACH BE
MADE TO ANY ORGANISATION OR PERSON ABOUT           Date 29 January 1990
ITS CONTENTS BEFORE THE TIME OF PUBLICATION




     HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY:       FINAL REPORT PUBLISHED

     The Final Report of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
     under Lord Justice Taylor     is published today. In Part V the
     Judge makes 76 Recommendations which he hopes will be
     "instrumental in promoting better and safer conditions at
     sports grounds in the future." (43 of the Recommendations are
     repeated from the Interim Report and there are 33 new ones).

     Football?     Present and Future
      Lord Justice Taylor paints a bleak picture of the current
      state of football under the heading "Three Sombre Lessons
      After Hillsborough". He notes how previous reports on crowd
      safety have been unheeded, that complacency isstill to   be
      found at many grounds even after Hillsborough,  and that
      footbali is suffering blight because of old grounds, poor
      facilities, hooliganism, segregation, alcohol and poor
      leadership. He sets out ways in which he thinks all those in
      the game could set a better example, especially to younger
      fans, and embark on the task of creating a better atmosphere
     .at football grounds and upgrading stadia so as to provide fans
     ’with modern facilities. He points out the many sources of
      revenue available to the football clubs to enable them to
      finance the improvements he is proposing. In the course of
      his Inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor visited modern stadia in
      Scotland, Holland, France and Italy as well as grounds in
      England and Wales.
      All-Seated Accommodation
      Lord Justice Taylor recommends that sports grounds designated
      under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 should become all-
      seater under a phased programme. For the English first and
      second divisions, the Scottish Premier League and national
      stadia he recommends a reduction of 20% in present standing
      capacity over each of the next five years, so as to eliminate
      standing by August 1994. For all other designated grounds, he
      recommends an annual reduction of 10%, so as to eliminate
standing by August 1994. For all other designated grounds, he
recommends an annual reduction of 10%, so as to eliminate
standing by August 1999. The first reductions should be made
at the start of the next football season in August. Until
then, Lord Justice Taylor recommends a slight relaxation in
the cut in capacity which he proposed in his Interim Report
(13% instead of the 15% he recommended then). The effect of
these recommendations is shown in the example below:-

    First Division Club
     Standing Capacity before Hillsborough:   25,000
     (calculated according to Green Guide)
     15% cut after Interim Report             21,250
     13% cut after Final Report               21,750
     First 20% reduction (August 1990)        17,400
     Second 20% reduction (August 1991)       13,050
     Third 20% reduction (August 1992)         8,700
     Fourth 20% reduction (August 1993)        4,350
     Fifth 20% reduction (August 1994)             0
Lord Justice Taylor also recommends that the FIFA ruling that
there should be no standing from 1993 onwards at high risk
matches (as defined in UEFA Regulations) should apply here.

Advisory Design Council and National Review Body
To help clubs plan and build the necessary changes at their
grounds, .'Lord Justice Taylor proposes that the FA and the FL
should set up an Advisory Design Council to conduct and
marshal research and disseminate information and expertise
regularly to League clubs. Lord Justice Taylor sees a need
for a National Inspectorate and Review Body to review the way
local authorities carry out their functions of certifying
sports grounds. Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act
gives these powers in relation to football grounds.

Fences and Gates and Pitch Invasions
Lord Justice Taylor recommends that "prison-type fences" be
removed. He says that high, spiked fences are intimidating,
ugly and demoralising. He would like to see all perimeter
fencing removed in time but believes that would be premature
at this stage. He therefore recommends that no fences should
be higher than 2.2m and that they should have sufficient gates
on to the pitch to permit immediate evacuation in any
emergency. Gates should be painted and kept unlocked during
the match. He sees merit in safety corridors (such as those
at Anfield, Goodison Park and White Hart Lane), and balances
his views on lowering fences with a recommendation that it
should be an offence to go on the pitch without reasonable
excuse.
Clubs and Police
Lord Justice Taylor recommends that clubs and police should
agree written "statements of intent" setting out their
respective responsibilites. Clubs should check turnstiles,
signs and tickets and recruit adequate stewards. They should
provide the police with proper control rooms. The police are
urged to review their operational orders for police matches,
their training for senior officers in charge of matches, and
their arrest procedures at grounds. Their planning should
provide that ticketless fauns should not be allowed to enter a
ground except in an emergency. They should consider options
such as postponing kick-off, early kick-offs or Sunday
fixtures. Police authorities should review the charges they
stake for the costs of policing inside grounds.

Other Recommendations
                                       » .   •*


There are detailed recommendations about communications,
Safety Certificates, the role of the local authorities, co­
ordination of emergency services, first aid, medical facilites
and ambulances. Lord Justice Taylor does not think that the
current rules governing the sale of alcohol in grounds should
be changed.
Offences and Penalties
Lord Justice Taylor considers the problems raised by ticket
touts and suggests making it an offence to sell tickets on the
day of the match without the club's authority. He also
proposes that it should be an offence to throw a missile or to
chant obscene or racialist abuse. He suggests extending the
powers of the courts to make attendance centre orders and to
use "tagging" to keep convicted hooligans away from football
grounds during matches.
National Membership Scheme
Lord Justice Taylor considers in detail the Management
Consultants' Invitation to Tender (ITT) and Statement of
Requirements (SOR) for the national membership scheme. This
follows undertakings by Ministers last summer that Parliament
would have an opportunity to consider any comments he might
make on it.
He says (paragraph 424) that he has grave doubts about the
feasibility of the scheme and serious misgivings about its
likely impact on safety. He also has grave doubts about the
chances of its achieving its purpose and is very anxious about
its potential impact on police commitments and control of
spectators. For these reasons, Lord Justice Taylor says he
cannot support the implementation of Part I of the Act.

He draws attention to the progress being made through the use
of CCTV in detection and in the collection of evidence, and
the better use of intelligence with the setting up of the
National Football Intelligence Unit. "Put together with
progress towards all-seating, improved accommodation, better
facilities, improved arrangements for crowd control and better
training of police and stewards to achieve it, I believe these
measures would give the best chance of eliminating or
minimising football hooliganism."
i
t




    NOTE TO EDITORS

    Following the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April,
    when 95 people were killed, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed
    by the Home Secretary
         *'To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
         football ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
         recommendations about the needs of qrowd control and
         safety at sports events."
    Lord Justice Taylor was assisted by two Assessors: Mr. Brian
    Johnson CBE, QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor
    Leonard Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at
    the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. The Secretary of the
    Inquiry was Mr Robert Whalley from the Home Office.
    The Inquiry heard oral evidence in Sheffield Town Hall in May
    and June. Lord Justice Taylor produced his Interim Report on
    1 August. He completed his Final Report on 18 January.
