                                 cc


                                       u^cuJI;
                                      Ha


                                        WvxaL               >
                                                                     H   ome    O   ffice
                                                                    Q U E E N ANNE'S GATE
                                                                    L O N D O N SWIH 9AT


                                            ^        voccAucK      M
                                                      }>           (U
 Councillor D M Ablett                          (U              Au u
 Chairman to the West
  Midlands Police Authority                                             (U
 Council House                                                           (VA
 Dudley                                                                                     /
 DY1 1HF
                                                                          (VU           /v
                                                                               16 June 1989




 Thank you for your letter of 7 June about the cost of th«
         m   n,aby the West Midlands police into the Hillsborouah
 Stadium Tragedy which we discussed at our meeting on 25 May.

 thatPras1 Tte«^hr? P°sition of y°ur Police authority and I reaffirm
 that, as I said at our recent meeting, we fully accerjt that- -t-vio
 authority.     police investigation should not fall to your police


ofa\so u t r e r ^
                     «£?.                                                  ^        °i ^ r 0


                                   ^^Y^r^au^oi^i^^about^^e^issues
wnich you raised at your meeting with me.         I enclose for vmtr
whict^deals ^ i t t S L s ^ i s t u e ^ ^       ” °“ t l8tt8r t0 Mr


yiSB^rWsjiriS
Chief T°rkShire oorreotly discussed his proposed^gSSst^itt HK
S n I t V l^ V s e s s 0L n t0.nStabUlary Wh° WhCl1" « n t o 2 - “ « » " S i S


|£l»sri:H“iS"C«£-“sSV;?SLi-
                                                                 o " hApril\k6 , J S s

S'iES                       the ^                          ^ fthceon§ ^ eco°„fstI2S
    f®ci®ioTn tG^plac® the results of the investigation at the
      « of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry does not change the fact
that a substantial part of it deals with matters which are
concern of the South Yorkshire police.      Clearly, there is an
ouestions wh hinvestigation which has been directed towards
questions which are the concern principally of the enquiry   This
is one of the matters which I intend to disculs with south
Yorkshire in my forthcoming meeting with them about Ihe costs?

£ha?n ?
      t?fe?inani
             P d ya
                  °dlS +-
                        atn «ie1ty-
                  additional         l°U h!Ve
                                  costs  will been
                                               not ^iven
                                                    fall the
                                                         to assurance
                                                             the West
          an<?   <=an assure you that I am as anxious as you“ o
resolve the issue of costs.         I hope that we can do this when I
meet members of South Yorkshire Police Authority on 20 June.

has^taken^place. Y°U agai" 88 S°°n *S Possible after that nesting


                                   iBu   m




                                                  r'
                                             FERRERS
Councillor D M Ablett
Chairman to the West
 Midlands Police Authority
Council House
Dudley
DY1 1HF

                                                     16 June 1989




Thank you for your letter of 7 June about the cost of the
investigation by the West Midlands police into the Hillsborough
Stadium Tragedy which we discussed at our meeting on 25 May.
I appreciate the position of your police authority and I reaffirm
that, as I said at our recent meeting, we fully accept that the
costs of the police investigation should not fall to your police
authority.
I also explained that we shall shortly be meeting representatives
of_ South Yorkshire Police Authority, at the request of whose
Chief Constable the investigation was instigated, in order to
discuss how the costs should be met.
As you know, Mr Addison has been in correspondence with Mr
Barnfield, the solicitor to your authority, about the issues
which you raised at your meeting with me.  I enclose for your
information a copy of his most recent letter to Mr Barnfield,
which deals with those issues.
You raised the question of how the investigation was established
and whether it was being conducted for the South Yorkshire Police
or the Home Office. It was on the initiative, and at the request
of, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire that West Midlands was
invited to undertake the investigation.    The Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire correctly discussed his proposed request with HM
Chief Inspector of Constabulary who wholly endorsed the Chief
Constable's assessment.
In view of the other preoccupation of the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire, Her Majesty's Chief Inspector undertook to
approach the Chief Constable of West Midlands to ascertain
whether he would be prepared to undertake the task.           The
statement, which was issued by South Yorkshire on April 16, makes
it clear that the invitation to the Chief Constable of West
Midlands to undertake the inquiry came from the Chief Constable
of South Yorkshire
The decision to place the results of the investigation at the
service of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry does not change the fact
that a substantial part of it deals with matters which are the
concern of the South Yorkshire police.      Clearly, there is an
element of the investigation which has been directed towards
questions which are the concern principally of the enquiry. This
is one of the matters which I intend to discuss with South
Yorkshire in my forthcoming meeting with them about the costs.
I can understand your anxiety. You have been given the assurance
that the final additional costs will not fall to the West
Midlands, and I can assure you that I am as anxious as you to
resolve the issue of costs.    I hope that we can do this when I
meet members of South Yorkshire Police Authority on 20 June.
I will write to you again as soon as possible after that meeting
has taken place.




                                       FERRERS
                                                            “V i
From: Ms P Ransford                          cc   Mr Storr
      FI Division                                 Mr Yates
      Extn 3241                                   HMCIC
      16 June 1989                                Mr Chilcot
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                                  Mr Malone-Lee
                                                  Mr Addison
                                                  Mr Nagler
                                                  Mr Sandiford
                                                  Mr Whalley
                                                  Mr Archer
                                                  Mr Durbin
Miss Nicholson

HILLSBOROUGH POLICE INVESTIGATION COSTS

Lord Ferrers asked for an expansion of the draft reply to
Councillor Ablett of West Midlands Police Authority (provided
with Mr Addison's note of 13 June to Ms Adams) to cover the
points which West Midlands raised about how the investigation
came to be set up.
2.   I attach an amended draft reply. This is based on the
account given by Sir Richard Barratt in his note of 12 June (copy
attached). I have kept the account deliberately brief in the
letter as it could otherwise give rise to argument from West
Midlands, whose Chief Constable seems to have built up a
different interpretation of events.
3.   I have also not been specific about the offer we propose to
make South Yorkshire since we have not yet received the Chief
Secretary's view on the special payment and also not yet
disclosed anything to South Yorkshire. I have however indicated
that the point that some of the costs may arise directly from
the Taylor enquiry itself is well taken.
4.   No one has attempted to precisely apportion the different
aspects of the police investigation. I doubt whether West
Midlands could do this in terms of police man hours, even if they
tried. But it is reasonable to suppose that an investigation by
350 officers would not have been required to look into the
factual questions about safety of sports grounds on which Lord
Justice Taylor asked for police advice. The interviewing of
witnesses could be serving a number of purposes: the
investigation into policing, the Taylor enquiry, preparation for
coroners' inquests and dealing with any eventual claims for
compensation or complaints against the police; apart from Taylor,
these are matters for the South Yorkshire Police.
5.   The share of costs which the special payment plus normal
police grant would cover - about 75% if costs reach £4 million as
predicted - should therefore provide more than adequate cover for
the aspects which pertain to the Taylor enquiry.
6.   The draft reply promises West Midlands a further letter
after the meeting with South Yorkshire.




                                         P^Xr Q-ex*'1 ] a ^ I
                                        P RANSFORD
                                                                        FILE NUMBER

DRAFT LETTER


ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE

    TO                                         ENCLOSURES                    COPIES TO BE SENT TO
     Councillor D M Ablett
     Chairman to the West
      Midlands Police Authoz ity
     Council House
     Dudley
     DY1 1HF                                                                                                         •




£        (FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                                         (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY)

                         LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE B Y ........................................................
                                                                                    (NAME OF SIGNATORY)

                            Thank you for your letter of 7 June about the cost of the
                            investigation by the West Midlands police into the
                            Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy which we discussed at our
                            meeting on 25 May.

                           I fully appreciate the position of your police authority
                           and can reaffirm that, as I said at our recent meeting,
                           we fully accept that the costs of the police
                           investigation should not fall to your police authority.
                           I also explained that we shall shortly be meeting
                           representatives of South Yorkshire Police Authority, at
                           the request of whose Chief Constable the investigation
                           was instigated, in order to discuss how the costs should
                           be met.

                           As you know, Mr Addison has been in correspondence with
                           Mr Barnfield, the solicitor to your authority, about the
                           issues which you raised at your meeting with me. I




         H.O. EST. 112
in                                                                                                       35688 9.85 XNW
enclose for your information a copy of his most recent
letter to Mr Barnfield, which deals with those issues.

I promised at the meeting to come back to you on the
points you raised about how the investigation was
established and whether it was being conducted for the
South Yorkshire Police or the Home Office. The Chief
Inspector of Constabulary has confirmed that, in
approaching Mr Dear about the police investigation, he
was acting on behalf of Mr Wright, the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire. It was from Mr Wright that the
initiative for an independent outside investigation
initially came.

The decision to place the results of the investigation
also at the service of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry
does not change the fact that a substantial part of it
deals with matters which are the concern of the South
Yorkshire police. I appreciate that there is an element
of the investigation which has been directed towards
questions which are the concern of the enquiry. This is
an aspect which I shall have very much in mind in my
forthcoming discussion with South Yorkshire about the
costs.

I am very anxious to resolve the costs issue and hope
that we can do so when I meet members of South Yorkshire
Police Authority on 20 June. I will write to you again
as soon as possible after that meeting has taken place.
