                                            West Midlands Police

                                                Witness Statement

                    (CJ Act 1967, s.9 MC Act 1980, s. 102, MC Rules 1981, r.70)


Statement of: Graham John McCOMBIE

Age if under 18: Over 18

Occupation: Detective Sergeant 8792


This statement (consisting o f “X page(s) each signed by me) is true to the best o f my knowledge and belief and I
make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it
anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.

Dated                               W W     •

Signature:




On the 2nd December 1997 I gave evidence to the 'Hillsborough Scrutiny" before Lord Justice

STUART-SMITH mainly concerning my dealings with Paul TAYLOR and Mr and Mrs HICKS.

Having read the transcript of my evidence I would like to add the following:

For 17 months I was resident in Sheffield completing follow-up enquiries on behalf of Lord

Justice TAYLOR and then the Coroner. I spoke to literally hundreds of people, all of whom had

a story to tell about Hillsborough. To this date I can still put names to body numbers. I can still

remember some experiences as if it were yesterday.

Without doubt I did speak to Paul TAYLOR, I remember him and I also remember Trevor and

Jenny HICKS being very upset by what he told them in his initial contact.

When I went to see Paul TAYLOR I was in possession of his original statement, his own

recollection and the questionnaire that was completed.

I would have gone through the contents of these chronologically to make sure that everything had

been recorded properly. I then would have asked him in detail about what he had said to Mrs



                                                       Signature Witnessed by:     ............................................
                                                 2

HICKS. I believe I would then obviously have asked the question "Why didn't you put this in

your original statement/recollection". I met several people at Hillsborough who wanted to tell

you what they wish they had done, rather than what they did do. Paul TAYLOR clearly retracted

what he had told Mrs HICKS as I have recorded it on the "Result of Action" which I completed

on 31 May 1989 and put back into the Incident Room. Even though he had nothing of evidential

value to add to his original statement, I still asked for the following to be done:

1.      Identify TAYLOR in the crowd.

2.      Assess his involvement.

3.      Can we establish any continuity re Victoria HICKS.

If on the 31 May 1989 Paul TAYLOR had stood by the story of what he had told Mrs HICKS I

would simply have recorded it in statement form and submitted it through the Incident Room.

I have reflected on the suggestion I used the term pequry in talking to Mr TAYLOR but I do not

believe I would have had cause to do so. It is quite common for Police Officers, when explaining

the caption at the start of a statement, to have to explain it to witnesses. The simple way is to use

the term peijury because everyone understands it. Mr TAYLOR may have had that explained

to him by the officers taking his written statement or in going through his own recollection and

statement again he may have asked me what it meant. I would have used the term in explanation

but I can see no reason why I would have initiated this.

Finally, can I emphasise that there was no reason to take a statement because it was clear to me

he retracted what he said. I would add that the written message I put back to the incident room

did include the key points Mr TAYLOR raised and retracted during my interview with him, eg:

"I got Victoria out of the pens, I was giving her the kiss of life and then a Policeman said 'leave

her alone, she's gone' without feeling her pulse" etc.

I therefore ensured that the facts were entered into the system for any later reference and if at the


Signature: . .                                  Signature Witnessed by:   ............................................
                                                 3

inquests a request had been made to find or clarify this, a normal search would have produced

the message and the link to the statements of Paul TAYLOR. Indeed the retrieval of the message

and actions for this scrutiny confirms this.




Signature:                                     Signature Witnessed by:
