From: Peter Edmundson                                        cc   Permanent Secretary
      Operational Policing                                        Mr Pugh
      Policy Unit                                                 Mr Butler
      Room 527, QAG                                               Mr Warner
      @ 273 2621                                                  Mr Owen

           6 February 1998


1.        Mr Michael

2.        Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - LETTER FROM LOUISE ELLMAN MP


Issue

The attached letter of 29 January from Louise Ellman MP, enclosing copies of the
letters to you from Colin Moneypenny of Liverpool City Council, and Trevor Hicks,
Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, both of which were sent in
November 1997.

Timing

2.    In view of the likelihood that the report will be published in the week
beginning 16 February, an early reply would be helpful.

Recommendation

3.       That you reply to Ms Ellman along the lines of the attached draft.

Consideration

4.      Both Mr Hicks and Mr Moneypenny expressed concern at alleged delays on
the part of South Yorkshire Police in releasing information, and requested that the
timetable of the scrutiny be extended. Ms Ellman now expresses her support for these
earlier representations. You (Home Secretary) replied to both Mr Hicks and Mr
Moneypenny on 4 December 1997 (copies attached).

5.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith indicated at the time that he had not experienced any
difficulty with access to the information held by South Yorkshire Police. The Judge
was at all times responsible for the conduct of the scrutiny, including the timetable. In
the event, he was unable to complete his report before the end of the year as he had
intended, due to the number of representations he received.




:odm a\m eridio\edrm #90184# 1
6.     Ms Ellman does not raise any additional issues to those raised by Mr Hicks
and Mr Moneypenny and it therefore seems appropriate to respond to her along the
same lines as your earlier replies to them.

Handling/presentation

7.        There are no additional handling considerations.




                                 PETER EDMUNDSON




:odm a\m eridio\edrm #90184# 1
DRAFT REPLY FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE


Louise Ellman MP
House of Commons
London
SW1A OAA



Thank you for your letter of 29 January enclosing copies of earlier letters to me from
Mr Colin Moneypenny of Liverpool City Council and Mr Trevor Hicks of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny into
the Hillsborough Disaster.


As you may be aware, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith submitted his report to me on
29 January and I am carefully considering it. I hope to publish the report shortly.


I requested the views of both Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire on the points raised in Mr Hicks’ letter. From what they have told
me, I am satisfied that all the material which should have been available for
examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the purposes of the scrutiny was
available to him, and that the scrutiny was able to investigate fully the issues raised by
the Family Support Group and others. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith assured me that he
was given full access to the material held by South Yorkshire Police, and that the
force had contributed fully throughout his scrutiny.


When I established the scrutiny and set its terms of reference, I was clear that the
scrutiny should be thorough and that it should be able to examine whatever matters
the judge considered relevant. I am satisfied that the families and the public can have
confidence in the report and in the integrity of the scrutiny process itself.




:odm a\m eridio\edrm #90184# 1
