                          QUESTION                 FOUR

Why didn't police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
terrace when eye witnesses, including football commentator John
Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?

No information was received from any source to the effect that there was
overcrowding or problems with density in the central pens 3 and 4.                Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield saw nothing untoward on the terraces to cause concern
and the problems with density were not immediately obvious to him. It would be fair to
say that the view from the elevated position of football commentator John Motson in
the South Stand compared to the lower more acutely angled view afforded to Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield in the Police Control Room gave the former a more
realistic concept of the situation, and the fact that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
attention was focused on the continuing build up outside the turnstiles in Leppings
Lane.


OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 42-52, Volume 2.

Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control
room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
view of them from an elevated position through their window. Although they had no
field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by then
working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly
excessive air traffic on channel 25, attempts could have been made to alert officers
on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding and report their observations.
In the event, pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place, fans
were showing and signalling distress. None of this was seen or recognised in the
control room.

245. The 20 officers detailed to the perimeter track were distributed round the pitch so
that some five officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no
reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The same applied to the
officers in the west stand. Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral briefings also
contained no mention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.

246. The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone "access
to the track from the terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive
medical attention)". At the end of the 1988 semi-final, there was a minor pitch
invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order
by being put into capital leters. The combination of no instructions as to overcrowding
and a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition of
crushing slow and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm went unheeded or certainly
unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule required
consent of a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

247. "Senior officer" meant an officer of Inspector rank or higher. The Inspector in
charge of the 20 officers on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed himself by the
players’ tunnel, the most central position for supervising his men. In evidence he said:

"I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the fans
were in danger. I'd then inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed
to the back of the stand."

That underlines the inhibition against opening perimeter gates. So did the evidence of
one Constable who said it had been so drummed into officers not to open the gates
that when he saw distress in pen 4, he "debated" with himself before opening the
gate, thinking: "If I'm wrong, I'm going to get a right bollocking for this". Naturally, one
would hope that common sense and humanity would make some officers cut through
the rules and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even
then not immediately. Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again
before they were finally opened and at first those seeking to climb out over the fence
were pushed bade. This reaction of the police did not go on for as long as some
witnesses believed.      They probably misinterpreted the hand movements from
Mr Greenwood and others aimed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the
pressure as attempts to stop those climbing out at the front.

249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the
problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to be lost.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 27

27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the
pre-match briefing of all officers on duty there should alert such officers to the
importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking
appropriate steps to remedy it.


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

204. It is convenient to mention a modification I think sensible regarding interim
recommendation 5. That provided:-

.. * 5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police
officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in
that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other
steward or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer
authorised under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the control room."

I repeat that recommendation (with a slight change of working to achieve clarity)
but qualify it to avoid absurdity when numbers are small. The recommendation
need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do
not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000,
whichever is the lower.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendations 11,12 and 16

11. There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the club and the
police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control and in
particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and the
monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding.
Any variation of the document in respect of an individual match should agreed in
writing in advance.

12.(a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other standing area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitoring
that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check
crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in
addition to any other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a
police officer who can authorise access through gates to the pitch under
Recommendation 20 below.

16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and
especially those with duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed
and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition of
signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include demonstrations at
the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
different crowd densities.
                            119

                                       D.G. DUCKINF1ELD


Q. That being so, the likelihood was, was it not, that fans
   coining in through A-G would most naturally gravitate towards
   that central tunnel? - A. Provided they liked to watch the
   game from the rear of the goal, yes sir.

Q. But not only that, it was the only obvious way in to the
   terracing because there was no sign at all to the left,
   indeed there was a wall with an opening in but no sign
   whatever and to the right there was a sign but it was a
   considerable distance away and frankly invisible unless
   you really looked hard? ~ A.Yes, that is the situation.

Q. That is a fair description, is it not? - A. Yes, that is
   a fair description.

Q. Therefore surely anyone coming in would naturally, as I
   say, gravitate towards that central tunnel whether or not
   he wanted to go directly behind the goal? - A. Yes, I
   think that is a fair assessment.

Q. That being so, was there not an obvious potential problem
   of overcrowding in those central pens unless some steps
   were taken as part of the plan to ensure that people were
   directed away from those central pens should they become
   full? - A. I don't accept that sir.  I think the situation
   is that people would enter the ground there and ordinarily
   assess the situation.  This is my perception. They would
   assess the situation and if they chose to go into a position
   behind the goal then they would go down the tunnel.  If
   they went down the tunnel and it was an area that did not
   suit them they had got two opportunities to either (a)
   return from the direction they came or move to either side
   along the back of the wall of the West Stand.

Q. Provided those gangways were kept clear at the back to
   enable them to get through to move from side to side and
   provided that there weren't people coming down the tunnel
   behind them to make it difficult for them to turn round
   and go back? - A. Yes sir, you must bear in mind these
   people that are coming are football fans who are accustomed
   to football grounds and the peculiarities of football grounds.

Q.    Well did you not appreciate that the vast majority of those
     fans would be fans who were used to Anfield where they go
     through on to an area of terracing which has no penning
     and thus they can go down the middle and fan out all over
     the        A. Can I make the point sir?   Liverpool played
     at Hillsborough last year and had the same accommodation
     and as I understand it they had the same accommodation
     this year at a league match so it was not new to them.

Q.    That       may be but you would expect   them to remember in
     detail a year after? - A. Sir, I think that football fans
     I would think are of such a nature that they know the
     g r o u n d sufficiently to know the spots where they want to
     go and these fans it is their third visit in twelve months.


                                                                 42
                                               121

                                                         D.G. DUCKINFIELD


                       problem are not accepting that responsibility and dealing
                       with it effectively, then I think that problem should be
                       left with them. If it gets out of hand and there is a
                       likelihood of injury then I will step in and do my job.

                     Q. That sounds like a recipe for disaster. Chief Superintendent,
                 B      because what you are effectively saying is this, is it not,
                        that you let them get on with it and only if the worst comes
                        to the worst do you take any steps. What I am suggesting
                        is you should foresee areas of problems such as this and
                        take or make contingency plans? - A. Can I take you back, sir?

                     Q. Yes. - A. If I said that I apologise, that was not ....

                     Q. No, I want to give you the opportunity to make absolutely
                        clear what you are saying? - A. Taking it stage by stage
                        the responsibility for crowd management ana control and
                        the filling of pens is the responsibility of the Club.
                        If the filling of pens gets to a situation where they are
                        overfilling and it becomes apparent to me that they are
                        overfilling and difficulties are likely to occur, then I
                        shall take some action.  Now I have not got to the situation
                 D      where there are major difficulties or a disaster likely to
                        occur.

                     Q. But surely it must be good policing and good practice to
                        try and foresee situations which might lead to the need
                        to take emergency steps so as to avoid them arising at all?
                        - A. Yes, I can accept your point that we should have
                        Police Officers in positions who can monitor the position.
                 E
                     Q. Did you take any steps to see if there were Police Officers
                        as part of the plan who could monitor for example over­
                        crowding in those pens? - A. Yes sir, if you examine
                        Serial 1, the track serial, there are 20 Officers there who
                        are spaced equi-distance around the track and there were
                        Officers along the Leppings Lane side of the track behind
                        that goal and looking towards G a t ® 1-6 Police Officers were
                        in position there and they could monitor visually the filling
                        of the pe n s .

                     Q. So you considered, did you, that Serial 1, looking at the
                        Operational Order which is Document 14 if you wish before
                        vou, it is Tab 14 on the document that looks like this.
                        Have you got it? - A. Yes sir.

                     Q. It is Serial 1, perimeter track.  That part of Serial 1
                        because they are spread out, as I understand it, all round
                        the perimeter? - A. Yes.

                     Q. That part of Serial 1 which is in front of the Leppings
                        Lane terracing, it is part of their responsibility, is it,
                        or you considered it was part of their responsibility, to
                        monitor and report on the numbers in the pens and to check
             H          on the possibility of overcrowding? - A. It is a responsi­
                        bility of theirs if the filling of the pens gets to the

L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                       43
                                             D.G. DUCKENFIELD



was where they were flowing isn't it? And you did snow
the geography.  - A. When I saw the compilation I saw
people walking in, orderly, not rushing, not charging
towards a particular point, and that was my perception of
the situation.

Bur. they were all flowing, if you look at the video, in a
direction which to anyone who knows the ground is in the
direction of the tunnel weren't they? Of course there
were one or two who were peeling off in other directions
but the vast bulk was going in the direction of the tunnel
wasn't it.   - A. I didn't perceive that situation sir.

Bur. it you were aware of the geography of the ground you
must have prceived it.      A. I looked at the compilation
and I was surprised to see that people were walking, and
the directions they were going.

Don't believe everything you read in the papers!  But the
direction they were going was clearly in the direction of
that tunnel wasn't it? - A. That is not my belief sir.

Where did you think they were going? - a . My concern was
that they were coming into the ground ana I saw them
walking in what I thought was the general directions, and
some were going through that gateway in the wall.

Let me put at least this;  you were aware that because a
large number of people had come in in a short space of
time that there might be a problem if they went down into
those centre pens.  - A. There is a problem in any pen
when a large number of people come in.

But particularly those centre pens.   -    A. There could be a
aif f iculty .                            . .

And that is' why you were keeping, as you say, an intent
eye watching the Leppings Lane terrace intently was it?
A. I wasn't looking specifically at the central pans. I
was looking at the terrace and the rest of the ground as a
whole.

It must have occurred to you that one possibility was
overcrowding in the central pens resulting from this. - A.
There was a possibility of overcrowding everywhere sir.

Particularly in the central pens. - A. It was a
oossibility but it was a possibility of overcrowding every­
where .

You then see a gate, which you think was either gate 3 or
gate 4, being opened and some people coming out on to the
perimeter track.  - A. Yes sir.
                                           D.G. DUCKENFIELD




It presumably must have occurred to you to ask yourself
why that was happening.  - A. I was surprised in one
respect.

This was a PC acting contrary to instructions.  - A. 'Well
not so much that. He wasn't acting contrary to
instructions if there was injury or there was difficulty.

I am obliged.  So it occurred to you that if the Police
Officer was doing that it was lively to be because it was
injuries or difficulties.  - A. The Order says that he
should ask for an instruction from a senior Officer.   I
wanted to know why he had opened it because he had not
asked for permission.

Exactly, so there must have been some sort of emergency to
make him do it mustn't there? - A. Not necessarily at
that stage.  It might have been someone who just wanted to
get out of there for whatever ceason.

But someone just wanting to get out was one reason, or one
thing which a conscientious Officer should not have opened
a gate for wasn't: it? - A. I think the reversal of that,
sir, is that a conscientious Officer would speak to a member
of the crowd and determine what the situation was and if
need be open the gate.

But shortly thereafter you have an increased traffic of
people coming out of those pens, and people beginning to
climb over the sides and over the front.  - A. Yes sir.

What did you think was causing that?     A. I thought it
was a pitch invasion because the gate had been opened and
people were taking advantage of the situation..

Climbing to the sides couldn't have been anything to do
with'a pitch- invasion could it? - A. My perception is
that the gate was opened first of all and there were one or
two fans coming on to the perimeter track, and I looked
and I couldn't see a reason for it, and the situation
developed with one or two more people coming on to the
perimeter track, and at that stage I thought individuals
were taking advantage of the gate being opened to come out
on to the perimeter track.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Were there also people climbing
the fences between the pens at that time? - A. Not at
first my Lord.  The gate was opened and people started
walking out initially. .

     MR. COLLINS:   The situation quickly developed, as I
understand it, from what I have seen and from your state­
ment, fairly quickly developed from the gates being opened
                                 57


                                                  D. G. D U C K E N F I E L D

     put this to you - could not see through the               tunnel.
     They could not see what the position was on               the terracing
     unless they were told to go down and have a               look and if
     necessary do something about it.   A.   Are               you meaning
     Police Officers, sir?

Q. Yes, I am.   A.   Police Officers, sir, who work that
   area can act on their own initiative and assess the
   situation.

Q. It is not much of a controller who does not do anything
   to control when he can see something happening, is it?
   A.   What are you suggesting that I am seeing?

Q. What I am suggesting that you are seeing is something
   going wrong on the terracing.   A.   I have just said,
   sir, I did not see anything going wrong onthe terracing.

Q.    You   did. You saw people climbing over the fence.
     A.   No, let me take it back a stage.     I didn't see
     anything untoward on the terracing and when the gate
     was opened I could not understand why.

Q.   You needed   to find out.        A.   Yes.

Q.   Andone thing that should have occurred to you, and I would
     suggest it must have occurred to you, was, this could be
     overcrowding - people trying to get out for safety reasons:
     right?   Or did that not occur to you?   A.   That did not
     occur, sir.

Q.    It did not occur to you at all?   Not even as a possibility?
     A.    It is a possibility.   What I am saying is that on
     that particular occasion I was looking and I saw the
     Officer open the gate and I wondered why.

Q. Did it not occur to you for one moment that it" was- a
  " possibility ---  A.   It could have been a possibility ---

Q. --of overcrowding.       A.        It could have been a possibility
   of overcrowding.

Q.   Ifit was overcrowding, the one thing   you must do and do
     quickly is to stop anyone else going down that central
     tunnel to add to the overcorwding - right?    A. Yes, sir.

Q.    And the only way you can do that is by directing Police
     Officers to go and do something to block off that tunnel
     and to go down the tunnel and get people out if necessary.
     /\,  I am not aware, sir, that that tunnel was still
     filling at that point.

Q.    But you could see it was from the video, if you had bothered
     to look, because you could see people still coming in.
     A.   Is that a fact, that the tunnel was filling when that

                                                                                46
                                                          58


                                                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD


                               gate was open?

                          Q. I am sorry?        A.   Is that a fact, that the tunnel

                          Q. People were still coming in and were still able to go
                             down that tunnel because no-one had taken any steps to block
                             it off.   A. Well, I wasn't aware of the fact that the
                  B          tunnel was filling with spectators.   I was looking at the
                             gate.

                          Q. All I am suggesting is that the one thing you should do
                             is to take some steps to ensure that no-one can - no-one extra
                             can go down that tunnel and people should be hoiked out,
                             if possible, to relieve the situation if it was overcrowding.
                             A.   If that tunnel was overcrowded, as you say --

                          Q. Not the tunnel, the terracing.   A.  If the terracing wss
                             overcrowded, as you say, then reasonable people going
                             down that tunnel would surely turn round and walk back.

                          Q. Chief Superintendent, you had the possibility of a
                             disaster on your hands as things turned out.   You had
                             the possibiliity of overcrowding.   You have a football
                  D          match that has just started and that will encourage
                             people to come down and get to see it, will it not?
                               A.   It will.

                          Q. And unless you take some steps - and by "you" I mean
                             the Police - take some steps to control things and ensure
                             people do not come down, you have the potentiality of
                             a great disaster, do you not?   A.   Difficulties can
                             be experienced but there were Officers and stewards in
                             that area and reasonable people would not go down there
                             and push?  they would turn and walk out.

                          Q.    And that is why you did nothing, is it,:because you thought
                               that there was nothing that needed to be done?               A.   I am
                               not s a y i n g r l _ -di'd nothing. — I did-not receive any information
                               subsequent to the gates opening >that Officers and stewards
                               were not in that area and I saw ‘nothing on the terraces
                               initially to cause concern.

                          Q.   Anyway, when you saw people coming out, youpresumably
                               wanted to get some information from someone as it were
                               nearer the scene?   A.   Yes, sir.

                          Q, Did you radio to any Officer on the perimeter.   A.    I
                             believe a radio message was passed, sir, but there was
                             no response.

                          Q    So what did you do?             Chief Inspector --

                          Q         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry.   The radio message
                               was passed by whom to whom?   A.   The Control Room, sir.
                      H
                               jo?   A.   I asked the controllers in the Control Room to
                               ask the P.C. on the track what was happening.

L. H a ro h a m Ltd                                                                                  47
                              85         D.G. DUCKENFIELD


      But nothing to do with crowd control or forming people into
      queues, they should do that themselves? - A. No, we have a
      responsibility there but I would hope that we can ask for
      the assistance of the public tc form orderly queues.

      Nov; we come to the period before the gates were open. Is
      it your view now, still your view, that at 2.30 and 2.40 the
B     centre pens 3 and 4 were not fully packed? - A. Yes sir,
      as far as I am aware.

    3. Uhat is your understanding of the density of a crowd on the
       terraces when capacity has been reached, so that if the
       capacity of the pen is 1200 and 1200 are in the pen, what
       is yout perception cf the distribution of people. Can peopi
       out their hands in their pockets and reach their hanckerchi e"s?
       Can they read their programme comfortably? Are they jostle d
       by the person in front or behind? Uhat is the position as
       your perception of it? - A. I would say a shoulder to shcui cer
       chest to back.

    3. Uhat chest to back touching? - A. Yes.

      Shoulder to shoulder touching? - A. Yes.
D
    3 . Mo room to pick your programme up and look at it in front
       of vour face? - A. Ito, I think if you are chest to bc.ck
      and shoulder to shoulder there would be room, but there is
      oackincr.




                                       /o. i don't know




H

                                                                     48
                                86
                                                        D.G. DUCKENFIELD


    0. I don't know to what extent you have heard the evidence given
       so far or read it. but are you aware that spectators who were
       in the ground at 2.40 felt uncomfortably packed and were
       somewhat apprehensive? - A. no, sir.

    Q.    2.45? - A. I was not aware of that.

B   Q.    2.45? - A. I have not seen any statements from witnesses.

    0. On your understanding today, from what you have been told,
       when do you think was the first time that people began to be
       fearful, began to feel pain, feel themselves crushed? - A. I
       d o n ’t know, sir. I c a n ’t assess that.

    Q. You have never tried to find out? - A. No. sir.         Are you
       suggesting since the Inquiry started?

    Q. Yes. - A. My role since the Inquiry started has been to remain
       detached.

    Q. Well, before.  I d o n ’t mean since a   fortnight    ago.  Since the
       incident at Hillsborough? - A. No.       Since the    incident at
       Hillsborough I have played no part       whatsoever   in making any
D      enquiries at all.    I have remained     completely   detached.

    q .   if it turns out that people were indeed being crushed before
          gate C was opened, it would rather look as though your own
          assessment of the terrace was in error? - A. Is that the
          accurate situation, sir?

    Q . We d o n ’t know what facts the Tribunal will find, we only know
        at the moment what people say, although indeed I have to say
        their evidence has not been generally challenged. - A. I can
        only relate to what I saw, and as far as I am concerned,
        looking through the control box window at the crowd prior to
        the gates opening on the perimeter track there did not appear
        to be a difficulty.

    Q. So if in fact people were being crushed and were fearful,
       before the gates were opened, it looks as though your own
       assessment may have been in error? - A. You have got to accept
       my position and where I was standing.  My assessment, I would
       suggest, is correct, because I did not see it. and that is my
       perception of the situation.

    Q. One young lady who was standing on the Spion Kop looking
       directly at the terraces, said that at 2.45 the pens 3 and 4
       were overcrowded. - A. May I suggest, sir, that from possibly
       150 yards away that is a very good assessment if it is
       accurate.

    Q. So what it comes to is this, is it, that by 2.49, 2.50. there
       was little doubt in your mind that even though the two pens
       were not overcrowded they were getting on to being nearly
       full.  is that correct? - A. I would anticipate that, sir,
H      leading up to the kick-off.

                                                                           49
                                 87
                                                       D.G. DUCKENFIELD


    Q.   Not anticipate.  It is what you saw. - A. no, I would   say they
         were filling, sir. but accurately the assessment, I c a n ’t give
         it.

    G.   Mr. Duckenfield, you saw the terraces at 2.45, 2.50.   Was it
         not your perception that even if the centre pens were  not over
         full they were getting on for being full? - A. I would say
B        they were getting on for being full.

    G. Now, bearing in mind that the capacity of those pens is 1.000
       and 1.200 apiece, getting on for being full means there will
       be what, room for 100 more in each pen, 200 more in each pen?
       - A . I can't be specific, sir. You are asking me to look at a
       situation and count numbers.

    Q. No, I am not asking you to be specific.  That is why I am
       putting it broadly.  90% full:  would that be what they were?
       - A. No. sir. what I would say is this.   I looked at the pens
       as I looked at the rest of the ground, and my general
       perception was that the ground was filling and that area was
       filling.  As to how much, whether it be 80%, 90%, I c a n ’t say.

    0. M r . Duckenfield, the trouble is we have got photographs. We
D      have seen videos, and it really is not any use you saying
       that.    It is plain, is not it. that by 2.50 the two wing pens
       at the Leppings Lane end were pretty empty, whereas the two
       centre pens, if you won't have them as full, were getting on
       for being full? - A. Yes, sir.

         You agree with -char?   It must, therefore, have been very-
         important to ensure that there was no further crowding of pens
         3 and 4? - A . That there were not more than the number to fit
         in comfortably be allowed into those pens?

    u      Yes, and another 100 or so even on your perception would have
           put those pens at full? - A. You are quoting numbers, sir.  I
         j would say they were approaching being full'.       "    v-

    Q. [Yes. Therefore they had reached on your view a critical stage
       Iin crowd control.  There was going to come a time shortly when
        somebody would have to cut off the inflow into those pens? -
        A. Yes, sir.

    Q. And that in your view was the responsibility of the club
       stewards? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q . You did not, of course, know in the control room whether at
        that stage there were any stewards at the front of the tunnel?
        - A. Yes, sir.

    G. You did or did not know? - A. I did not know. sir.

    u . A request was made to you at 2.49 by an obviously agitated ana
        very concerned experienced Superintendent for the gate or
        gates to be opened? - A. Yes, sir.
H
     Q. And you very naturally had a number of concerns which we all
                                                                             50
                              106
                                          D.G.


     A. Sir, I think my reply to that was that these are trained
     Police Officers, they know the situation and it is ay viev/
     they would report to me if there was a difficulty.

0. Your assessment of whether there was crov/ding in that parti­
   cular stand depended on your standard of people being chest
   to back and shoulder to shoulder. Is that right? - A. Yes
   sir.

 . You p r e s u m a b l y know what is laid down in the Green Guide
   as to the maximum number of people that one should have in
   ten square yards? - A. I am aware there is a formula in
   the Green Guide.           When I was asked for the information I
   was not being specific about the Green Guide.           I was giving
   a personal visual view.

Q. Just let me ask you this question:according to the Green
   Guide the maximum number of people in ten square yards,
   it is paragraph 222:  "The maximum number of people should
   be 54 persons per ten square metres”? - A. Yes sir.

O.    You are not seriously suggesting, are you, that if you put
     54 people in ten square metres they will be chest to chest
     and shoulder to shoulder? - A. To be honest, sir, I can't
     visualise that at tiie moment.

Q. Uell just try and visualise, let's divide it by ten, one
   square y a r d / Do you follow me? - A. Yes sir.

0.   One square metre.  Five people in     one square metre. They
     are not going to be chest to back     and shoulder to shoulder
     are they? - A. No sir.

0.   And that is the maximum? - A. Well there      are a lot of football
     grounds sir where that is not the case.

Q. Would you now look please at Composite Album Mo.. 2 and . .
   Photograph PR1/12A? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   If you look at that photograph, which isa viev/ of     the
     position as I say at 2-minutes-past-3, it is     quite apparent,
     isn't it, that t h e s i s much greater density at the front
     than at the back? - A. Yes sir.

Q.    Is that something that you took into account when you were
     looking down over this area, the degree of density in
     different parts of the terrace? - A. No sir, it was not
     obvious to me.

Q.    But is it something you were looking for? - A. It would be
     something I would be looking for but it wasnot immediately
     obvious to me.

Q. Is the fact of the matter, I think you indicated yesterday,
   .the possibility of crushing was not a danger which was in
    the forefront of your mind.  Is that right? - A. Yes sir,
    that raav be correct.

                                                                          51
                              107
                                        D.G. DUCKENFIELD


3.\ Do you think the possibility may be that when you were
    looking over the West terrace you were not really thinking
    about the possibility of crushing? - A. Mo sir, I was
    looking for movement in the crowd and difficulties in the
    crowd as a result of the gates opening and from where I was
    I did not appreciate there was a density.

2. But were you looking specifically to see whether or not
   crushing was taking place? - A. If you say "crushing"
   specifically, no, I was looking for indications.

Q. If you now look over the page in those photographs which is
   at 4-mir.utes-past-3, that is a tine I think when you agree
   that you realised there was serious problems and it was no
   longer a pitch invasion? - A. Excuse me sir, are you talking .. .

p. It is PR2/1 anc that is actually at 4-rninutes-past-3.    Get
   that? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you will accept, because it has been drawn to your
   attention already by Mr. Collins, people lying on the ground
   and so on and so forth? - A. Yes sir.

Q. At that time it must have been apparent to you that people
   were trying to get out of that pen? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And they were having difficulty in doing so by getting
   through the gate? - A. Yes sir.

0. I am not necessarily suggesting this would be the solution,
   but one of the possibilities that would arise would be tc
   cut some of the fence down? - A. Yes sir.

Q. That would be a pretty obvious thought that would go through
   anybody's mind, isn't it? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Did it go through your mind? - i\. Dot immediately sir.    .

q .   do vou know how long it took before anybody asked for tiie
      Fire Brigade to -cone with their cutting equipment after
      that photograph was taken? - A. I don't sir.

O. Ten minutes.     Does that strike you as a very long time? -
   A . Yes sir.

Q. v/ell are you saying then even though you knew there was
   crushing up against the front and you knew there was
   difficulty in people getting out, it never crossed your
   mind to get somebody to bring some cutters to release the
   people? - A. Sir, there was a request for cutters veri-
   early on. At the moment the call was put out for other
   assistance and a request was made then for cutters and I
   believe that because none were readily available from the
   Police Service the Fire Brigade were called.




                                                                   52
