CHAPTER 3


The Aftermath of the Disaster


1.    During my scrutiny I have heard serious criticisms made of the Inquests into
      the deaths of those who died at Hillsborough. It has been suggested to me
      that they were seriously flawed, because they did not go into the important
      question of whether more could have been done to help the victims or
      whether the rescue operation following the disaster could have been better.

2.    In the first part of this Chapter I describe the conclusions which I have
       reached about the inquests. In the second part I consider whether there
       should now be a fresh public inquiry into what was done, and not done, to
       rescue those who were crushed. The first issue I must discuss is the so-
      called ‘3.15 cut-off point’ at the Inquests.


The Inquests and the 3.15 cut-off point

3.    I have given a brief description of the Inquests in Chapter 1 of this report.
       The inquests on 95 of the victims were conducted by Dr Stefan Popper, who
       was at that time Her Majesty’s Coroner for South Yorkshire, in two stages
       between April 1990 and March 1991. (The 96th victim, Tony Bland, lived
      until 1993).


‘Mini-Inquests ’

4.     The first stage, the so-called ‘mini-inquests’, ran over a two and a half week
       period in April and May 1990. The law governing inquests is the
       Coroners Act, 1988 and the Coroners Rules of 1984. As I explained in
       Chapter 1 these require the inquest to answer four separate questions about
       the deceased - who they were, and when, where and how they died.

5.     It was not possible in April 1990 for an inquest to reach a decision about
        how any of the Hillsborough victims had died, because there was the
        prospect that one or more of the senior police officers who had presided
        over the police operation at the ground might be prosecuted. It is lawful
        and perfectly proper for an inquest to be adjourned in these circumstances to
        await the decision of the prosecuting authorities as to whether anybody
        should be tried in connection with a death and - if a trial takes place - its
        outcome.

6.     However the Coroner could at that stage usefully establish the answers to the
       rem aining statutory questions of who the victims were, and when and where
      they died. The mini-inquests resolved these questions. For each of the 95
      victims the West Midlands Police, who had investigated the disaster on
      behalf of Lord Taylor and the Coroner, presented the Inquest with a
      summary of the facts about them, based on the very many interviews that
      had taken place and analysis of photographs and other material about the
      match.

7.    The Coroner therefore went into very considerable detail at the ‘mini­
      inquests’ into the precise circumstances of where and when each of the
      deceased died.


The main Inquest

8.    The remaining question, of ‘how’ the victims died, fell to be answered by
       the main (or ‘generic’) inquest. This began on 19 November 1990 and
       concluded, after 80 days of hearings, on 28 March 1991 when the jury
       brought in a verdict of accidental death in respect of each of the victims.

9.    At the beginning of the main inquest the Coroner ruled that he would cut off
      the inquiry at 3.15 p.m., by which time he considered that all those who
      died had received the injuries which caused their deaths. This ruling by
      the Coroner has been subjected to a good deal of criticism, not only during
       my scrutiny but also during the application by six of the bereaved families
       for judicial review of the inquest in 1993.

10.   The Divisional Court, which heard the application in 1993, upheld the
       Coroner’s decision about the 3.15 ‘cut-off point’. But it has been
       submitted to me by Counsel for the Family Support Group that fresh
       evidence discovered since 1993 undermines the Divisional Court’s decision.
       Before considering this evidence and the submissions based upon it, it is
       necessary to examine the Coroner’s reasoning in more detail since it has
       been widely misunderstood and misinterpreted.


The Coroner’s reasoning

11.   The Coroner’s reasons for introducing the 3.15 ‘cut-off point’ can be
      summarised as follows:

       (a)     in considering the question of how someone died an unnatural violent
               death it is not usually relevant to consider matters subsequent to the
               infliction of the injuries which obviously result in death. It is not
               relevant whether the person died instantly at the scene or some time
               later, after medical or other unsuccessful treatment. Accordingly it
               is not appropriate for a Coroner to conduct an enquiry into the
               response of the emergency services or consider in any given case
       whether had it been quicker, differently organised, or with other
       facilities a person who died might have been saved;

(b)    there was no evidence that any of those who died did so from any
       cause other than crush or traumatic asphyxia as a result of being
       crushed in the pens (see note 1 to this chapter). There was no new
       intervening cause which might break the chain of causation between
       the crushing injuries and death. The Coroner rejected the submission
       of Mr King, who appeared for the families at the Inquests, that there
       might have been an intervening cause.

(c)    all those who died received the injuries from which they died before
       3.15 at the latest. This did not mean that they were all dead by then
       - they may have respired and had a heartbeat for some period after
       that time, running to hours or days;

(d)    the effect of the pathological evidence which the Coroner had
       received was that once the chest of the victim was fixed so that
       respiration could no longer take place, irreversible brain damage
       would occur after between four and six minutes.

(e)    that it was necessary to keep the Inquiry within reasonable bounds
       and to this end a time cut-off had necessarily to be imposed.

It should be noted that the Coroner did not say that all those who died did so
before 3.15, or that the medical evidence was to this effect. In this respect
he has been widely misrepresented. Nor did he say that all those who
became unconscious subsequently died. The evidence was that it was only
those people whose chests were in a state of permanent fixation as a result of
the crush for four to six minutes, so that they could not breathe at all for that
time, whose condition was irreversible.

In upholding the Coroner’s decision on this point the Divisional Court said
that the Coroner cut off the evidence at a reasonable and sustainable point,
particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public enquiry which had already
been conducted by Lord Taylor (McCowan LJ at page 12 of the transcript
of the Divisional Court’s judgement). The Divisional Court also rejected the
grounds advanced on behalf of the applicants that the Coroner wrongly
limited the inquest so as to exclude inquiry into whether lives could have
been saved by calling the emergency services sooner or providing better
emergency care for the injured. It concluded that these questions were not
relevant to the inquiry into how - i.e. by what means - the deceased had
come to their deaths.
Further evidence

14.   In the light of the Divisional Court’s reasoning it is difficult to see the
      relevance of further evidence that person A was alive at 3.15pm but died
      subsequently, or that spectators B, C and D became unconscious in the crush
      but subsequently recovered, whether because of resuscitative treatment
      received at the ground or in hospital, or that an ambulance driver, E, found
      a particular policeman ignorant of the situation and unhelpful, or that a
      particular doctor, F, had criticisms as to the availability of drugs or other
      resources. Still less is it arguable that such new evidence affords grounds
      for quashing the verdicts of accidental death at the inquest.

15.   Nevertheless this is the nature of the new evidence which I have been asked
      to consider during my scrutiny. I must describe it in some detail before
      dealing with the submissions which Counsel for the Family Support Group,
      and others, have based upon it. It falls into three groups - evidence from
      Dr Ed Walker, evidence from supporters who became unconscious but
      survived and who, in some cases, believe they were considered to be dead at
      the scene, and evidence from ambulance men. I was also asked to examine
      an article by Mr Wardrope in the British Medical Journal.


D r Ed Walker

16.   Dr Walker’s evidence can be summarised as follows. He was a House
      Officer in Anaesthetics at Rotherham District Hospital. At about 3pm on the
      day of the disaster he happened to turn on the television at home and saw
      scenes of disturbance at Hillsborough. He realised there might be casualties
      and thought he might be of assistance, so he went to the Northern General
      Hospital to see if he could help.

17.    On arrival at the Accident and Emergency Department, no one seemed to
       know very much about the situation. The first casualty arrived soon after he
       did. This was Lee Nicol, who was in cardiopulmonary arrest. Dr Walker
       intubated him, gave him external heart massage, and his heart started beating
       again. Lee Nicol was taken to the Intensive Care Unit, but was declared
       dead two days later.

18.    The second patient arrived shortly afterwards. This was Philip Hammond,
       who was also in cardio-pulmonary arrest. Dr Walker carried out
       resuscitative treatment and the heartbeat was restored. In a statement which
       Dr Walker made near the time he said that he established venous access for
       drug therapy, but in subsequent comments on Dr Slater’s evidence, he said
       that the drugs which had been administered had been delivered via the
       endotracheal tube. In his evidence to me he could not recall which was
       correct. Philip Hammond’s pupils were fixed and dilated, and shortly
       afterwards he was certified dead.
19.   These are the only two patients treated by Dr Walker whom it has been
      possible to identify. In his statement near the time, Dr Walker dealt with the
      resuscitative treatment he gave to six other patients. Three died. He
      believed that one made a good recovery but did not know what the outcome
      was for the other two. Thereafter he went to Ward 60 at the Hospital,
      where he assisted, particularly with two patients who had deteriorated
      neurologically and had to be transferred to the Cardiac Intensive Therapy
      Unit. The effect of his evidence therefore was that he treated five patients
      who subsequently died, most of them later that day. He treated others who
      were seriously ill, but one at least, and possibly more, recovered.

20.   Dr Walker made a written statement in the form of an aide-memoire shortly
      after the events. Apart from these matters to which I have referred, he made
      a number of criticisms about the availability of drugs and other equipment at
      the hospital and the delay in activating the major accident procedure. In
      evidence to me, he said that these points were mainly for internal
      consideration by the Hospital. On 20 July 1989, he made a witness
      statement on West Midlands Police Criminal Justice Act witness statement
      paper, which was later put on the computer system (Holmes) which the West
      Midlands Police were using for their investigation. He wrote this statement
      out in his own language, and he confirmed to me that he said everything in it
      which he wished to. It forms Appendix 5, part 1.

21.   Dr Walker gave evidence to me on 22 October 1997 and a transcript of his
      evidence appears at Appendix 5, part 2. Dr Walker also made written
      observations to me dated 28 September 1997 and in later letters. Much of
      this is in the form of comment and does not add significantly to his factual
      evidence. He did not give evidence at the Inquest.


Spectators who were unconscious but recovered

22.    Counsel asked me to consider evidence about Ian McDermott, Steven
       Williams, Roger Ball and Edward Spearitt.

23.    Mr McDermott’s evidence is contained in a signed statement dated 3
       September 1997. I can summarise it as follows. He was in pen 3 and was
       crushed. He was in agony and could not breathe. He lost consciousness and
       felt he was going to die. He recovered consciousness while being given the
       kiss of life on the terraces. He drifted in and out of consciousness. He was
       carried onto the pitch and given further mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and
       heart massage.

24.    Mr McDermott was taken to the gymnasium and given oxygen and a drip.
       He was checked by a doctor and sent to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital,
       where he was treated and discharged a few days later. His case attracted
       some publicity in the press when he was visited by the Prince and Princess
       of Wales. He did not give evidence at the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest, but
he had made a statement to the West Midlands Police dated 29 April 1989.
He appears to have forgotten about this but it is in substantially the same
terms as his recent statement, though with less detail. His earlier statement
was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Coroner.

Steven Williams’s evidence is contained in a signed statement dated 12
October 1997. I can summarise it as follows. He was in pen 3. At about
15.04 (when Beardsley’s shot hit the cross bar) he was pinned for 5-10
minutes against a crash barrier unable to move and in pain. He was
subjected to crushing for at least 30 minutes and eventually lost
consciousness. He recovered consciousness on the ground, vomiting and in
shock and pain. He was taken to the Northern General Hospital. X-rays
showed fractures of two ribs. He was in hospital for three days. In addition
to his physical injuries, he suffered post traumatic stress disorder. He did
not give evidence at the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest.

Counsel for have also put to me the evidence of Andrew Worsley, who
dragged Steven Williams out from underneath his father. Mr Worsley says
he thought Steven Williams was dead because he was blue in the face and his
eyes were staring. He dragged him out of the tunnel at the back of the
Leppings Lane terrace to a place where there were 15 to 25 bodies dead or
unconscious. He there handed him over to a police officer “who dropped
him uncaringly on the floor”.

That appears to be the last Mr Worsley saw of him. It would seem that
Steven Williams must have regained consciousness fairly soon afterwards,
since he was conscious when he was put in the ambulance. But it is not
known what, if any, resuscitative treatment he received or whether he was
seen by a doctor. If Mr Worsley’s evidence is correct, it shows a callous
attitude by the police officer in question. But there were doctors and
ambulance personnel at the Leppings Lane end who were dealing with those
brought out through the tunnel from the terraces. The fact that Mr
Worsley may have thought that Mr Williams was dead does not mean that
those more expert did so, or that they abandoned him.

Roger Ball is the father of Kester Ball, who died in the disaster. He came
to see me in London on 31 October 1997. Mr Ball gave evidence at the
Inquest to the effect that he was in pen 3 and became crushed. Shortly
before the game was stopped he must have lost consciousness. He regained
consciousness near Gate C, with someone slapping his face. He fully
recovered, and was not taken to hospital but searched for his son.

There has been put before me also a letter from solicitors acting for a Mr Ian
Wier to Mr Ball’s solicitors. It is stated that Mr Wier found Mr Ball
collapsed on the ground and apparently dead. The man next to Mr Ball was
dead. Mr Wier says that Mr Ball was going blue in the face and another
supporter trod on his chest to get out of the ground. He revived Mr Ball by
slapping his face.
30.   It seems that Mr Ball recovered consciousness without any resuscitative
      treatment such as mouth-to-mouth ventilation or heart massage and thereafter
      seems to have made a complete recovery. The fact that a wholly untrained
      person (Mr Wier) thought he was dead does not suggest to me that the
      emergency services were making similar erroneous assumptions.

31.   Edw ard Spearritt is the father of Adam Spearitt, who died as a result of the
      disaster. Adam died in intensive care at 16.45 on 15 April. Edward
      Spearritt gave evidence at the Inquest. He was in pen 4 and was crushed.
      He lost consciousness and was taken to hospital. He too was taken to
      intensive care, but made a full recovery. Counsel for the Family Support
      Group told me that there is no evidence as to what happened to Mr Spearritt
      between the time he lost consciousness at 3.06 pm or thereabouts and 5 pm
      when he arrived at Hospital. Counsel submitted to me that it was reasonable
      to conclude that Mr Spearritt was also left for dead because of what
      happened to other bodies (presumably a reference to Mr Ball)

32.   I have been unable to ascertain at what time Mr Spearritt reached hospital,
      though according to Mr Wardrope it was before 5 p.m. Most of the serious
      cases, of which Mr Spearitt’s was one, were taken to hospital well before
      this. No detailed inquiry or evidence was collated in respect of victims who,
      like Mr Spearritt, were crushed but survived. I do not think that it is
      possible to conclude on the evidence that Mr Spearritt was at any time ‘left
      for dead’.


Ambulancemen

33    I have been asked to consider evidence from three ambulancemen - Anthony
      Edwards, John Flack and Peter Howes.

34.   Anthony Edwards was employed by South Yorkshire Metropolitan
      Ambulance Service (SYMAS). He was on duty on the day of the disaster.
      He has made four signed statements. The first, dated 7 May 1989 to
      SYMAS solicitors, was put on the West Midlands police Holmes computer
      and was available to the Taylor Inquiry and the Coroner. The second is
      dated 25 October 1989. The third is dated 5 September 1995 and the fourth
      is dated October 1997. In addition he has written me a number of letters.

35.   Mr Edwards was very anxious to speak to me and he came to see me on 11
      December 1997. He did not give evidence at the Taylor Inquiry or the
      Inquest but his part in taking Victoria Hicks to hospital is referred to in the
      mini-inquest into her death (24 April 1990, page 9).

36.   In his first statement, of 7 May 1989, Mr Edwards describes the arrival of
       his ambulance at the Penistone Road end, being ordered onto the pitch by
       Mr Hopkins, the Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer, but being told by
police that he could not get through. After the intervention of Mr Hopkins,
his ambulance was driven onto the pitch as the St John Ambulance was
leaving. On the way to the Leppings Lane end progress was slow. Fans
were screaming for the ambulance to stop.

On arrival at that end there was much confusion. Mr Edwards went to assist
a casualty and whilst doing so he was deliberately kicked in his rib. His
ambulance was eventually loaded with a boy and girl (Victoria Hicks) and
another body.

The ambulance left with two policemen, a nurse and two spectators (one of
whom was Trevor Hicks, Victoria’s father), and proceeded to the Northern
General Hospital. The ambulance returned to the ground and Mr Edwards
assisted with casualties at the gymnasium. By this time the serious casualties
had been dealt with, he was exhausted and was told to go to Casualty at the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital because he had been kicked. Mr Edwards said
that he was unaware of any Hillsborough plan or the role of the gymnasium
as a casualty clearing centre or temporary mortuary until he was told on the
day.

Mr Edwards’s statement of 25 October 1989 is immaterial, because it simply
states that he does not wish there to be any prosecution in respect of the
assault on him. In a letter to me dated 10 November 1997 he says that the
two officers who interviewed him on 21 October 1989 (sic) showed him
video tape and photographs of his ambulance on the pitch. He points out
that they must have forgotten this when they interviewed Mr Bruder on 3
May 1990 and gave evidence at the Inquest on 4 May. I refer to this later,
in Chapter 4.

Mr Edwards’s statements of September 1995 and October 1997 add little of
substance to his previous account of his arrival and departure from the pitch,
save to point out that his ambulance experienced no difficulty getting down
the ramp. This was different from the experience of the first two
ambulances to go on the pitch. When treating patients in the gymnasium, he
described the scene as chaotic. There was a shortage of orofarangeal
airways, and he noticed how few bodies had these airways in them. The rest
of the most recent statement is comment.

John Flack was a leading ambulanceman employed by SYMAS and was on
duty on the day. He made four signed statements. The first dated 5 May
1989 was available to the Taylor Inquiry. The others, dated 10 August, 23
October and 29 November 1989 were additionally available to the Coroner.
Mr Flack did not give evidence at the Inquiry or Inquest, but his part in
taking Lee Nicol and Carl Lewis to hospital was referred to in the
summaries which police gave at their respective mini-inquests.

In his first statement Mr Flack describes the arrival of his ambulance at the
Penistone Lane end, contact with Station Officer Eason, driving onto the
pitch and taking a boy (Lee Nicol) who was receiving resuscitative treatment
and was accompanied by a doctor to Northern General Hospital. Apart from
the St John Ambulance this was the first ambulance on the pitch. He
returned to the ground and collected another casualty, but on arrival at the
hospital, the casualty was examined by a doctor and declared dead.

He returned to the ground, this time being directed to Leppings Lane
(outside the ground). There were three ambulances already there. He
described the scene as bedlam with police and fans everywhere. He had
difficulty in finding an ambulance officer in charge or deciding where the
casualty clearing point was. He took a third casualty (Carl Lewis) to the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital accompanied by a local doctor and a Derbyshire
ambulance man (Peter Howes). After that he reported to the Herries Road
bus depot which was being used as the assembly for ambulances.

Mr Flack’s remaining statements are concerned with identification of the
casualties, and add nothing of substance.

Peter Howes was a qualified para-medic employed by Derbyshire
Ambulance Service. He was on duty on the day and his ambulance was
called to assist. He has made two written statements. The first dated 15
September 1989 was available to the Coroner and his part in helping to
resuscitate Carl Lewis and take him to the Hallamshire Hospital was referred
to in the mini-inquest. The second is dated 15 October 1997.

In his first statement he described arrival at the Leppings Lane end. He was
unable to get any clear information and there was no obvious ambulance
point. There was a large number of casualties, some conscious, some not.
He described resuscitative measures on a patient who was lying face down
with a shirt over his head. He intubated the patient and instructed a police
officer on heart compression. He was joined by a doctor who used a
defibrillator carried in the ambulance and inserted a canula. He was then
asked to accompany Carl Lewis to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital with Mr
Flack and the doctor.

His second statement adds little to the previous one. He comments on lack
of police help in finding the location and the fact that they did not receive a
major incident call which might have prepared him for the horrific scenes.

I did not think it necessary to interview any of these witnesses other than Dr
Walker, nor to append their statements to this report. Their statements
were available to the police and are available to the Family Support Group
and I am prepared to accept what is said in them.
Mr Wardrnpe’s article in the British Medical Journal

49.    Counsel also referred me to an article published in the British Medical
       Journal (BMJ) in November 1991 by Mr Wardrope - the Accident and
       Emergency consultant at the Northern General Hospital - and others. This
       showed that all 13 Hillsborough patients admitted to the hospital in cardiac
       arrest died (two after a period in the Intensive Care Unit), as did the one
       patient admitted to Royal Hallamshire in cardiac arrest.

50.    The significance of the article as far as the Support Group were concerned
       was that it also said that ten patients who were unconscious or convulsing on
       admission and five who were confused were admitted to Intensive Care and
       survived, though the outcome in some cases involved severe neurological
       deficit including two in a persistent vegetative state (one of whom, Tony
       Bland, has since died).

51.    The article also said that of 15 other patients who were admitted with a
       history of unconsciousness, 12 were admitted to the wards and three sent
       home. All except one made a good recovery.


Arguments for quashing the inquest verdicts

52.    Based on the evidence which I have described above, Counsel submitted to
       me that a further application to the Divisional Court for judicial review with
       a view to quashing the verdict of accidental death would have a reasonable
       prospect of success. Counsel cited the following reasons, which I have
       done my best to summarise.

              1.      The medical evidence adduced by the Coroner suggested that
              all the deceased had died quick and painless deaths and that they
              were all dead by 3.15 pm. For this reason the Coroner ruled that no
              evidence after 3.15 could be considered. The 3.15 pm cut off was
              predicated on a number of unrealistic assumptions about the time it
              took for the deceased to be asphyxiated and unconscious. The
              evidence now put forward shows these conclusions and assumptions
              are false. Reliance is primarily placed on the evidence of Dr Walker
              (written submissions, paras 58 &59).

              2.     The fresh medical evidence undermines the justification for
              the 3.15 cut off point and shows that people could have been saved.
              The evidence shows that:

                      (a) some of those who died were alive at 3.15 pm. This is a
                      reference to Dr Walker’s evidence (written submission para
                      76 and oral submission para 81, line 31 - the reference to
                      Houldsworth is an obvious mistake for Walker).
                    (b) At least one supporter who would otherwise have died
                    was saved by proper medical treatment (this appears to be a
                    reference to the cases of Ian McDermott and Stephen
                    Williams, the evidence of Dr Walker that some of those he
                    treated survived, and the BMJ article by Mr Wardrope -
                    written submission para 76).

             3.      That the justification for the 3.15 cut off point was that one
             can be confident that when people became unconscious their deaths
             would have followed, normally within six minutes, or in some cases
             later. But this had been falsified by new evidence that not all those
             who became unconscious died. Reliance is placed on the evidence of
             Dr Walker that some patients treated by him survived, the cases of
             McDermott, Williams, and Mr Wardrope’s article in the BMJ. Had
             this evidence been given or the facts known the whole of this cut off
             point would have been completely undermined (oral submission p66,
             line 17 and p75 p25).

             4.     The jury at the Inquest were not allowed to know that two
             people (Lee Nicol and Adam Spearritt) died after 3.15. The jury
             were not told that people who became unconscious and were taken to
             hospital, recovered (oral submission p77).

             5.      That the evidence previously referred to together with the
             evidence of the ambulance men Edwards, Flack and Howes as to the
             inadequate response to the disaster by the police and emergency
             services was relevant to the question “how” the deceased died and
             the Coroner should have admitted this evidence and not imposed a
             cut off time.

             6. That it would be open to the Divisional Court to hold that the
             verdicts had been procured by fraud, suppression of evidence or
             insufficiency of inquiry (oral submission p69). That the evidence of
             Dr Walker (like that of Mr Houldsworth) was central and its non­
             presentation could amount to fraudulent concealment (oral
             submissions p81).


Conclusions on these submissions

53.   In my judgement these submissions are unfounded.

54.   I now set out my reasons for this conclusion. It is convenient to consider
       the reasons advanced in sub-paragraphs 1 to 4 together, since they raise
       different aspects of the same argument. Sub-paragraph 5 is slightly
       different. Sub-paragraph 6 applies to all evidence said to be new.
Arguments about the 3.15 cut-off point

55.    The arguments advanced in sub-paragraphs 1-3 of paragraph 52 above show
       a complete misunderstanding of the Coroner’s reasons for imposing a cut-off
       point at all or choosing the time of 3.15 pm. I have set these out in
       paragraph 11 of this Chapter, particularly sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and
       (e). I do not need to repeat them here. But essentially they were that it is
       not necessary or appropriate when considering the question “how” , i.e. by
       what means, the deceased came to their death to consider what happened
       after the injuries which resulted in death were inflicted. This reasoning was
       upheld by the Divisional Court. To adduce fresh evidence that some of
       those who died did so after 3.15, or that some of those taken to hospital in a
       state of unconsciousness survived does not affect this reasoning.

56.   The answer to the question how the deceased came to their deaths was that
      they suffered from traumatic or crush asphyxia (see note 1 to this Chapter)
      as a result of being crushed in pens 3 and 4 through dangerous overcrowding
      with the result that they were unable to breathe for a continuous and
      sufficiently long period of time to cause death. They did not come to their
      deaths because first-aid or medical attention failed to resuscitate them.

57.   It was well known to the Coroner and legal representatives of the families,
       and also to the inquest jury, that not all those who died did so before 3.15.
       So far as the Coroner was concerned he said as much in the course of his
       reasons for imposing the cut off (inquest transcript, day 1 pl6). Mr Tim
       King QC, Counsel for the families, confirmed to me that this was so, as is
       apparent from his submissions to the Coroner (day 1, p9) which referred to
       the case of William Pemberton and the evidence of an ambulance man that
       resuscitation at 15.50 appeared to be successful.

58.   So far as the jury was concerned, they had heard evidence in the mini­
       inquests that Lee Nicol died on 17 April, and they heard of the attempts that
       were made to resuscitate him both before and after arrival at hospital. The
       jury also heard that Adam Spearritt and Philip Hammond did not die until
       after attempts to resuscitate them both before and after arrival at hospital
       failed. They also heard the evidence of Mr Wardrope, which I summarise in
       paragraphs 62 and 63 below.

59.   It was well known to the Coroner and the legal representative of the families
       that not all those who were unconscious as a result of the crushing died. At
        Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, evidence was given of successful mouth-to-mouth
        resuscitation being given to those who were unconscious (Bradley, day 1
        page 97).     Other witnesses gave evidence to Lord Taylor that they had
        been unconscious. Mr Hennessey (day 2, page 49) recovered consciousness
        in hospital. Mr Clarke (day 2, page 70) was crushed, blacked out,
        recovered consciousness on the pitch after mouth-to-mouth resuscitation by a
        policeman and was later taken to hospital. Mr Moody (day 3, p98) lost
        consciousness and recovered on the pitch. Mr Smith (day 4, pl36) was
trapped for some minutes, passed out, and recovered consciousness while
being put over the fence.

Evidence was given at the Inquest by many witnesses who said that they
became unconscious because of the crush. Two said they recovered
consciousness in hospital (Mr Spearritt [day 34, p i 1] and Mr Baron [day 35
p l2 and 18]). Others regained consciousness at the ground. Mr Garrett
(day 22 p48) said he temporarily lost hearing and sight. Others were Messrs
Crawford (day 25 pl8), Anderson (day 27 p33), N J Langley (day 26 pl23),
Oyitch (day 32 p97), Jolly (day 35 p96), Ball (day 40 pl09 - whom I have
already mentioned above), Gray (day 42 p i2), L D Lloyd (day 45 pl02),
and T W Lloyd (day 45 p i 17, who lost consciousness twice). Mr King also
confirmed to me that he was well aware of this.

Mr Wardrope, the Consultant in the Accident and Emergency Department at
the Northern General Hospital, gave evidence at the Inquests. His evidence
can be summarised as follows.

He arrived at the hospital at 15.33 and took charge. By then six patients had
already arrived. At first he gave help resuscitating some patients but soon
took over the job of triaging patients as they arrived. 87 patients were
received in the first hour. 13 of these were suffering cardiac arrest. Some of
these were triaged dead on arrival. It is not quite clear how many this
applied to, but it seems to have been not more than four.

Other patients received resuscitative treatment but died. These patients were
not dead on arrival, otherwise resuscitative treatment would not have been
attempted. Two patients, Lee Nicol and Adam Spearritt, were admitted to
the Intensive Care Unit but subsequently died. Of the 87 patients, 17 were
admitted to the Intensive Care Unit.

Although Mr Wardrope’s article in the BMJ is somewhat more detailed, it
does not differ significantly from this evidence. What is apparent from Mr
Wardrope’s evidence is that a substantial number of patients were not dead
on their admission to hospital, but died subsequently; and that of the 17
patients who were taken into intensive care, and were therefore almost
certainly unconscious and seriously ill, the great majority lived.

In his summing up (day 75, p72) the Coroner told the jury:

       “In order to avoid any possible misunderstandings, o f course, you
       have to understand particularly with asphyxial deaths and
       particularly in the light o f what the various pathologists said, if you
       could have got to a particular person or if one had got to a person
       before the irretrievable damage had been done then, provided one
       did resuscitation correctly, that person might well not only have
       recovered but might have been perfectly alright. That is undeniable.
       Indeed, we have seen several people who were unconscious, who told
              us so, and who are here and who seem perfectly alright because the
              cells in their case fortunately had not been so severely damaged as to
              the irretrievably harmed. That, if you like, is the beauty o f the body,
              that you can assault it like that and retrieve it before it is too late and
              the people themselves just recover. ”

66.    The fact that Dr Walker had treated Lee Nicol was referred to at the mini-
       inquest on him (1 May 1990, p9). It is clear that the rest of the evidence
       which I have seen from Dr Walker, Ian McDermott and Stephen Williams
       adds nothing to the evidence given at the Inquest.


Arguments about the response to the disaster

67.    I now turn to consider the submission (5 in my summary of the arguments at
       para 52 above) that the inquest verdicts should be quashed because the fresh
       evidence, particularly that of the ambulance men, shows that lives could
       have been saved by a more prompt and efficient response from the
       emergency services.

68.    The fact that evidence was available, from ambulance men who were not
       called at the Taylor Inquiry, about confusion, lack of comprehension by
       some police officers and other difficulties, does not in any way undermine or
       affect the Coroner’s decision not to have a wide-ranging inquiry into the
       response of the emergency services or his decision to have a cut-off point
       into the inquiry as to how the deceased came to their death. Indeed it is only
       to be expected that evidence relating to the rescue operation existed. Had
       the Coroner embarked on such an inquiry, which was wholly unnecessary
       for the purpose of answering the question of how the victims met their
       deaths, it is quite evident to me that the Inquest, which lasted an extremely
       long time as it was, would have become totally impossible.

69.    As the Divisional Court pointed out, it was a matter for the Coroner’s
       discretion at what point he chose to confine the inquiry. Even if there had
       been no prior investigation into the response of the police and emergency
       services, the Coroner would have been perfectly entitled to limit the inquiry
       as he did. But again, as the Court pointed out, the decision was “reasonable
       and sustainable, particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public inquiry
       which had already been conducted by Lord Taylor” (per McCowan LJ,
       transcript p3). I shall return to this matter in the second part of this chapter.


Fraud or suppression o f evidence!

70.     The suggestion that the evidence now put before me on this aspect of the
        case was deliberately suppressed and concealed and those concerned acted in
        bad faith, is, in my opinion, wholly irresponsible. The evidence of Mr
        Edwards and Mr Flack was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. There is
nothing surprising in the fact that they were not called to give evidence since
they did not add materially to that which was given.

Dr Walker’s evidence was available to the Coroner and the fact that he had
treated Lee Nicol was referred to at the mini-inquest on him. It would be
unusual for a junior doctor to be called to give evidence of treatment, even if
he was the first anaesthetist on the scene. The matter was dealt with, as one
would expect, by Dr Appleyard, the Consultant Anaesthetist in charge of the
Intensive Care Unit who was called to give evidence. For reasons I have
already given, Dr Walker added nothing of any significance.

So far as the evidence of Ian McDermott and Stephen Williams is concerned,
the West Midlands Police took a very large number of statements from
Liverpool supporters including Mr McDermott. More than 50 were called
at the Taylor Inquiry and over 100 gave evidence at the Inquest (only 8 of
whom had done so before at the Inquiry). I think it is worth quoting what
Lord Taylor said about the West Midlands Police.

        “I pay tribute particularly to the West Midlands Police fo r their
       speed and dedication in gathering the evidence and to all those
        responsible fo r processing it. The most eloquent tribute to fairness
       and thoroughness o f the police investigation came from the Secretary
        o f the Football Supporters ’ Association. He said there had been
        initial anxiety at Liverpool as to whether that investigation would be
       fa ir and objective. His Association therefore collected 200 witness
        statements themselves. Having heard the opening statement by
        Counsel to the Inquiry based upon the evidence gathered by the
       police, he found that it accorded entirely with his Association’s
        evidence and the initial anxiety was wholly dispelled. ” (interim
        report, para 16).

It is obvious that the police could not take statements from all those who
were in pens 3 and 4 who survived the ordeal. As I have pointed out the
evidence of these witnesses did not differ materially from that of witnesses
who were called to give evidence. The suggestion, if indeed it is made in
respect of those witnesses that their evidence was concealed or suppressed,
is completely unfounded.

In my opinion it is quite impossible on the basis of the evidence and
submissions now advanced to impugn the verdict of accidental death or
suggest that the Divisional Court should again be invited judicially to review
that verdict.
Note 1 (to paragraph 11)

There is a semantic argument based on the difference between traumatic and
crush asphyxia.

 Before Hillsborough the expression traumatic asphyxia was generally used to
describe asphyxia due to the application o f external force. It covers a wide
range o f cases from instant death due to crushing by some enormous weight,
strangulation where unconsciousness occurs fairly quickly but death only after
some period, to cases like the present where the chest is fixed in position fo r a
period o f about 4-6 minutes, so that throughout that time the victim cannot
 breathe. As in the case o f strangulation, i f the pressure is released before
 death occurs recovery can take place, though it is not necessarily always
 complete. I f death has not already occurred, resuscitative treatment in the
form o f oxygen or mouth-to-mouth ventilation together with external heart
 massage is the appropriate first aid treatment.

 The problem at Hillsborough was that those who died were unable to breathe
fo r too long a time, because it was not immediately recognised what was
 happening to them and the extreme difficulty o f access. It may be that crush
 asphyxia is a somewhat more specific description than traumatic asphyxia to
 describe the cause o f their deaths. But the Coroner used the terms
 interchangeably and in my view he was right to do so.
The Rescue Operation


75.   Should there now be a fresh judicial inquiry into the response of the police
      and the emergency services, with a view to ascertaining whether lives could
      have been saved? In my interviews with some of the families, this appeared
      to be what they wanted.

76.   I also had some submissions on this topic from Professor Scraton, Director
      of the Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice at Edge Hill University
      College. I was not initially clear as to what further investigation or inquiry
      Professor Scraton thought ought to occur, but in due course it appeared that
      this was one of the two aspects that he urged ought to be inquired into. It
      became one of the main points in the final written submissions which he sent
      me on 3 December 1997.

77.   I cannot agree that there should be a new public inquiry into the rescue
       operation. It was extensively inquired into by Lord Taylor. He reached
      certain conclusions and made recommendations. I will set out as briefly as
       I can the nature of the evidence that the Taylor Inquiry heard, and the
       findings and recommendations made in relation to this matter.


The evidence heard by Lord Tavlor

78.   Liverpool supporters spoke of the slow reaction of the police in appreciating
      what was going on in the pens, the failure to open the perimeter gates earlier
      and their closure in the early stages. Police officers who had been
      stationed on the perimeter track, in the West Stand and in the Control Box,
      gave evidence as to why they did not appreciate sooner what was happening.

79.   Many police officers and supporters gave evidence to Lord Taylor of
      attempts to extricate casualties from the pens and the difficulties involved,
      attempts at resuscitation by police and supporters, and the chaotic conditions
      in the pens and on the pitch.

80.    St John Ambulance personnel who were on duty on the day gave evidence
       about the rescue work. Mr Wells was the Divisional Superintendent in
       charge. Mr Hytner QC who appeared for the families at Lord Taylor’s
       Inquiry expressly stated (day 19 pl9) that having read hundreds of
       statements of supporters there was no word of criticism levelled against the
       St John Ambulance Brigade. The other St John personnel who gave
       evidence were Divisional Superintendent Towler, Mr Godley and Mr
       Saxton.

81.    Two South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) officers,
       Station Officer Higgins and Mr Eason, who were present at the disaster gave
      evidence to Lord Taylor. They spoke of the confused situation, difficulty of
      access and problems with the radio. Mr Hopkins, the Deputy Chief
      Metropolitan Officer took over command on the ground at the Penistone
      Road end. He dealt at length with the arrangements for use of the
      gymnasium as a casualty station, access for ambulances, equipment carried
      and the operation generally. He was not cross examined by Mr Hytner. Mr
      Clarke and Mr Page, Senior ambulance officers, gave evidence about the
      control of the operation at Headquarters.

82.   Lord Taylor’s Inquiry considered at length the questions of when
      ambulances were summoned, why they were not summoned earlier, when
      the major accident plan was put into effect and why it was not done earlier.
      This involved the evidence of the police officers who had been in the control
      box and SYMAS personnel at Headquarters. The question of why there was
      no request for doctors and nurses to attend the injured until late on was dealt
      with, together with the impact on casualties.

83.   The Taylor Inquiry also looked at the question of when emergency
      equipment was asked for and why it did not arrive until it was too late.
      The Inquiry went into these issues with the police and the fire brigade.
      Altogether five fire officers gave evidence of the part the brigade played in
      the rescue operation.


Doctors

84.   Five doctors, three of whom were Liverpool supporters present at the match
      as spectators, gave evidence as to the parts they played in the rescue
      operation. In the light of the submissions now made, it may be helpful to
      refer to some of the evidence given by these doctors.

85.   Dr Byrne was a Consultant Anaesthetist. He went down to the pitch at
      about 3.20. He saw that cardio-pulmonary resuscitation appeared to be
      being carried out efficiently and that he could be more use elsewhere. On
      the directions of the police he went to the gymnasium. There were already
      two doctors there. He assisted in treating patients and later gave formal
      confirmation of death in relation to 16 bodies. His cross examination by Mr
      Hytner is important and I set it out in full (Taylor Inquiry day 25 p24).

              Q. Dr Byrne, I am not sure that I got an answer o f yours down
              accurately. I f I did, I would like you to help us about explaining it; if
              not, I will not have any questions. I think you said that an earlier
              call fo r help would not have done very much good. Have I got that
              down accurately or inaccurately? - A. No, that is correct.

              Q. Just fo r the benefit o f the bereaved, I think I ought to ask you to
              explain that a little. Can I take it stage by stage. In the crush, there
would have been those who immediately or after a while stopped
breathing? - A. That is correct.

Q. There will be those who got on to the pitch still breathing but
gasping fo r breath, maybe with rib injuries or something o f that sort?
- A. I believe there were a few.

Q. By the time any doctor would have got to the pitch, however
quickly, there would have been those who were already clinically
dead - is that right? - A. That is correct.

Q. No good could have come from any doctor getting to them
because they are dead? - A. Some o f them may have been able to be
resuscitated from the cardio-vascular point o f view but would have
suffered such lack o f oxygen to the brain that had they been
resuscitated, they would have severe lack o f oxygen brain damage.

Q. When I say “clinically dead ” I mean not capable o f being
resuscitated. - A. Well, capable o f being resuscitated from the
circulation point o f view; I am sorry.

Q. In between, would there have been those who were either finding
it difficult to breathe or who, though alive, had ceased temporarily to
breathe? - A. There would certainly be some perhaps finding it
difficult to breathe fo r a number o f reasons. Most o f those reasons
would involve slightly more sophisticated equipment than would have
been available or one would expect to be available at a football
ground.

Q. You see, the comment that earlier medical attention would not
have done any good would seem to imply logically that once the
doctors got there they could not do much good. Are you saying that
really however heroically people were behaving in attempting mouth-
to-mouth resuscitation and so forth, they did not actually do any
good? - A. I think that is my overall impression, yes.

Q. So people who appeared to be revived by mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation or other means o f resuscitation, are you suggesting that
if they had not had medical attention eventually they would have
started breathing o f their own accord? - A. I believe there are odd
patients who have recovered after mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, but
they would have had to be resuscitated very, very quickly.

Q. You appreciate I have no medical instructions to challenge
anything that you are saying. I am simply trying to get some
clarification. - A. Yes.
86.   Dr Byrne was re-examined by Mr Collins QC, Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry
      (page 29) -

            Q. Dr Byrne, can I explore something a little more o f M r Hytner’s
            questions ? Am I right in thinking that broadly there are two
            categories. There are those who have already died in the sense that
            they have stopped breathing as a result o f crushing, and those you
            think probably would not have been saved by an earlier call fo r
            medical assistance? - A. Yes, that is correct.

            Q. Because they would have been crushed on the terraces and would
            have been likely to have suffered, effectively, death before they were
            able to be got out? - A. They would have suffered severe brain
            complications.

            Q. And the only way o f resuscitating those sort o f people would have
            been to have got them either mouth-to-mouth or oxygen or whatever
            in the terraces themselves or immediately upon being brought out? -
            A. That is correct.

            Q. I suppose a doctor present immediately on them being brought
            out might have assisted but he could not, I suspect, have done a great
            deal more than a trained ambulanceman or a trained St John’s
            person could have done, is that right? - A. Yes, in that situation.

             Q. So fa r as the other sort are concerned, there are those who have
             suffered some sort o f crush injuries, perhaps fractured ribs or
             whatever and who as a result have difficulty in breathing. Is that
             right? - A. Yes.

             Q. And if they are not given treatment, they might cease to breathe
             altogether? - A. There is a condition called tension pneumothorax
             where the rib punctures the lining o f the lung and if it happens on
             both sides, then you cannot breathe and you need a seal putting in
             the chest, involving inserting a special needle in.

            Q. That I can see, but what I am getting at is there may have been
            people presumably brought out from those terraces who had difficulty
            in breathing, who had not ceased breathing but who had difficulty in
            breathing? - A. There was certainly one patient that I saw.

             Q. And there may well have been others? - A. Yes.

             Q. Lord Justice Taylor:   On the pitch? - A. No, in the
             gymnasium.

             Q. Still having difficulty then? - A. Yes. He had clinically obvious
             rib fractures.
      Q. M r Collins: And those sort o f patients would have needed
      medical attention ? I am sorry, that is the wrong question. Such
      patients could have been assisted by medical attention - is that right?
      - A. My view would be that you would get a patient like that quickly
      to hospital.

      Q. I see. That is really all that sensibly can be done? - A. Unless
      you have this special equipment fo r relieving tension pneumothorax.

       Q. We know that oxygen was administered to a number o f people. Is
      that simply to help them when they have difficulties in breathing? -
      A. The use o f high inspired concentrations o f oxygen in this situation
       is, I think, probably not very well proven. It is more as a device to
      force something into the lungs. There is 20 per cent oxygen in the air
       and that is usually sufficient, but it has to be got into the lungs. This
       device that has been mentioned is in fact just a way o f inflating the
       lungs but, instead o f with air, with 100 per cent oxygen. So I don’t
       think in that situation it’s been proven that 100per cent oxygen is
       necessarily any better than air.

      Q. So does it boil down to this - that although obviously the
      presence o f a doctor helps to tend to a patient to diagnose fractures
      and to treat the patient in the correct manner, what really matters is
      getting patients in this sort o f situation to hospital as quickly as
      possible? - A. That is my belief ”

D r Ashton was a Liverpool supporter. He answered the call for doctors and
nurses and went to the back of the West Stand. The police did not seem to
know what was wanted or who was in charge. He assisted with the
resuscitation and sorting out priorities as to who should go to hospital. He
was critical of the absence of equipment. He was asked (Taylor Inquiry,
day 25 p i 15):

       Q. Well now do you think looking back on it and seeing what was
       there, that if equipment o f this nature had been available it would
       have made any practical difference to the number o f people who
       survived? - A. I think it is a very difficult question because o f the
       nature o f the injuries. It seems to me that a lot o f people were
       actually dead when they were brought out from the ground so we are
       really in the realms o f speculation. What I would say is if there had
       been equipment there then at least the various medical and nursing
       people who were there and who became involved, many o f whom
       have contacted me, could at least have had a go at trying to do
       something with the equipment.
       Q. Well we have heard today that those people who were not
       breathing had something like four minutes before they were going to
       be in serious trouble if not dead? - A. That is correct.

Dr Ashton arranged for serious cases to go to hospital. Those who were left
were either dead or had minor injuries. He and another doctor confirmed
those who were dead at that end of the ground.

D r Curpen was a Liverpool supporter. He realised there was trouble and
went to help. The police diverted him to the gymnasium. This was just
after 3.20 and he was the first doctor there. There was very little equipment
at that stage. But later, about 3.30, a team of para-medics arrived and there
was then all the equipment needed. He then examined bodies and confirmed
those that were dead.

Dr Phillips was also a Liverpool supporter. He went onto the pitch at about
3.10 and assisted with resuscitation. After that he looked for people who
were dangerously ill; but he could not find any, they were either dead or
slightly injured. He gave evidence during day 25 of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry,
when he said (p 95):

       Q. So fa r as that is concerned, can you say if there is anybody who
       might have been saved but was not as a result o f what you perceived
       as to the inadequacies o f the equipment from your point o f view? -
       A. I can only say that there may have been because it may well be
       that the delay in getting people out o f the terrace was too great and
       by then it was probably or possibly too late fo r them and it concerns
       me not that people would have been harmed by a de-fibrillator, that
       in actual fact maybe some severely brain-damaged people may have
       been revived and we would now have a great number o f still
       unconscious, permanently brain-damaged fans.

At page 96 of the transcript he says “I f they had not been breathing fo r [4
minutes], then it was hopeless, I agree ”

All this evidence was entirely in accord with that given by the pathologists
and Mr Wardrope at the Inquests. Even if Dr Walker’s evidence was at
variance with it, which in my view it is not, it would not justify the issue
being reopened. Mr King told me that he had advised the families that if the
evidence of the pathologists at the Inquest was to be challenged, medical
evidence would be required to support the challenge. This was obviously
correct advice. No such evidence was forthcoming then or now.

In addition to those who gave oral evidence to Lord Taylor a considerable
number of statements from ambulance personnel, firemen and doctors who
responded to the call for help were available to his Inquiry. Lord Taylor
made it clear that he had taken into account many written statements in
addition to oral testimony and that he would not have been assisted by
       calling any more witnesses to give evidence in person (interim report,
       paragraph 14). I have looked at the written statements which were then
       available, some of which can be found on the body files. In my opinion
       their effect is not significantly different from that of the witnesses who gave
       oral evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry though they are of course all dealing
       with the particular part which they played.


Lord Taylor’s conclusions about the rescue operation

94.    Lord Taylor dealt with the rescue operation in Chapter 5 of his Interim
       Report. At para 89 he said

               “Those capable o f survival mostly came round o f their own accord.
              The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and
              treated. ”

95.    In Chapter 14 of his interim report Lord Taylor dealt with the response of
       the police. He criticised the slow appreciation of Mr Duckenfield and Mr
       Murray of what was happening.       He continued (para 251 and 252)

              “ Until Chief Superintendent Nesbit arrived, there was no effective
              leadership either from control or on the pitch to harness and
              organise rescue efforts. No orders were given fo r officers to enter
              the tunnel and relieve pressure. Some officers did this on their own
              initiative. Apart from the Tannery request to clear the pitch, no
              attempt was made to clear and mark off a casualty area where first-
              aid could be given without hindrance by fans and photographers
              milling about between the bodies. There was no co-ordination o f the
              early provision o f first-aid or o f stretcher parties or o f the rescue
              effort through gates 3 and 4. No request fo r help was broadcast to
              doctors and nurses in the crowd until about 3.29 pm when it was too
              late. Probably, there was little that could have been achieved in
              most cases however soon doctors had been summoned, but there were
              marginal cases where earlier attention might have made a difference.

               The plight o f those behind the fencing and the existence o f injuries
               were known to officers at the scene from 3 pm. But the Major
              Disaster Plan was not started until 3.06 pm at earliest when the
               ambulance service was called. No request fo r cutting gear or fo r the
              fire brigade was made until 3.13 pm. Again, it is unlikely that these
               services could have saved lives if they had been called promptly, but
               it is possible.”

96.    In Chapter 21 of his interim report Lord Taylor reported on the first-aid and
       emergency services. He said (paras 296 and 297)
              “/ say at the outset o f this chapter that no valid criticism can be
             made o f the response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS
              or by the fire brigade on 15 April. Indeed, no represented party
              ventured any criticism o f them. The only attack on SYMAS came
             from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances did not
              arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack
              o f triage. He was proved to be wrong in all three aspects.
              Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on television on 15 April when he
              said more lives could have been saved if staff and equipment had
              arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fa ct as to the
              times o f arrival o f ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was
              not possible to say whether lives could have been saved. His
              comments on television were irresponsible. The other doctor
              complained o f the absence o f defibrillators. I am satisfied on
              overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the
             pitch with people milling about would have been highly dangerous
              owing to the risk o f injury from the electric charge.

              I find that all three o f the emergency services named above responded
              promptly when alerted, that they brought appropriate equipment and
              that their personnel operated efficiently. ”

97.   Lord Taylor made comments on what it was reasonable to expect in the way
      of equipment. He criticised the lack of co-operation between police and
      emergency services and dealt with problems of access for ambulances. In
      his final report Lord Taylor made specific recommendations in relation to
      co-ordination of the emergency services with the police (para 228), and the
      sort of first-aid, medical facilities and ambulances that should be available at
      football stadia.


M r Edwards’s evidence

98.    I discussed earlier in this Chapter the written statements about the
       emergency services response from Mr Tony Edwards, a former South
       Yorkshire ambulanceman. I think it is convenient at this point to discuss
       the oral evidence that he gave me. I had not thought it necessary to
       interview Mr Edwards, for reasons which I have already described. But he
       was anxious to come to see me and he did so on 11 December 1997.

99.    Although he had never mentioned this before, Mr Edwards told me that he
       was critical of the response of the ambulance service. He said that, in his
       opinion, ambulances should have gone onto the pitch and triaging should
       have taken place at the Leppings Lane end of the pitch. He blamed himself
       for not triaging patients at this end of the pitch. He said this was his duty as
       the only ambulance man there. Specifically, he said that Victoria Hicks
       should not have been put in his ambulance as she was already dead, whereas
       he believed that her sister Sarah was not. But he did not take Sarah’s pulse
       or see if her pupils reacted to light.

100.   Mr Edwards said that his ambulance should have stopped before leaving the
       ground for triaging to take place. He said he had never mentioned these
       criticisms - and others which he had - before, because he expected to be
       called to give evidence and cross-examined on them. Mr Edwards did not
       understand that he could not be cross-examined with a view to eliciting
       matters he had never mentioned. It seems to me that his criticism of the
       operation ignores the fact that there were both doctors and St John
       Ambulance personnel at the Leppings Lane end of the pitch, as well as from
       time to time Mr Higgins, Mr Carpenter and Mr Eason from SYMAS, even
       though these people may not have been there during the relatively short
       period when Mr Edwards himself was there. Mr Edwards’s criticism also
       ignores the fact that the triaging was taking place at the gymnasium in
       accordance with a pre-existing plan agreed between the ambulance service
       and the police, and that the quite chaotic conditions on the pitch would have
       made it extremely difficult to do it there.

101.   It is clear that Mr Edwards has been racked with guilt, at least apparently
       since the Cook Report television programme about Hillsborough shown in
       June 1994, because he feels that he himself could and should have done
       more. I do not think he should blame himself. He was obeying Mr
       Hopkins’ order in going down the pitch to pick up casualties and take them
       to hospital as quickly as possible. He would have faced a very difficult task
       in trying to persuade Mr Hicks that his daughter Victoria should be left
       behind, even if it meant taking Sarah instead. He had already sustained an
       assault in the course of his duty and valuable time would have been lost.


Conclusion about the rescue operation

102.   In the light of Lord Taylor’s very full and detailed inquiry, and the specific
       findings and recommendations, I cannot see that any useful purpose would
       be served by having any further inquiry into the rescue operation. Even if
       some ambulance men, notably Mr Edwards, feel that they or the service
       generally could have done more in spite of the very difficult conditions, I do
       not think this could affect Lord Taylor’s findings and recommendations.

103.   It would clearly be quite impossible to say about any given victim of the
       disaster that if more sophisticated or competent aid had reached him or her
       at some unspecified earlier moment, they would have survived. Any wide
       ranging inquiry such as advocated by Professor Scraton and some of the
       families I have spoken to, would clearly impose enormous burdens on the
       police, the emergency services and the hospital and medical staff. But these
       burdens would in my judgement be to no purpose.
104.   In my opinion there is no evidence of want of care by the emergency or
       medical services. In any event the extent of the legal duty of care on rescue
       services towards those who are injured is limited. Their duty is not to
       create or increase the danger created by others. They are not liable for an
       ineffective response to an emergency caused by others, at least until they
       have assumed responsibility for the care of a particular patient (see Capital
       and Counties PLC v Hampshire County Council [1997] 3WLR 331).

105.   I have not understood Counsel for the Family Support Group to invite any
       further inquiry into these matters. Instead they made it plain that they
       accepted Lord Taylor’s findings and the sufficiency of his Inquiry.
