                   THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                   Room 1106
                   50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW 1H 9A T
                   Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



D Denton Esq                                                   Your reference:

                                                               Our reference:

                                                              Date:      ■Z *    November 1997




           33e a r AA                             '


Thank you for telephoning today about an appointment with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

2.     As I explained, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been appointed by the Home Secretary
to conduct a scrutiny of fresh evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Football
Stadium in April 1989. His objective is to establish whether there is any significant new
evidence about the disaster which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to
the Inquests, or to the prosecuting and police disciplinary authorities. If there is significant
new evidence, he intends to see whether it might have affected the outcome of any o f the
proceedings. He hopes to report his findings to the Home Secretary by the end of the year.

3.    You may wish to see Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference, and I attach a
copy.

4.      During the course of his work Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has examined evidence
relating to the preparation of statements by the police officers who were involved on the day
for presentation to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and later to the Inquests and to the Police
Complaints Authority and the DPP. He understands that officers set down their personal
recollections of the events of the day.

 5.     These then went to the West Midlands police, investigating on behalf of Lord Taylor,
 when they were treated in effect as witness statements. But before officers’ recollections
 went to West Midlands police, they were examined centrally and some were altered to some
 extent. Officers were then asked to sign the amended versions.

6.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith understands that you played a part in this process and he
would like to discuss that with you. He has asked me to say that he is sorry to be troubling
you in this way, especially so long after the event. It is o f course entirely for you to decide
whether to see him to discuss this, but it would as I said greatly assist him if you did.


 C :\H IL L S B O R \M A IN \D E N T O N .1 8 2
7.      You kindly agreed to visit the Judge here on Monday 1 December at 11.30. We
will arrange for a full transcript of the meeting and will send you a copy. We will also pay
travel expenses.

8.      We are in the main Home Office building at Queen Anne’s Gate. This is directly
opposite the main exit from St James’s Park tube station (District and Circle lines). The
quickest way here from St Pancras is to take the Victoria line southbound and change at
Victoria.

9.     We look forward to seeing you on Monday. Please feel free to telephone if there is
anything else you would like to know beforehand.


            vSU aO            >x i




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




G:\H IL L S B O R \M A IN \D E N T O N . 1 8 2
                  THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                  Room 1106
                  50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
                 Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Peter Metcalf                                               Your reference:
Hammond Suddards Solicitors
2 Park Lane                                                Our reference:
LEEDS
LS3 1ES                                                    Date:              November 1997




Thank you for your letter of 11 November to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

2.      The Judge has asked me to say that he found what you have told him very helpful.
He notes that at 1.2 of your letter you recall that you sent comments on officers’ self-taken
statements by fax to Chief Superintendent Denton. He has asked me to find out whether you
retain copies of these faxes and, if so, if we could see them.

3.           I look forward to hearing from you.

                              J\




 C F BONE
 Secretary to the Scrutiny




 C :\H IL LS B OR \M A IN \S U D DA R D S . 1 8 5
