 This is my account of my involvement in the Hillsborough disaster on the
 15th April 1989.

 I will dispense with details of my journey to Sheffield etc., but would like to
 point out that I did not consume any alcohol on the day of the match.

 I, along with a friend, entered the ground via Gate 'C' after it’s second
 opening at 14.52 pm. The match ticket was left unchecked and I still have
 the full ticket to this day. My friend and I headed straight for the tunnel
 ahead of us. My first reaction was of anger that my ticket was not checked
 rather than of conem at the large numbers being allowed in. I walked
 through the tunnel on the right handside and turned right at the bottom.

I immediately became concerned about the conditions in the area I had
entered. There was a lot of 'swirling' and I never actually settled for any
length of time in one position. My feelings were to push as far right as
possible. I thought I would head for the corner flag area. I was completely
unaware that this terrace was sectioned. I believe the players would be on
the pitch at this time.

After much swirling and movement, I eventually ended up appoximately 6
yards or less from the perimeter fence directly behind a small gate to the
pitch.

I had lost eye and verbal contact with my friend. Very quickly, I became
locked in and could not move. I will not dwell on the sheer panic and
helpnessness I felt and how frightened I was. Needless to say, I ended up
cheek to cheek' with people around me and had my face pushed into the hair
of the people in front.

 I am sure I can vaguely remember Liverpool about to kick-off. (I don't
 know why this is, but as daft as it seems I feel I can remember this point). I
 also distinctly remember a policeman standing either at the small gate, or on
the fence frantically waving to people to push back. After desperate agony,
I could not breathe any longer. I just could not breathe in or out. I fell®
unconscious and I obviously thought I was going to die. This had to be
before the players left the pitch and I do not remember anything about* the
 Peter Beardsley incident'. I could describe more about the crush but feel
this to be irrelevant.




Ian McDermott                                           3rd September 1997
                                      l
I came to, whilst being given the 'Kiss of Life'. I know I was still in the
terraces. I was in a state of limbo (as you can imagine), but I do remember
the chronic pain in my chest ie my heart. I could not see properly and my
hearing was fuzzy but I could hear the shouting of my name. I know the
person administering first aid was crying, and I know I had people 'all over'
my legs. After drifting in and out of consciousness, I know I was lifted up
by the Police. I know someone had checked my spine and neck before this
happened.

I was then carried out of the pen, through a broken fence immediately
behind the goal and out onto the pitch. I was given further 'mouth to mouth'
resuscitation and chest massage. Eventually I was taken on a wooden
board , by fans and a policewoman to the opposite end of the ground. I was
there for a short while, in the 'Recovery Position', and believe I was
inspected by a doctor.

I was then taken into the gymnasium area and laid out on my front which
caused further pain, but I could not let anyone know of my discomfort. I
saw things that have stayed in my mind like a photograph. I saw rows of
training shoes and jean clad legs covered with coats inches from where I
was placed.

I know I was tended to by firemen and was given oxygen via a mask. I was
also fitted with a drip, to my right hand. I believe I was checked by an
Asian doctor. This all took place in the gym.

I was then taken into an ambulance. I don't know whether by stretcher or by
a group of people (I believe it was by an ambulance stretcher). I know my
uninjured friend 'held the drip' and there was at least one other person in the
ambulance although I did not see them. I did not believe I would survive, as
my heart hurt so much.




This is as much as I feel I need to describe of the actual events.



Ian McDermott                                              3rd September 1997
I have listed some definite facts as follows

1.    I was without a doubt, in Pen 3.

2.    I was unconscious before the players left the pitch -15.06 hrs.

3.    I have stated that I left the terraces, carried by police through a
broken fence. I know having viewed a 'police videotape’ that this was
through the last section of the fence joining Pen 3 to Pen 4. Directly
behind the goal and adjacent to the dividing fence of Pen 3 and 4.

On the police videotape the time shows 15.25 hrs when the fence was
broken. So I was still in Pen 3 at least until 15.25 hrs.

4.     I have photographic evidence on my involvement. One picture
shows me at the TSTotts Forest' end in the ’recovery position’. The front
page of 'The People' newspaper shows a policeman feeling my neck for a
'pulse'. The picture does not show exactly where on the pitch this is. The
original may well show this (Photographs appended hereto)

5.    I was given the 'kiss of life' by a fan and by police officers on
separate occasions and in different locations. I received oxygen in the
gym and also an 'intra-drip'. This would all be after 15.25 hrs.

6.




Ian MoDermott                                          3rd September 1997


                                      3
ermo   29th September 1997
