       VYN JONES M Sc                                     FURNIVAL HOUSE
      TANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                Furnival Gate
 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                                Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                          Telephone: 0742 727599
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                   SM ITHDO W N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                    Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                  Telephone: 051 -7 09 7175
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 021 -2 36 5000, extn. 2025                     Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                             Our Ref:           JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 50A
Telephone: 021-359 3332                                   Date:              8 June 1989

                                        k P<£/
         R M Whalley Esq
         Secretary to the Inquiry
         C/0 Town Hall
         Surrey Street
         Sheffield
         S1 2HH




         SAFETY FENCES AT NIMES, FRANCE

         I have pleasure in enclosing three copies of a short video film about
         perimeter safety fences at Nimes Football Club in France. Accompanying
         the videos is a copy of a report by Chief Superintendent Stacey of the
         Metropolitan Police giving his observations.

         I trust they are of assistance,     I have written to the Metropolitan
         Police thanking Mr Stacey.




        /w /




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T          Sheffield
                                                                                       No. 728 (Unruled)

                                       METROPOLITAN POLICE
                                                                         DISTRICT/BRANCH         f . .........
Reference    j
t° paper‘ I Dirt.                                                                 cTATifin
                                                                                  STATION    Tottenham
                                                                     2U May                           89
Registry Folio No.                                                                              19

G.O./Police Order.                      refers

                              ASSESSMENT OF FRENCH PERIMETER FENCING
                         Re


Commander TO.20 (Through DAC 1 Area)

With reference to Minute 1 of the attached file.

In company with the Chairman of the Tottenham Hotspur Football Club,
Mr. Irving Scholar, and the Club Secretary, Mr. Peter Barnes, I visited
Niems, France on Tuesday 2 May 1989 to inspect the perimeter fencing
at the Stade des Costieres which is the Niems Soccer Club’s home ground.

This fencing, invented by Mr. Cloez and manufactured by a Niems
Company has, to date, only been erected at the Niems club and
consequently has never been subjected to the pressures exerted by
the excessive crowds who regularly attend British First Division
fixtures.

This new fencing system consists of interlocking fencing panels,
each measuring 2.4 metres x 2.4 metres. Every panel has the capacity
to pivot on a metal sleeve fixed over individual holding posts and
can move through a 90 degree arc from the closed to the open position.
Once open, spectators from the terraces are able to move quickly from
any emergency situation which may exist on the terraced areas. (See
attached pamphlet).

It appeared, at first sight, that this system is infinitely superior to
the fixed fencing commonly used in the stadia throughout Great Britain.
There are, however, two factors that initially gave me cause for concern.
The first was the "cascading" effect of opening, where each panel had to
move to a position of approximately 60 degrees before releasing the
adjoining panel. Consequently, when the continuous set of panels exceeds
distances of between 20 and 30 metres, the time taken for every panel to
be opened could be unacceptably long. In response to my query on this matter,
I was assured that this problem could be overcome by having shorter sets
of the fencing system.

The second problem identified was the absence of doors in the fencing
to allow police officers to enter through the perimeter fencing to
effect arrests, etc. I was assured by Mr. Cloez that the insertion
of properly constructed doors into each panel would provide no problems.

The system is electrically operated from a designated control point
but has the facility, in the event of power failure, to be released
by a manual lever affixed to the pitch side of the fencing.

My laboured description of this fencing and its operation will be
greated assisted by a viewing of the attached video tape which was
obtained from the club and which I have had translated by SO.3.


                                                                                      Cont/«...

            A ll m inutes to be numbered in consecutive order.   Continue on other side if necessary.
                                                                                                       No. 729 (Unruled)




                                                    Page - 2 -


           At present, Tottenham Hotspur Football Club are seriously considering
           using this new system of fencing and are awaiting the arrival of the
           manufacturer's representative to discuss specific requirements of
           the club.

           Being aware of the potential value in terms of crowd safety that this
           fencing system could have, I contacted Assistant Chief Constable
           J.M. Jones, the officer assisting in the Hillsborough enquiry. He
           has requested a copy of the video tape. Accordingly, I am sending two
           copies of the video tape with this report and ask that one be forwarded
           from this Force to Mr. Jones, whose letter is attached.




                                                                                  Chief Superintendent




M.P.8HE)            All minutes to be numbered in consecutive order. Continue on other side if necessary.
