                                                           Parly No. I 05241




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR WRITTEN ANSWER ON WEDNESDAY
20 MAY 1998


Maria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston): To ask the Secretary of State for the
Home Department, what provisions were made out of public funds in
respect of costs to (a) commission expert evidence and (b) challenge
expert evidence put by another party at the public enquiries into the (i)
Hillsborough disaster and (ii) Stephen Lawrence murder; what was the
outturn cost to public funds of such assistance for each inquiry; and
how costs were agreed, verified and disbursed.




DRAFT REPLY


The original papers relating to the Taylor Inquiry into the Hillsborough
Stadium disaster are being examined to see what information was kept on
costs. I will reply to the hon. Lady when that has been done.


Information on the costs to public funds in respect of the Stephen Lawrence
Inquiry is not available as that inquiry is still in progress. The Chairman of the
inquiry, Sir William Macpherson of Cluny, has been asked to recommend how
the costs of the inquiry should be met.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90204#l
BACKGROUND NOTE


We understand that Maria Eagle has asked similar Questions in respect of
other public inquiries conducted by the Lord Chancellor’s Department and the
Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions. It is not clear
what has prompted these Questions but Miss Eagle has been prominent in
support of the Hillsborough families.

2.     Details of the costs to public funds incurred at the Taylor inquiry into
the Hillsborough disaster is not readily available but we are obtaining Taylor
inquiry papers from the Public Record Office. In the meantime, we
recommend using a holding reply.

3.    We understand that Lord Taylor provided for the costs of legal
representation for the bereaved families, the injured and for the Football
Supporters’ Association at the inquiry to be defrayed from public funds. The
Health and Safety Executive provided advice to the inquiry on a range of
technical issues.

4.     The Stephen Lawrence inquiry has commissioned expert evidence in
the form of a report by South Yorkshire Police into the use of Holmes - a
computer based approach used for the gathering and collation of information
relating to the crime - in the Stephen Lawrence investigation. South Yorkshire
police have not indicated whether they will charge the inquiry for the report. I
understand from the inquiry secretariat that they may only ask for expenses to
be covered.

5.    The Stephen Lawrence inquiry is still in the process of hearing
evidence and is not due for completion until the end of the year. We are,
therefore, unable to provide information on the outturn costs to public funds.
The Stephen Lawrence inquiry was called under section 49 of the Police Act
1996. There is power under section 49 to defray any costs of the inquiry out
of the police fund and the Home Secretary has asked Sir William to
recommend how the cost of the inquiry should be met.




 :odma\meridio\edrm#90204# 1
