25-9.JS



From:        J L Goddard                        c c : Ms   Snow
             F8 Division                              Mr   Angel
             Ext. 3314                                Mr   Boys Smith
                                                      Mr   Cogbill
             14 September 1990                        Mr   Moorey
                                                      Mr   Simmonds




Mr Storr



TAYLOR REPORT:     NEW OFFENCES


You asked for advice on the letter to the Home Secretary from
the Secretary of State for Employment on the new offences
recommended by Lord Justice Taylor.


2.      Mr Howard is supportive of the Home Secretary's proposal
to legislate at the earliest opportunity and raises a few
points of detail.     These points are dealt with in the attached
draft reply.


                           j. L. GODDARD


                            J L GODDARD
26-9.JS                    D R A F T




Rt Hon Michael Howard QC MP
Secretary of State for Employment
Caxton House
Tothill Street
London SW1H 9NF




FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY



Thank you for your letter of 7 September about Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendations for new criminal offences welcoming
my proposal for introducing legislation at the earliest
opportunity.


Turning to your more detailed comments, you made the point
that the touting offence, in the terms expressed by Taylor,
might not prevent touts from selling tickets at neutral
grounds.    This is an eventuality which we shall wish to cover
if we legislate.


As you recognise, football touts need controlling in the
interests of safety and order.   I believe a clear and
justifiable distinction can be made between football and other
touts which will enable us to resist any attempts to widen the
scope of the proposed touting offence.


I share your concern that the proposed new offence of running
onto the pitch should include exceptions for safety purposes.
My officials will consult yours about the details of the
proposal.


I am copying this letter to members of QL and H Committees,
Sir Robin Butler and First Parliamentary Counsel.
