                                             cc     Mr Chilcot
                                                    Mr Boys Smith
                                                    Mr Soden

HMCIC


CRIMINAL AND DISCIPLINARY      INVESTIGATIONS     STEMMING   FROM   THE
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

Your note of 5 September to Mr Boys Smith recorded Mr Wright's
concern over delay in West Midlands Police progressing the criminal
and disciplinary enquiries arising from the Hillsborough disaster.

2.   With regard to paragraph 2 of your note, I consider that the
stance of the West Midlands Police Authority is getting rather
unreasonable.   South Yorkshire Police Authority have agreed to pay
the West Midlands for the work connected directly with Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry and we have offered South Yorkshire      a special
payment to enable them to do so.      We have also confirmed that
special payment will be paid on work undertaken by the West
Midlands  Police up to then in connection with the        Coroner's
inquests, discipline and complaints investigation and have invited
South Yorkshire to make a case for an extension of special payment
for the criminal investigation if they feel that to be necessary.
(I understand that West Midlands feel they need to repeat their
interviews of witnesses for the latter, but even so the process
would one would have hoped be less expensive and time consuming the
second time round.)

3.   The  West Midlands Police Authority have submitted an invoice
to South Yorkshire for their costs up to 30 June and I consider
that it would be in their own interest to submit further accounts
as soon as they can.      We for our part are encouraging South
Yorkshire to make payments to West Midlands without delay.   We in
turn are trying to get Treasury agreement to expedite the special
payment.  South Yorkshire could in any case claim 51% of the costs
immediately if they wish.

4.   I also understand from F2 that Mr Dear has suggested he may
have to stop work on the Police Complaints procedure due to the
costs issue and this aspect is worrying the Police Complaints
Authority.    Again it is for South Yorkshire to make payments to
West Midlands for this work and to the extent that it is part of
the original investigation we will make special payment to South
Yorkshire.   I should be grateful if you will keep me in touch with
developments.




                                            M J ADDISON
F1 Division                                 7 September 1989


 v ru;
  t   *
