From:     F J Smith                     cc   Mr   Storr
          F8 Division                        Ms   Nicholson
          Ext 2952                           Mr   Boys Smith
          2 0 October 1989                   Mr   Turney
                                             Mr   Bolton
                                             Mr   Goddard
                                             Mr   Mould
                                             Mr   Osborne
                                             Mr   Pugh
                                             Mr   Gilbert
                                             Mr   Lidington
                                             Mr   Lee, DoE

Mr Rex

FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL: NOTES ON HOME OFFICE AMENDMENTS

I attach draft notes on the amendments that were being put
down in Mr Lloyd's name today, for Report Stage on 30 October.
Mr Osborne, Ms Jago and I will attend forr a briefina meeting
with Mr Lloyd on Tuesday 24 October at n aw.




                                        F J SMITH
                                              2/2/40(   )


FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

COMMONS REPORT STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENT



Mr Lloyd
Page 2, line 40 [Clause 2], at end insert -
         '( ) Where a person is charged under subsection (1)
     above with an offence of entering or remaining on
     premises, and was at the time of the alleged offence not
     disqualified from being a member of the national football
     membership scheme, it shall be a defence to prove that he
     was allowed to enter the premises as a spectator by a
     person reasonably appearing to him to have lawful
     authority to do so.1



GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT

Purpose and effect
This amendment concerns Clause 2 which in subsection (1)
establishes a criminal offence of unauthorised entry to
designated grounds. The offence at present is 'absolute1, ie
it contains no defence.

The amendment adds a defence for the person who is admitted as
a spectator by someone appearing to him to have lawful
authority to do so, but only if the defendant is not
disqualified from being a member of the national football
membership scheme.

Speaking note

Mr Speaker, careful thought was given in Committee to whether
it was right for the offence of unlawful entry in Clause 2(1)
to be absolute - that is, to have no defence provided in the
Bill.
                2.   The Government has continued to give the matter careful
                thought in the light of those debates and now on balance
                believes it right to provide a defence. This amendment
                achieves that.


                3.   The point is relevant particularly to emergencies. on
                which there are three further amendments standing in my name
                which we will reach a little later. Hon Members were rightly
                troubled by the possibility of a dangerous crush developing
                outside grounds - despite everything we are doing to try and     r\
                avoid that - and it becoming essential ri±0 -save Ttfe. -for
                gates to be opened and tho^se outside to be admitted.    (


            V   4.   In such circumstances it would be impractical to expect
A.U     ^
      ^ y\ l    officials painstakingly to inspect membership cards and we now
                consider it right to exempt from the offence innocent people
                who were not members of the scheme - those perhaps who joined
                the queue unaware of the requirement for a card or who were
                unintentionally caught up in the crowd.


                5.   There is however one important qualification to this
                defence. If hon Members think this one carefully through I am
                sure they will agree it would be a nonsense to extend the new
                defence to persons disqualified from the scheme.


                6.   The implications of doing so would be a free licence for
                the very hooligans the scheme will seek to exclude, to try to
                kick up enough trouble outside grounds for the club and the
                police to let them in. They may indeed try that on. But with
                the defence as proposed here, they could not be let in free of
                the criminal offence of unlawful entry. And if they are not
                seeking admission, it is difficult to justify why they are in
                the midst of a crowd queuing at the turnstiles for that very
                purpose.


                7.   The balance of the defence is I think correct and, Mr
                Speaker, I therefore beg to move.
                                              5/5/15   ()
                                              9/8/7    ()
                                             10/9/15   ()


FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

COMMONS REPORT STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENTS


Mr Lloyd

     Clause 5, Page 5, line 15, after 'that' insert*, “'except
     in an emergency1.

     Clause 9, Page 8, line 7, after 'prove1 insert ’either
     that the spectators were admitted in an emergency or'.

     Clause 10, Page 9, line 15, after 'that' insert', except
     (in the case of the procedures) in an emergency,'.



GOVERNMENT AMENDMENTS

Purpose and effect


All three amendments make some form of provision for people to
be admitted to a designated ground in England or Wales,
without regard for whether they are members of the national
football membership scheme or not, in an emergency.

The first amendment qualifies the mandatory requirement in
Clause 5(2)(h) that the scheme must ensure only authorised
spectators are admitted to grounds, by adding the words
'except in an emergency'.


The second relates to the criminal offence in Clause 9(1) of
admitting spectators to unlicensed premises and provides a new
defence in Clause 9(2) that spectators were admitted in an
emergency.
The third adds explicit reference, to emergency procedures, to
the criteria in Clause 10(9) which the licensing authority
must take into account when licensing a around to admit
spectators. The reference to such procedures therefore
implicitly provides for admission of persons in an emergency
without the club committing an offence under Clause 10(10) of
breaching a licence condition.

Speaking note


Mr Speaker, the Government in tabling these amendments is
responding to views expressed by this House and in another
place for the Bill to provide explicitly for the emergency
admission of people, whether authorised as spectators or not.


The Government has consistently maintained that any provision
for adapting admission procedures should be dealt with
primarily in the scheme rather than solely in this Bill. The
first amendment therefore introduces the mandatory requirement
for the scheme to so provide.


The second qualifies the offence in Clause 9(1) of admitting
spectators to unlicensed premises by the new defence that the
responsible person did so in an emergency. Similarly, the
third requires the licensing authority to consider
arrangements to deal with emergencies when granting a licence
to admit spectators. Implicitly that therefore puts within
the scope of a licence the provision to admit spectators in an
emergency, safeguarding the licensee from an offence under
Clause 10(10) (admitting spectators in breach of a licence
condition) in such circumstances.


Mr Speaker, there are two additional points I would like to
explain.


I mentioned in a previous Government amendment to the Clause 2
offence that the new defence of acting on lawful authority did
not, and should not, apply to those disgualified from the
scheme. That is right. However the same is not necessary in
respect of offences by the club, who could not be expected to
discriminate between disqualified persons and others in an
emergency. The offences in Clauses 9 and 10 should reflect
that, as in these amendments.


The other point, Mr Speaker, is over the practical meaning of
the term emergency. The Bill does not define this term
explicitly - because the search for a precise definition is
probably doomed to failure. There are in fact many degrees of
emergency. All though, to my perception, require a genuine
risk of injury or loss of life, whether actual or potential.
An emergency is not, for example, a convenient shorthand for
simply an operating delay or inconvenience.


In other words, the various provisions for emergencies in the
Bill - and in due course the scheme - will only come into play
at a football ground when such a risk actually arises. The
Bill does not set out who should declare whether an emergency
exists or not. However, it is the club's responsibility to
get that right since it is their licence that is at stake and
it is they who would risk committing an offence under Clauses
9 or 10.


Unless a dire and immediate emergency arises, therefore, the
club would be very well advised to consult the police or other
emergency services present. Otherwise it would be shouldering
full responsibility for declaring an emergency to have arisen,
and would risk a court ruling that it was wrong. Conversely,
if the police themselves spotted that an emergency had arisen
it is only to be expected that they would quickly communicate
that to the club.


Mr Speaker, these amendments make sensible provision for
emergencies and I commend them to this House. I beg to move.
                                             15/13/19 (   )



FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL
COMMONS REPORT STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENT


Mr Lloyd

     Clause 15, Page 13, line 19, at end insert 'in ordinary
     language'.




GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT


Purpose and effect, and speaking note


This amendment adds to the requirement in Clause 15(6) (to
explain to the accused the effect of a restriction order being
made against him) the requirement to do so in ordinary
language.


The amendment simply brings Clause 15(6) into line with a
corresponding amendment being made to Clause (7)(7)(a), in
relation to explaining the effect of disqualification from the
national football membership scheme. I beg to move.
                                                  Schedule 1/21/23 (   )
                                                  Schedule 1/21/33 (   )


FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL
COMMONS REPORT STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENTS


MR LLOYD


Page 21,   line 23 [Schedule 1], at end insert-

    1( )     any offence under section 12 of the Licensing Act 1872
           (persons found drunk in public places, etc.) of being
           found drunk in a highway or other public place committed
           while the accused was on a journey to or from a
           designated football match being an offence as respects
           which the court makes a declaration of relevance;

     ( )   any offence under section 91(1) of the Criminal Justice
           Act 1967 (disorderly behaviour while drunk in a public
           place) committed in a highway or other public place
           while the accused was on a journey to or from a
           designated football match being an offence as respects
           which the court makes a declaration of relevance,1.
Page 21,   line 33 [Schedule 1], at end insert-
     1( ) any offence under section 4 or 5 of the RoadTraffic Act
          1988 (driving etc. when under the influence of drink or
          drugs or with an alcohol concentration above the
          prescribed limit) committed while the accused was on a
          journey to or from a designated football match being an
          offence as respects which the court makes a declaration
          of relevance,1.


GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT

Purpose and effect


The purpose of this amendment is to include in the range of
offences relevant for the purposes of both parts of the Bill all
those offences of drunkenness committed on the way to or from a
designated match. This will extend Schedule 1 to catch not only
those offences defined in Section 1 of the Sporting Events
(Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, but also offences of being
drunk in a public place, disorderly behaviour while drunk in a
public place and driving when under the influence of drink (or
drugs) or with an alcohol concentration above the prescribed
limit.

Speaking notes


During the Standing Committee's deliberations on the Bill several
astute Opposition Members identified a small anomaly in the
composition of the Schedule of offences which trigger
disqualification from the membership scheme, or the power to make
a restriction order. This anomaly concerns the extent to which
offences of drunkenness might be relevant for the purposes of the
Bill. My Rt Hon Friend the Minister for Sport undertook to look
into the matter further, and both Departments have since given it
careful consideration.


We are all of us aware of the part which alcohol has to play in
spectator violence, particularly at football matches. The
Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 was introduced
swiftly with all-party support to deal with precisely this
problem, and does so with some success by making it an offence to
enter a ground when drunk or in possession of alcohol or to
possess or to consume alcohol in view of the pitch during the
match.


Paragraph (f) to the Schedule deals with Section 1 of the Act
which makes it an offence to possess or consume alcohol or to be
drunk on the way to or from a football match on a football special
coach or train. In relation to drunkenness on journeys to or from
designated matches, those offences are too narrowly defined for
the purposes of the Bill: the definition would include, for
example, someone who is sober but carrying a single can of beer on
a football 'special', but would exclude someone who is drunk and
maybe disorderly trying to make the same journey on foot.


It is important to keep the matter in proportion. All relevant
offences should be directly related to the offender's conduct in
relation to a designated match. I believe that any offence of
excessive drinking on the way to a match should be included. The
proposed amendment would catch not only those on football
specials, but anyone drunk in a public place or convicted of a
drink-driving offence, providing the court had made a declaration
of relevance in respect of that offence.

I am grateful to the Honourable Members who drew attention to this
matter and I commend this amendment to the House as the sensible
way forward. I beg to move.
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL                   Title/4/ (   )
COMMONS REPORT STAGE
NOTES ON AMENDMENTS


Mr Lloyd

Title, line 4, leave out 'by designated agencies.'



GOVERNMENT AND AMENDMENT
Purpose and effect. ^|speakincr note


This amendment is consequential to those government amendments
agreed to by the Standing Committee    which introduced specific
reference to police stations or the    enforcing authority, as
appropriate by function. It serves     to delete the now
redundant reference in the title to    ’designated agencies'. I
beg to move.
                                                                (Z I0
                   '                       J o OCT i9SS    \in.gn           Ct    H ,
                       CONSIDERATION OF BILL                                      ^        <,2

                                                                                  A/ An<.\u f%
                                                                                  ^        h
             FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL (LORDSI, AS AMENDED




Mr. Colin Moynihan

   Page 1, line 14 [Clause 1], at end insert—
         *( ) The Secretary of State shall not make a designation under subsection (2)
      above without giving the Football Membership Authority an opportunity to
      make representations about the proposed designation, and taking any
      representations he receives into account.’.

   Page 2, line 40 [Clause 2], at end insert—
         *( ) Where a person is charged under subsection (1) above with an offence of
      entering or remaining on premises, and was at the time of the alleged offence
      not disqualified from being a member of the national football membership
      scheme, it shall be a defence to prove that he was allowed to enter the premises
      as a spectator by a person reasonably appearing to him to have lawful authority
      to do so.’.

   Page 3, line 5 [Clause 5], at beginning insert ‘Subject to subsection (3A) below,’.

   Page 3, line 11 [Clause 5], at end insert—
         ‘(3A) The Secretary of State shall not designate any body corporate as the
      Football Membership Authority unless he is satisfied that its articles of
      association make provision securing—
           (a) [that its Board shall comprise a Chairman and [four, six or eight] other
                 members, of whom the Chairman and half the other members are
                 persons approved by the Secretary of State [before their election as
                 Chairman or as member, as the case may be,] and the remaining
                 members are persons nominated by the Secretary of State, and]
           (b) that the Chairman shall be a person who has no such financial or other
                 interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the performance of his
                 functions as Chairman;
      and he [may] withdraw the designation of that body if he ceases to be so
      satisfied.
        [(3B) The Secretary of State may withdraw his nomination or approval of any
      member of the Board.’.]

   Page 3, line 34 [Clause 5], at end insert—
         ‘( ) Where the Secretary of State withdraws the designation of a body as the
      Football Membership Authority, he shall, as soon as it appears to him to be
      appropriate to do so, lay before each House of Parliament a report stating his
      reasons for the withdrawal.’.

                                            12ocl89.184
Page 3, line 47 [Clause 4], after ‘section’ insert—
       ‘(a)’.

Page 3, line 47 [Clause 4], after ‘Association’ insert \ the Football Association of
   Wales’.

Page 3, line 48 [Clause 4], at end insert *; and
       (b) give such persons as appear to it to represent the interests of football
             supporters an opportunity to make representations.’.

Page 5, line 12 [Clause 5], at end insert ‘and requiring that in Wales any application
   form for membership of the scheme shall also be available in Welsh’.

Page 5, line 15 [Clause 5], after ‘that’ insert \ except in an emergency,’.

Page 5, line 35 [Clause 5], leave out ‘imposing charges specified in’ and insert ‘for
   the imposition of charges under’.

Page 6, line 44 [Clause 7], leave out from ‘with1 to end of line and insert ‘the date
   of the conviction.’.

Page 6, line 47 [Clause 7], leave out ‘be withdrawn’ and insert ‘cease on the date of
   the conviction’.

Page 7, line 9 [Clause 7], after ‘court’ insert—
                  ‘(O’.
Page 7, line 10 [Clause 7], at end insert—
                  ‘(ii) shall explain to him in ordinary language the effect of the
               conviction on his membership of the national football membership
               scheme; and’.

Page 7, line 19 [Clause 7], at end insert—
   ‘( ) Where, on an appeal against a person’s conviction of the relevant offence or
   against a sentence of imprisonment imposed on him in dealing with him for the
   offence, his conviction is quashed or the sentence is reduced to one which is
   not a sentence of imprisonment taking immediate effect, the court which
   determines the appeal or, as the case may be, the court to which the case is
   remitted, shall cause notice of the quashing of the conviction or of the sentence
   imposed to be sent to the persons specified in subsection (7)(b)(i) and (ii) above
   and, where his conviction is quashed, the Authority shall re-admit him to
   membership of the scheme, but without prejudice to any proceedings under the
   scheme to exclude him from membership’.

Page 8, line 7 [Clause 9], after ‘prove’ insert ‘either that the spectators were
   admitted in an emergency or’.

Page 8, line 22 [Clause 10], at end insert—
   ‘(2A) The licensing authority shall not refuse to grant a licence without—
       (a) notifying the applicant in writing of the proposed refusal and of the
             grounds for it;




                                         12ocl89.184
                                              (3)

        (b) giving him an opportunity to make representations about them within
              the period of twenty-eight days beginning with the service of the
              notice; and
        (c) taking any representations so made into account, in making its decision.’.

Page 8, line 31 [Clause 10], at end insert—
      ‘( ) A licence to admit       spectators may also include conditions requiring
    specified descriptions of spectators to be refused admittance to the premises to
    watch designated football matches, or specified descriptions of designated
    football matches or a particular such match.’

Page 8, line 46 [Clause 10], after ‘notice’ insert ‘in writing’.

Page 9, line 3 [Clause 10], after      ‘holder’ insert ‘in writing’.

Page 9, line 8 [Clause 10], leave      out ‘his’ and insert ‘its’.

Page 9, line 15 [Clause 10], after ‘that’ insert ‘, except             (in the case   of the
   procedures) in an emergency,’.

Page 11, line 23 [Clause 13], at end insert—
      ‘( ) Before exercising its power under subsection (2) above to require the
   inclusion of specified terms and conditions in any safety certificate, the
   licensing authority shall consult the local authority, the chief officer of police
   and either the fire authority (where the local authority is in Greater London or
   a metropolitan county) or the building authority (in any other case).
      ( ) As respects those terms and conditions, the local authority need not
   consult the chief officer of police, the fire authority or the building authority
   under section 3(3) or 4(8) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 before
   issuing a safety certificate or about any proposal to amend or replace one.’

Page 13, line 19 [Clause 15], at end insert ‘in ordinary language’.

Title, line 1, after ‘admission’ insert ‘and provide for the safety’.

Title, line 4, leave out ‘by designated agencies’.




                                           12oct89.184
