                                               cc   Miss Snow
     Mr A U uU                                      Ms Spencer
     M,                                             Mr Yates
                                                    Mr Chilcot
     Mr AUU                                         Mr Moriarty
                                                    Mr Boys Smith
                                                    Mr Turney
                 Auj U    U    <     u   ku*        Mr Bolton
                                                    Mr Goddard
                                                    Mr Whalley
                              If**       •

                                                    Mr Martin
                                                    Mr Mould
                                                    Mr Smith, F8
                                                    Mr Mower
                                     J * /l         Mr Godfrey


Mr Walters


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY FINAL REPORT

I attach a suggested timetable of the Parliamentary events
leading up to the statement on Monday 29 January.


As there is no time for conventional CFR copies of the Report
to be printed Parliamentary Section will have to produce
copies for use in advance of publication by removing the
outside covers and placing an embargo label over the
publication date (so that details are embargoed until the
Home Secretary stands u p ) .


However,   in the absence of proper CFRs Ministers may wish to
consider whether in fact we should issue CFRs to the press in
any numbers at all.      There could be points of order raised
before the Statement about their precise status and also
adverse comment in the House about the pains evidently taken
to inform journalists in advance of Members themselves.
Whatever is decided we should, I suggest,       lay the report
before Parliament slightly before CFRs are given to the press.


                                                         /We have also
E.R.
       We have also considered whether we need to make advance copies
       of the Report available for parties to the Inquiry, most of
       whom are based in Sheffield.   However, in view of the fact
       that the contents of the Final Report are less dedicated to
       the circumstances of the disaster itself than the interim
       report was, we have agreed with the inquiry team that making
       courtesy final copies available to these parties on
       publication will be perfectly adequate.




                                                  J A GILBERT
                                                  Parliamentary Clerk


       24 January 1990
   Private Office
SUGGESTED TIMETABLE FOR STATEMENT ON THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
FINAL REPORT



25/26 January          S of S Office to circulate draft of
                       statement to No 10, Lord President,
                       Lord Chancellor, Secretaries of State
                       for Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland
                       and DoE.



29 January 10 am       Parliamentary Section to telephone the
                       Speaker's Office and Lords Whip's
                       Office to put them on notice for a
                       statement after Questions.


                       S of S Office to telephone Roy
                       Hattersley MP, Sir John Wheeler MP,
                       David Blunkett MP and Denis Howell MP
                       to confirm that statement will be made



                noon   Parliamentary Section to deliver CFRs
                       of the Report to Mr Hattersley,
                       Mr Blunkett, Mr Howell and
                       Sir John Wheeler on a strict in­
                       confidence basis.    (In order to assist
                       Mr Blunkett we would also provide him
                       with copies of Lord Justice Taylor's
                       press release.)



                       Parliamentary Section to arrange for
                       Lords Whip's Office to offer repeat to
                       the Opposition.


                       Parliamentary Section to fax round to
                       Ministerial colleagues final text of
                       statement,   if revised over the week-
3.00 pm    Parliamentary Section to deliver copies
           of the statement to Roy Hattersley MP
           and Sir John Wheeler MP.


           Report to be laid before both Houses
           (arranged by Parliamentary Section).


           ? Press Office to release a limited
           number of advance copies to selected
           correspondents.



3.30 pm    Statement (repeated in the Lords) with
(approx)   any Press interviews afterwards.
