       Bishopthorpe
           York
         Y 021Q E


    Telephone 0904 707021




W ith the Compliments of
    Archbishop of York
                     Hillsborough Memorial Service

           Sermon by the Archbishop of York, Dr John Habgood

       Sheffield Cathedral - Sunday 23rd April 1989 at: 6.30 p.m.



Galatians <6 2 "Bear one another's burdens and so fulfil the law of

Christ."



     All of us come here this evening in some way burdened.    We think

especially of those burdened with the sorrow of bereavement; they bear a

pain which at times must seem unendurable, and which only faith and hope

and the passage of time will ease.



     We think too of those who still watch and wait and hope at

hospital bedsides.



     Some of us here may be burdened with memories, with horrific

experiences, which will be with them for the rest of their lives.

Others may be burdened with the pain and anxiety of inner questioning,

those futile "if onlys" which haunt us, in the wake of any disaster.       If

only I had acted differently.   If only I had known then what I know now.

If only this or that had happened.    If only a hundred different things

which might have prevented an afternoon's eagerly anticipated sport

erupting into appalling tragedy.     Some who bore the brunt of organizing

and giving assistance may now be burdened by exhaustion, the sort of

emotional numbness which comes over us when we have done everything we

can and there is nothing left to do but wait for the next stage.      Many,

I expect, are burdened by the thought that this could happen in our

city, on our football ground, among our people.

                                                               cont/....
                                      - 2 -




     Whatever the burdens, says St Paul, we are to bear them together,

and so fulfil the law of Christ.



     And      haven't we    seen that happening already?One of the most

striking      immediate effects of the disaster was to bring everybody

together across all the normal barriers - fans and their families,

professional workers of many different kinds, churches of every

denomination.       I hope those who have known this at first hand will not

let the experience slip away.       We need each other in good times as well

as bad.       Bearing one another's burdens is not just for special

occasions.



        But   there are,    of course, other emotions which enter in, andone

of   these is anger. It is a very natural reaction      among those who have

been deeply hurt, and we have seen some examples of it in the last few

days.     There are times when it is right to be angry.    But anger which is

allowed to spill over before the true facts are known, anger based on

speculation, anger directed at those who cannot answer back, is merely

destructive.       In bearing each other's burdens we somehow have to find

ways of being sensitive to each other's anger, and restraining it.         We

need to respect the deep feelings in others as in ourselves, and not be

swept away by them.        Anger now when so much is uncertain, so much

remains to be discovered, can only make the task of learning from the

disaster that much harder.




                                                                  cont/.
                                     - 3 -




        The truth will out.   And what kind of truth will it be?       Obviously

it is not for me to anticipate the results of the enquiry.            But I think

here again St Paul can help us.      Just as we shae in suffering by bearing

one another's burdens, so we share in responsibility.



        Events of the magnitude of Hillsborough don't usually happen just

for one single reason, nor is it usually possible to pin the blame on

one single scapegoat.     It would probably be emotionally more satisfying

if we could pick out a single c©«¥se and say, "Yes, that's it               that's

exactly why it happened."      But real life is much more complicated than

that.     Real life is made up of hundreds of different decisions by

different people, some of which at the time seem unavoidable.             And

disasters happen because a whole series of mistakes, misjudgments and

mischances happen to come together in a deadly combination.            Perhaps the

warning signs were there already.       Perhaps they should have been heeded

and acted on years ago.       Perhaps there are questions about football

crowds in general which need now to be asked with a new sense of

urgency.     That again is not my business.      But the notion of shared

responsibility, going hand in hand with shared suffering, seems to me to

be part of the Christian vision of human life.



        "Bear one another's burdens and so fulfil the law of Christ."            And

"the law of Christ", as our readings         have reminded us, is love.    In

coming closer together, even through an event as terrible as this,              we

touch the very heart of the Christian gospel.          God is love.   God's     love



                                                                      cont/.
                                       - 4 -




enables us to love.    Whoever loves God must also love his brother.           When

the full tale of this day is told there will be many stories of heroism,

of selfless care, of devotion beyond the call of duty, which

unconsciously reflect this gospel of love.          But we shall also have to

live with the macabre acted parable which tells the opposite story - the

story of how easy it is to be caught up in the kind of pushiness which

unthinkingly and unwittingly slaughters the innocents.



        Tragedy drives us to God.    It reveals the possibilities of love

and brotherhood.     It points us to our shared responsibilities.         But it

also poses questions about God himself.          What was he doing in

Hillsborough that fateful Saturday afternoon?          How can we make sense of

a world in which such things happen?



        Here again my text may help.     Just as we can love because he first

loved us, so we can bear one another's burdens because he first bears

ours.     "Surely he has borne our griefs and carried our sorrows", as

Isaiah tells us.



        So what was he doing in Hillsborough?       Bearing the weight.

Suffering beside those who suffered.           Strengthening those facing

unendurable strain.     Knowing in himself the pain and the loss.           Offering

the comfort of his presence.        And taking the dying to himself in his

risen life.




                                                                     cont/.
                                      - 5 -




        And he stands beside us still - ready to bear the weight in the

    long process of healing and readjustment and restoration of hope and

    dignity and mutual confidence which lies ahead of us.   Hold on then to

    the belief that "in all these things we can be more than conquerors

    through him that loved us ___   and nothing can separate us from the love



•
    of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord."
