                        'fi     w tk m           v ' 1'   V


      INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
            STADIUM DISASTER

f
f

                   With the Compliments of
                  the Secretary to the Inquiry



           cc       Sir       ffefe/

                    ti (fdUsovv
                    P(^es&&             fiauAck/
                   ft      S u je fit




    50 Queen Anne’s Gate
    London SW1H 9AT
    01-273 3602
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                            London SW1H 9AT
                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370

David Dent Esq                                   Your Ref: 24/15428
Secretary
The Football League Limited
Lytham St Annes
Lancashire
FY8 1JG
                                            Date
                                                 27 November 1989




                f
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

Thank you for your letter of 24 November with the text of Mr
Fox's recent address to the Seminar organised by the Institution
of Structural Engineers. Mr Sweet and I were, of course,
present, and able to tell Lord Justice Taylor about it, but it is
nevertheless helpful to have the full text available. Thank you
very much.

                                        o u ho




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                                                                 m il
                                                              ^JVDED ^

                               THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
 Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 l)G. T elep hon e 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                        Secretary J. D. Dent




24/15428          ’                                                                               24th November,                  1989




R.M. Whalley, Esq.,
Secretary,
Inquiry into the Hillsborough
             Stadium Disaster,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON SW1H 9AT.




Dear Mr. Whalley,

     Mr. Fox has asked me to let you have a copy of his address
to the recent Structural Engineers' Seminar which I believe you
also attended.

                                                  Yours sincerely,




                                                         Se c r e t a r y ,



E n c los ure .




                All correspondence to b e addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
                          Heathrow Penta Hotel
                   May I say how happy and honoured I am to have been asked to address
 such a knowledgeable audience. You must forgive me if I refer to Blackburn Rovers and
 the Lancashire County Council during the course of my address but I would like to
 speak not only as the President of the Football League but also as the Chairman of a
 League Club who has always had to carry out the instructions of a Local Authority with
 a full time staff dedicated to the implimentation of the Green Guide* In this country
 we are at a great disadvantage on two accounts. One, being the country where Football
 was created we are saddled with stadiums that are archaic, constructed with materials
 which in to-days world are potential disaster ares       designs that with the best will
 in the world cannot be re-vamped to accomodate the requirements of to-days demands.
 ISro, the stadiums are owned by 1ihe Football iClubs,                      : ____ ~       ,
 not by the Local authorities. This in itself is a very important point in the iwrafag
kof directives from TJ.E.F.A. and F.I.FJL. the World ruling bodies in the game. For instanc
"the all seater directive for World Cup games can be ifigSl'difi^nted by the large important
 Cities of Europe, the likes of Munich, Milan, etc as a charge against the state, here
 of course the picture is very different, the money has to be found from commercial
 activities and consequently we always present a picture which is not in keeping with
 our image.
                 During my time as a Football Association Councillor I have sat on the
 majority of Commissions of Enquiry after incidents involving crowd problems and safety
 problems. I have always been appalled at the interpretation of the Green Guide. We all
know that the the Green Guide is,as it’s title suggests,' only a guide to help local
authorities to look at the safety aspect of sports grounds after the various disasters
 that have occured in the game since 1975* lefore the inquiry undertaken by Mr Justice
Popplewell sport in general and Football in particular was expected to put iife own house
 in order on a Club by Club basis, for instance the Burnden Park disaster had to be sorted
 out by the Bolton Club in conjunction with the local authorities. It has never failed to
surprise me that every conceivable point in the Green Guide has a different interpretatic
by the different local authorities* It is esential that the powers that be treat the
recommendations of the Green Guide as mandatory if we are to have any credence in what
we are trying to achieve* As an example, the interpretation of recommendation number
8 of the Lord Justice Taylor interim Report states, I quote: w Where there axe perimeter
fences, al l #gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period when spectator
are on the terrace.” On page 55 of the Lord Justice Taylor Interim Report is categoricall
describes an open gate* That isthe open gate will have three beneficial effects. I again
quotes w Obviously, an open gate is a more ready escape route than which has to be*locked
Secondly, the sight of open gates will be reassuring to spectators on the terraces* Third
the existence of gaps in the fencing by reason of the open gates will concentrate the ain
of police officers or stewards on the track to the need for monitoring of those on the
terraces* Even after this quite categoric instruction we still have several interpretati
from the various licencing authorities. Some Clubs are instructed to make sure the gate
is closed but the securing bar is fully withdrawn, other clubs are instructed to open the
gates whilst other clubs have been instructed to remove the gates altogether. At the
Skol Cup Final at Hampden Park on Sunday last- the gates in the perimeter fences were all
closed. I merely draw your attention to this state of affairs to illustrate the inefficie:
way we approach the whole problem of safety within our Sports stadiums. The Appraisal of
Sports Grounds by the Institution of Structural Engineers is an all embracing report and
sets out very precisely the s^tejip we have to take to bring our stadiums within the accept




                                                            Heathrow Penta Hotel Ltd.. Sath Road. Hounstow. M iddlesex TW6 2AC
                  I* MU                                          Telepnone: 01-89 7 6 3 6 3 Telex: 934660 Facsimile 01*897 : i l 3
                                                                           Registered No. 663141 Snqiano & Wales
031 F - 8 ?T                                   Registered C*>ce: Suite GO 39, heatnrow Penta Hotev Bath floaa. Hounslow. Middlesex TW6 2 £ r
                        Heathrow Penta Hotel
 minimum safety limits demanded in to-days society. To refer to the Lancashire Clubs. It
 has always been the policy of the Local Authorities to treat the Green Guide as mandatory
 rather that as a recommendations and as a consequence pens within specific areas have never
 been part of the overall concept and cruch barriers positioned in such a- manner as to
 enable side loading to be the order of the day. The seperate areas have been monitored
 elctronically and an accurate count of the specif ice areas •w j u c j I / recorded. Obviously
 now that we have this appraisal of Sports Grounds available the task of Directors and
 managers of sports clubs must be in a much more favourable position to carry out their
 duties of compliance with the directives from the authorities.
               As you are well aware the Football Authorities do not believe that the
 Foc^mII Spectators Bill is the answer to the problems within the game of Soccer or indeed
 wil^^ielp in conquering the terrible problems of lawlessness within our community. If the
 bill has to be implemented then of course the Football Authorities will leave no stone
 unturned to try to make the scheme work. However part of the legislation of the Football
 Spectators Bill is the setting up of the Football Licensing Authority. This Authority will
 ensure that the Green Guide will have a common interpretation throughout the country, no
 longer will we have problems caused by individuals      wg it upon themselves to have the
 gift of Poetic Licence when looking at the recommendation of 54 spectators per 10 sa. metres
The constitution of the Football Licensing Authority has not as yet been finalised but the
Football world looks favourably on an over riding body to co-ordinate the practical
interpretation of the Green Guide by the independant local licensing authorities, indee4
    the root cause of the majority of the problems.at the stadiums is the lack of overall
 supervision.   As a Club Chairman I am involved on a pre-match basis in the discussions with
the Police and with the County authorities as and when required which is generally quite
frequent. I find that the appraisal of Sports Grounds provides me, a layman, with the
detailed facts that are of paramount importance when ma>i ng the decisions necessary in
running a football stadium.
                In the perfect world the Clubs would all be involved in moving to the outskirts
of their towns or cities and constructing modern all seater stadiums, similar to the exercise
carried out by Scunthorpe. But we are now experiencing difficulties at both Government and
Local Authority level in obtaining the necessary permission from the planning authorities
to move ahead with their plans. Several Clubs are in a pesiiisA     to generate the bulk of
the necessary finance from selling their present stadium having already located new acceptable
sites for their proposed new stadiums. Several Clubs,         . Southend Ini ted, Jburnemouth,
3ristol Hovers, Shrewsbury Town, Huddersfield Town, Oxford Inited, Mansfield Town to name
a few axe at present experiencing these problems. If we axe to respond to Government requests
then we are entitled to full co-operation from the powers that be, we must never forget that
the ultimate in crowd safety is to play in a new purpose built stadium with danger areas down
to a minimum, _
                I am more than delighted to welcome the document that is being presented to-day
for everyone within the game must do all in their power to look to the simplification of
regulations and the tightening up of ambiguous instructions. We must never forget that the
next disaster is just around the comer. We cannot avoid disasters but we ran do all in our
power to legislate against the obvious- shortcomings.
                My roll in to-days proceedings is simply to outline the problems that the
Chairman, Directors and managers of Sports Clubs encounter in to-days sporting world and
the problems I see as the maj>r stumbling blocks. I look forward to the presentations of
the professionals during the cours^kof the seminar and know full well that at the end of to-day
ay knowledge will be increa,sejj?
                                           Thank you for your attention.




                                                              Heatnrow Penta Hotel Ltd.. Bath Road. Hounslow. Middlesex TW6 2AQ
                                                                   Teleonone: 01-897 6363 Telex: 934660 Facsimile: 01-897 m 3
                                                                             Registered No 663141 England & Wales.
   03T/F - B RT                                  Registered Office Suite GO 39. Heainrow Penta Hotel. Bath Road, Hounslow Middlesex TW6 2AQ
