Lynne Jones encloses a letter from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group.

A copy of Mr Hammond’s letter has been sent to all Members of Parliament, and this is one of
a number of resulting Minister’s Cases.

                            ? To P/S of M of S as within




                                                               l/Lyuyj/
                                                               MWard
                                                               27 January 1997
                                                     H   ome   O   ffice
                      The Rt Hon David Maclean MP   Q UEEN ANNE’S GATE


                                                    w     m    m      ir



Our Ref:  PW/97 5/2180/14
          PO 1295/97
Your Ref: MIN/C0743/CH




Thank you for your letter of 15 January, to Michael Howard,
enclosing one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken
to consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
Hillsborough, and the representations which have been made to himby
the bereaved families and by others.   He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                            DAVID MACLEAN

Dr Lynne Jones MP
                                                     H   ome   O   ffice
                      The Rt Hon David Maclean MP   Q U EEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                    LON DO N SW IH 9AT




Our Ref:  PW/97 5/2180/14
          PO 1295/97
Your Ref: MIN/C0743/CH




Thank you for your letter of 15 January, to Michael Howard,
enclosing one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken
to consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
Hillsborough, and the representations which have been made to himby
the bereaved families and by others.   He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                            DAVID MACLEAN

Dr Lynne Jones MP
                      Divisional file Refurencofu ) 1^ 1 S |218C| / I f
                                                        '




HOME OFFICE
MINISTERS CASE DRAFT REPLY

Addressee!
 Name                        j 0^.<us N\f
 Address                     Reference
 Tick on* t a x
       \2 i       House of Commons
        □         House of Lords
       □          Other - Insert full postal address




Letter drafted for Signature by

     lb             V(Y<x<Xju^ __________       ( Name of Signatory.

Enclosures]




Copies to be sent To]




                                       ( Full oddresses. If nccessory
Thank you for your letter of 15 January^addfessed to Michael Howard, enclosing one from
Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.


As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken to consider carefully
the points which were made in the programme Hillsborough, and the representations which
have been made to him by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would need to be convinced that it
would be in the public interest to do so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that terrible day.


In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether there is any new evidence;
he will also consider whether that evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been
put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the
verdict of the jury would have been different


The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the Home Secretary with a
detailed report of all the points raised by the programme. The Home Secretary has promised
that he will reach a decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been able to
consider all the issues.
                            From: Dr Lynne Jones, M.P.
                   Labour Member of Parliament for Birmingham Selly Oak


                                                                             House o f Commons
                                                                             London SW1A OAA
                                                                             Tel: 0171-219 3000
The Rt Hon Michael Howard QC MP                                              Tel: 0121-486 2808
Home Office                                                                  Fax: 0121-486 3013
50 Queen Anne's Gate                                                         Fax: 0171-219 3870
London SW1H 9AT

Our Ref:     MIN/C0743/CH
                                                                                ^          ,

Date:        15 January 1997
                                                                                0




                                                                   v*>7 If




I should be grateful if you will give the enclosed communication from the Hillsborough
Family Support Group your attention and send me a reply which I can forward to them.
I would like to add my personal call for a fresh inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster,
as I believe that it would serve two purposes. Firstly, it would allow the families of
victims to finally lay their loved ones to rest, and, secondly, it is essential that the
mistakes that were made at that game are identified and guidelines laid down for their
avoidance.


Yours sincerely,




       NE JONES MP


Enc.




                             Please quote reference in all correspondence
   sLfppO^                                                                  £up?0&
                          Hillsborough Family Support Group

All Members of Parliament.


                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - JUSTICE CAMPAIGN


Dr Lynn Jones M.P                                           fiECEIVED 13

I am writing to ask for your support for the campaign mounted by
the Hillsborough Family Support Group for the justice and
accountability which we believe has so far been denied to us by
the complete failure of the judicial system in the aftermath of
the Hillsborough Disaster.

You should be aware that following the broadcast on Independent
Television on December 5th 1996 of the drama/documentary
"Hillsborough", the Home Secretary is presently considering
whether, on the basis of the new and unused evidence which
emerged from the programme, there are grounds for him to order a
fresh Inquiry into the Disaster. Mr Howard in fact spoke
personally in the House of Commons adjournment debate which was
held about Hillsborough on 17th December, 1996 and he later met
privately with the many family members who had travelled to
London to be present at the debate.

The Hillsborough Family Support Group is hopeful that the Home
secretary will order a fresh inquiry, particularly in the light
not only of the new evidence but also of overwhelming public
support we have received - people from all walks of life from
right across Britain have written to us and telephoned to express
their outrage and anger at the treatment of bereaved families.
However, regardless of the decision of Mr Howard, the families
have also separately instigated the following legal actions to
take forward our quest for justice

i) a complaint to the Director of Public Prosecutions seeking a
criminal investigation into possible misconduct in the way
evidence was or was not presented to the Inquest jury. This
action is based on the evidence which has now come to light of
video- technician, Roger Houldsworth, who was not called as a
witness to either the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest and whose
existence was not known to the families until the TV programme
was made. The new evidence directly contradicts what some South
Yorkshire police officers told the jury and Taylor inquiry.

 ii) an application to the Attorney General under section 13 of
 the coroners act asking the High Court to consider quashing the
 inquest verdict and ordering a fresh inquest.

CHAIRMAN                                SECRETARY                          TREASURER

T. Hicks                                P. Hammond                         Mrs. J. Traynor
7 Moor Lane                             21 Rosemont Road                   43 Gorsefield Road
Grassington                             Liverpool                          Birkenhead
Nr. Skipton BD23 5BD                    L17 6BX                            Merseyside
Tel: 0756-752345                        Tel: 051-724 5771                  Tel: 051-652 7503
  inquest into the Disaster.) The response to the programme clearly indicates this is a
  matter of public intrest and should be dealt with accordingly.

   The Bereaved families of Hillsborough will forever be in debt to writer Jimmy McGovern
   and to Granada Television for bringing the tale of our fight for justice into homes and
   consciences of the British people. However, in some ways the story told on television
   could not truly reflect the scale of what we have been made to endure by having the
^ a b s o lu te grief of losing our loved ones compounded by what can only be described as
• t h e biggest farce and cover up in British legal history. As if this was not enough of a
   burden, the families, despite the unequivocal findings of the Taylor Inquiry, have also
   had to fight to counter a concerted and seemingly intentional campaign by certain public
   and media figures to scar the reputation and memories of our loved ones by blaming
    them, and.their fellow supporters, for causing the Disaster.

    The "Hillsborough" television programme seems at last to have washed away the
    cartload of lies about the Disaster which have stood as a barrier to the reaching of a air
    and just conclusion about the needless deaths of 96 people: On behalf of the
    Hillsborough Family Support Group I would now urge you to help us go one step further
    and establish as a matter of public record for all time the truth of what did happen on
    that dreadful day of 15th April 1989. Only if that can be done may the bereaved families
    be able to put our loved ones finally to rest.

    Yours faithfully




     Phil Hammond
     Secretary - Hillsborough Family Support Group.
