The University of Sheffield
Departm ent of Forensic Pathology                                                    The Medico-Legal Centre,
                                                                                     Watery S treet
                                                                                     Sheffield S3 7ES
Professor Alan Usher, o b   e. m b. b s   . f r c Path, o   Mj.icim et    Path)      Tel: (07 42 ) 738721




                                    HILLSBOROUGH - 15 APRIL 1989

                             PATHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF THE DISASTER



My medical qualifications are MB, BS, FRC Path, DMJ (Clin et Path).                                     I have been

in active practice in Forensic Pathology for almost thirty years and have been

Consultant Pathologist to the Home Office for South Yorkshire and the East

Midlands for twenty-five of those years.                                  During that time I have performed more

than twenty-six thousand post mortem examinations for Her Majesty's coroners and

have taken part in some seven hundred and sixty murder investigations.



I have been asked by Mr Mervyn JONES, Assistant Chief Constable of the West

Midlands Police in charge of the Hillsborough Enquiry Team, to provide a general

overview of the pathological aspects of the Hillsborough disaster in which some

ninety-five persons were killed on the afternoon of Saturday, 15 April, 1989,

during a cup semi-final match.



I took part in the investigation of the deaths myself, being present at the -

request of Her Majesty's coroner at Hillsborough Stadium on the evening of 15

April, 1989, and at the Medico-Legal Centre on Sunday, 16 April and Monday, 17

April.    I personally carried out nineteen of the ninety-five post mortems.                                    The

other examinations were carried out by teams of pathologists working five or six

at a time in the mortuary of the Sheffield Medico-Legal Centre at Watery Street

- following the transfer of the bodies from the temporary mortuary in the



                                                              -   1   -




                                                                                                \   \
r
    gymnasium of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.        Initially, I believe,

    some thirteen bodies were taken to the mortuary of the Northern General Hospital

    in Sheffield, but later they were removed from there and brought to the

    Medico-Legal Centre.       As far as I know, the only body autopsied at the Northern

    General Hospital was that of a Lee NICHOL (body No 95), aged 14 years, who

    survived, under treatment, until about 2 am on Tuesday, 18 April, and whose body

    was examined that same day by Dr Shirley HOLT, Consultant Pathologist at the

    Northern General Hospital, Herries Road, Sheffield, S5 7AU        (Tel: 0742 -

    434343).     The work at the Medico-Legal Centre was performed by five forensic

    pathologists and four clinical pathologists - all of consultant status.             They

    were:-



      Dr John CLARK     Department of Forensic Medicine, The University, Glasgow,

             G12 8QQ   Tel: 041 - 330 - 4574

             (Bodies numbered 11, 16, 19, 22, 26, 28, 36, 41, 43, 46, 53, 58, 65, 71,

             72, 79, 81, 86, 90 and 92)

      Dr Lloyd DENMARK     Department of Forensic Medicine, University of Leeds,

             Clinical Sciences Building, St James' University Hospital, Beckett Street,

             Leeds, LS9 7TF    Tel: 0532 - 431897

             (Bodies numbered 12, 21, 83 and 89)

      Professor Laurence HENRY      University of Sheffield Medical School, Department

             of Pathology, Beech Hill Road, Sheffield S10 2RX     Tel: 0742 - 766222

             (Bodies numbered 3 and 75)

      Professor J S P JONES       Department of Pathology, City Hospital, Hucknall

             Road, Nottingham, NG5 1PB     Tel: 0602 - 691169

             (Bodies numbered 8, 17, 25, 31, 35, 42, 50, 59, 68, 77, 78, 80 arid 94)

      Dr J R SH0RTLAND        University of Sheffield Medical School, Department of

             Pathology-, Beech Hill Road, Sheffield S10 2RX     Tel 0742 - 766222   "




                                               -   2   -
r
         (Bodies numbered 1, 10, 33, 56, 61, 74 and 76)

     Dr S SIVALOGANATHAN      Department of Forensic Medicine, University of Leeds,

         Clinical Sciences Building, St James' University Hospital, Beckett Street,

         Leeds, LS9 7TF      Tel: 0532 - 431897

         (Bodies numbered 5, 6, 7, 9,    34 and 54)

     Dr David SLATER      Department of Pathology, Rotherham District General

         Hospital, Moorgate Road, S60 2UD               Tel: Rotherham820000

         (Bodies numbered 14, 20, 24,    27, 29, 39, 40,         45, 47,   48, 49, 51, 55, 64,

         67, 91 and 93)

     Professor J C E UNDERWOOD      University of Sheffield Medical School,

         Department of Pathology, Beech Hill Road, Sheffield, S10 2RX                Tel: 0742 -

         766222

         (Bodies numbered 15, 38, 57, 60, 69 and 82)

     Professor Alan USHER     Sheffield University Department of Forensic Pathology,

         Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ES                Tel: 0742 -

         738721.(Bodies numbered 2, 4, 13, 18, 23, 30, 32, 37, 44, 52, 62, 63, 66,

         70, 73, 84, 85, 87 and 88).



    I can only speak in a detailed way of the nineteen examinations which I

    personally carried out.    However, having read all ninety-five post mortem

    reports and seen certain statements made by witnesses, I believe I can speak in

    a general way about the pathological conditions which proved fatal in the total

    of ninety-five cases which were examined.            The details of individual cases will

    need to be obtained from the pathologists who examined them, which is why their

    names and professional addresses, together with the body numbers, have been

    provided above.




                                            -   3   -
 Of the ninety-five dead, eighty-eight were males and seven were females, which,

 in my view, merely reflects the nature of the occasion.



 AGE

 Of the ninety-five who died, the youngest was a 10 year old boy and the eldest a

 67 year old man.

   Thirty-eight persons (approximately 40%) were under 20 years of age

   Thirty-nine persons (41%) were between 20 and 29 years of age

   Twelve persons (13%) were between 30 and 39 years of age

   Three persons (3%) were between 40 and 49 years of age

   One person (1%) was between 50 and 59 years

   Two persons (2%) were between 60 and 69 years old.

   Seventy-seven of the ninety-five (81%) dead were below 30 years of age.

 Again, I imagine these figures probably reflect the composition of the average

 soccer crowd.



 CAUSE OF DEATH

 In virtually every case, the cause of death was basically compression of the

 chest wall - against the bodies of the persons immediately around the deceased

 or against fixed structures such as the walls of the stadium and the crash

 barriers.   In the vast majority of the cases, this pressure caused the condition

 of traumatic or crush asphyxia - the two terms are synonymous.



 Asphyxia pathologically means some mechanical obstruction tt> norma:! breathingr

 That obstruction may be caused in a variety of ways - by a hand across the nose

 and mouth (suffocation), by a ligature tightened around the neck

• (strangulation), by a bolus of food which sticks in the airways (choking), or by
a strong pressure upon the chest wall so that it becomes fixed and cannot move

in and out to enable the person to draw breath.         Whatever the impedance to

respiration, the result is similar.       The oxygen in the air cannot be drawn into

the lungs and passed into the blood to be transported to the body tissues which

require it for their normal function.         The deoxygenated blood in the tissues

turns a dark colour, giving the victim's complexion a bluish or cyanotic hue.

The heart begins to fail and the walls of the smallest vessels (capillaries)

which are under pressure and themselves starved of oxygen, give way and allow

spurts of red cells to pass into the surrounding tissues where they show as tiny

pin-point haemorrhages (petechiae) in the loose skin around the eyes, on the

forehead and behind the ears as well as on many of the internal organs.         Thus, a

somewhat bloatd cyanotic appearance with external and internal petechiae arises.

If the impediment to breathing is not removed in some four to six minutes -
                                                            «


perhaps less if the victim is struggling and thus using up oxygen at a higher

rate - then the brain cells cease to function, unconsciousness supervenes and

ultimately the vital centres in the hind brain are damaged and die and then life

is no longer possible.



Appearances such as these were seen in almost every person who died at

Hillsborough, and in all but nine cases death was attributed solely to traumatic

(or crush) asphyxia.     In one case (No 76) the force compressing the chest was

(perhaps momentarily) so great that the rear surface of the breast bone almost

touched the anterior surface of the spine, nipping and splitting the aorta

between them so that the man bled to death internally before he could be

asphyxiated.   In only eight other cases (Nos 3, 27, 29, 48, 69, 91, 93 and 95)

were factors other than traumatic asphyxia thought to have even contributed to

the death, and in six of these eight, the contributory factor arose out of

trauma to the chest, neck or head.    In the remaining two cases (3 and 69) only,




                                      -   5   -
truly natural disease was believed to be a significant contributory factor in

the death.



INHALATION OF VOMIT

In any form of asphyxia vomiting may occur before death and because of

unconsciousness and the lack of the protective reflex mechanism, vomitus may be

aspirated into the lungs, greatly increasing the likelihood of death.     Most

pathologists regard this vomiting as merely a facet of death from asphyxia and

though recording it in their post mortem reports,    do not dignify it with a

separate heading in the cause of death. This is     my view and the one I have

adopted in compiling the simple statistics for this report.     It has, however, to

be said that for purely mechanical and obvious reasons, vomiting is more likely

to occur if the stomach is distended with food and/or drink and is subjected to

hard external mechanical compression.     Vomiting is also more likely to occur in

those persons intoxicated with alcohol.



OTHER INJURIES

In eighteen cases bones were broken - mostly ribs (thirteen cases), but in

addition the bones and/or cartilages of the larynx (voice box) were fractured in

three cases (47, 51 and 81) - perhaps suggesting that the throat of these

persons had been trodden on accidentally ie thatthey were on the ground when

they sustained that injury.



In only two cases were long bones fractured.     In one of these cases (18), both

bones in a woman's forearm were broken and in one (11) a young boy's femur was

broken.   Both injuries could have occurred as the result of accidental

trampling.
In two cases impacts to the chest wall were so severe as to cause extensive

bruising to the underlying lungs, affecting the victim's ability to breathe and

in one of these the ribs were actually fractured and their ends tore the

underlying lung allowing air to escape from the lung into the chest

(pneumothorax) and seriously adversely affect the victim's breathing.



In one case damage to the nose with subsequent bleeding allowed the inhalation

of blood into the lungs and this was thought to be a significant, factor in the

death.



As one would perhaps have suspected, a~very high proportion of these bodies bore

superficial grazes and scratches - evidence of blunt impact against all manner

of solid objects such as walls, concrete flooring, barriers and fences. These

injuries are too numerous to be described or interpreted here and details should

be obtained in each individual case from the pathologist who actually performed

the post mortem (see above).



ALCOHOL

In discussing this matter, my impression is that the dead came mostly from the

front (ie near to the pitch) areas of the Leppings Lane end, from amongst

persons who had arrived early in order to get a good view and thus their blood

alcohols are not necessarily an indication of the alcoholic status of those who

arrived later and were pushing to get in at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.



No blood was taken from the victim who died last ie no 95, because of the

interval of time which had passed between the accident and his death.

No   al co h ol - 'wa-s-found-   in the- b o d ies-o f-an y o f th e seven 'fem alB ^n.ctim sv            ~" ~

-Of--the-' .cemaiitwg -’esfcghrfey*?seven •tnen-'j^ttct.^'boys, f i f t y - o n e 5 8 % i werevnshown-- to •have’?’



                                                     -   7   -
nor more than 10 mg% in their blood, which is negligible, but fifteen had more

than 80 mg% in their blood, which means they could not legally have driven a

car, and six had upwards of 120 mg% in their blood.     Six youths below the age of

18, who were not legally allowed to drink, had taken drink, of which group one

boy, aged 17 years, had a blood alcohol of 141 mg%, whilst a 15 year old had a

blood alcohol of 56 mg%.



EYE HAEMORRHAGES

I have been asked to comment on the proposition that a distinction can be made

in this case between those persons who died from traumatic asphyxia standing up

in the crowd and those dying from the same cause lying down.     The latter, it is

said, will have petechial haemorrhages in their eyes whilst the former will not.

I have seen a very large number of cases of traumatic asphyxia and I am certain

that no such distinction can be made - both groups will in all probability have

petechial haemorrhages in their eyes.



GENERAL COMMENT

The Hillsborough disaster occurred between 3 pm and 3.30 pm on Saturday, 15

April, 1989.    By 2 pm on Monday, 17 April, ie less than forty-eight hours later,

all ninety-four of the victims who were then dead had been examined post mortem

and had a blood sample taken for analysis, so that their bodies were ready for

release to relatives.     I believe that several factors were responsible for this

feat:-



  1.   The excellence of Her Majesty's Coroner's arrangements and organisation.

  2.     The immediateavailability of the Football Club's gymnasium, sited just a

         few yards from the pitch.   This huge room was easily compartmentalised

         into three large chambers, each invisible from the others.   One was used



                                         -   8   -
      as a mortuary for temporary body storage, one as a makeshift canteen and

      the third as a reception area for relatives where they were greeted and

      assisted by padres of various denominations, social workers and

      ancillaries.

3.    The fact that the victims' bodies were not fragmented nor greatly

      disfigured as might have happened in an explosion or an aircraft crash.

      This meant that the initial identification was possible from polaroid

      photographs taken by the police, which made the identification process

      rapid and meant that relatives were generally required to view only one

      body and were spared the harrowing task of entering the main mortuary and

      searching for their dead.

4.    The use of the facilities available at the Sheffield Medico-Legal Centre -

      the only building of its kind in the United Kingdom.         This meant that in
                                                                              *
      one day it was possible for up to six teams of pathologists and their

      assistants to work simultaneously in excellent conditions with modern

      equipment so that they were able to perform seventy autopsies on Sunday

      alone.   This building was designed with an emergency facility to deal with

      disaster involving up to one hundred bodies, and when the disaster

      arrived, the building worked well.          Sheffield City Council are to be

      congratulated on their provision of such a building.




     Professor and Head of Depaptfn^nt
     Consultant Pathologis K^othe Home Office




                                      -   9   -
