r                                f,   H   •       4**   K   ■



                                 -l   .

                                                   cc       Mr
                                                            Mr
                                                                 Turney
                                                                 ^   U J . 1 1 C J


                                                                 Addison ✓
                                                                                     y
                                                                                         ©
                                                            Mr   Watts
                                                            Mr   Archer


    Mr Whalley



    POLICE INVESTIGATION INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

    This note is simply to record, as copy recipients will already
    know, that Mr Hillier the Assistant Chief Constable of the West
    Midlands Police telephoned on Thursday 20 April to ask whether
    the West Midlands Police could look to the Home Office to cover
    their costs arising from the investigation into the Hillsborough
    incident.

    2.  Mr Hillier said that the West Midlands Police were proposing
    to deploy several hundred men and to rent offices in Sheffield
    and possibly Merseyside, though on Merseyside they may use
    accommodation provided by the Merseyside Police.     There was a
    strong possibility that the total cost of the investigation could
    be about £1 million.

    3.   Mr Turney tells me that this is something which you are
    looking into, and I have told Mr Hillier that that is the case.
    I have also told him that the position is complicated because the
    investigation is being conducted, as I understand it, for 3
    separate purposes:   to service the tribunal, in response to the
    South Yorkshire Chief Constable's request for assistance, and to
    service the inquest.    He should therefore not expect a quick
    reply.

    4.   I also explained to him your responsibilities and those of
    Mr Watts   and  suggested   that   any further enquiries    about
    Hillsborough should be addressed to you or him as appropriate.




                                              P E BOLTON
                                              G2 Division

    21 April 1989
