22-11.AH                                         cc     Mr Mennell
                                                        Miss Pugh




Mr Goddard



HILLSBOROUGH: MEETING WITH LORD FERRERS

We received this morning the attached papers from Mrs Moody of
F2 Division seeking a contribution to a response to a letter to
the Home Secretary       from George Howarth,         the MP     for Knowsley
North.   I also happened to answer your telephone and took a call
from Mrs Moody who was        anxious that      F8    be represented      at a
meeting to discuss the letter from Mr Howarth which Lord Ferrers
has called for 11.3 0 on Wednesday 13 November (when I shall be
at Heathrow).


2.   You will see that Mrs Moody has asked for a contribution to
tack on to the end of the draft which she has already produced.
I have asked Miss Pugh to consider what we might usefully offer.
I have to say, though, that the note struck by Mrs Moody's draft
seems to me somewhat off-key.            However valid the points          she
makes,   they    could   perhaps   be   put   forward   in   a   rather   more
sympathetic way given the very real and understandable concerns
which Mr Howarth is expressing.


3.   As to the meeting, I think it would be as well if you were
to attend.      There is a rather uncomfortable history of our being
asked to accept hot potatoes which their rightful owners in this
part of F2 find somewhat indigestible.


4.   I have advised Private Office that you (or, in your absence,
Mr Mennell) will attend.      I have also suggested that Mrs Harrison,
(E Division) be invited given the criticism of the coroner's
inquest sometimes raised by the Hillsborough families, as well
perhaps as someone from G2 given their interest in the safety
aspects of the Taylor Report.


5.      Mrs Moody would like to speak to you on the telephone before
10 . 0 0 .




                             KEIR HOPLEY
                                                    U NOV 91
                                                     I I2-


From:         Mrs G I Moody            c:   HMCIC
              F2 Division
              273 2621
              8 November 1991




Mr Goddard
F8 Division


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



Mr Pickering copied to you the attached letter from Mr George
Howarth MP on this subject.     Although ostensibly on the
subject of the retirement of Chief Superintendent
Duckinfield - a matter which I have covered in the attached
draft - the meat of the letter seems tq-'-lie in the reque§3^in
the last paragraph that the role of the Seut&^Lancashire
Police be properly investigated.     I would imagTTns-thai- -t-he^
•
answer to this must lie ir>. a reference to the Taylor enquiry,
but that was not commissioned by this division and I would
welcome material suitable for inclusion in the letter covering
these points.




                            MRS G I MOODY




GIM-042.GIM
Thank you for your letter of 5 November addressed to the Home

Secretary about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.



As you know, our sympathies are very much with all those who

were in any way caught up in this tragedy, but the way in

which your letter is written makes me think that you must be

under some misapprehension as to the scope and purpose of

police disciplinary hearings.   Such a hearing is held in

private and is concerned only with whether the officer

concerned may have failed to conform to police discipline.

It would not therefore ir any way contribute to public

knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do more

than receive and consider evidence already known as to the

propriety of Mr Duckinfield's conduct.   Moreover the most

serious punishment which the disciplinary tribunal would have

been able to impose, had Mr Duckinfield been found guilty,

would have been dismissal or requirement to resign.      Mr

Duckinfield's resignation means that this end is already

achieved.



It would not be proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr

Duckinfield's case since the Home Secretary is the appellate

authority in police disciplinary cases,but I can and should

say that it needs too to be remembered that it is by no means

certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have £.ound Mr

Duckinfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred


GIM-042.GIM
against him.   If, as seems to be the case, he is a sick man

it would not be right to refuse him retirement on medical

grounds in order to hear charges which may or may not be

proved and whose most serious result could only be that he

leave the service he has already asked to leave voluntarily.

This, however, like the other matters raised in your letter,

is a matter for the South Lancashire Police Force and I

suggest that your concerns might best be discussed with the

Chief Constable of that force.



Having said this, I find it difficult to see what further

areas can usefully be explored when the Taylor enquiry...




GIM-042.GIM
                           vjticZy     wA                    » * I
                                     f   r*     J j/t        fr/luMA


                           * * ^.rrifi
                  HOUSE OF C O M M d N S ff/.LuA W * " * ^
                       LONDON   SW1A OAA
                                                             A nt

                                                             M m iU - l


  5th Noveinber 1991


 Rt Hon Kenneth Baker M.P.
 Home Secretary
 50 Gueen Anne's Gate
 London SWIH 9AT


 Dear Home Secretary

 RE:- HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


  1 ...am writing to protest at the way in which South
^Lancashire^'Police have effectively side-stepped the
  p^Sjrosed'disciplinary investigation into Chief
  Superintendent Duckenfield for his part in the
  Hillsborough tragedy.

 As you are aware, the policing of the Hillsborough
 tragedy has consistently been a subject of criticism,
 not least in the Taylor report. However, to date, no
 detailed investigation around the responsibilities of
 those concerned has yet been undertaken or published.
 This means, in effect, that specific responsibility
 for certain decisions will never, unless you
 intervene, be fully pinned down.

 Let me say that I am not seeking to hound Chief
 Superintendent Duckenfield, or question the fact that
 he was allowed to take early retirement on the basis
 of his ill-health, which, I understand, has been the
 subject of a proper medical examination. However,
 if the families of those sadly killed at that event,
 or, indeed, any of the survivors, are to be'satisfied
 that the justice they were promised by the then Prime
 Minister has been obtained, then surely the policing
 of the event, irrespective of the medical circumstances
 of anybody at this time, must be subject to a detailed
 investigation. Whether this is achieved by a
 disciplinary process or some other means, does not, it
 seems to me, really matter.


                                              (continued).
                           -   2   -



Having met a large group of the families, I can assure
you that they are far from happy at the whole process
which has so far taken place up to and including the
Coronor's Inquest and this latest decision, which
incidentally they predicted several weeks ago to me and
my colleague, Peter Kilfoyle, only adds to their sense
of frustration and injustice.

I have written separately to the Attorney General, arising
out of a letter from the Prime Minister's office to one of
the families and hope to meet him in the near future.
However, I do believe it is within your powers to-~JLoo^\
very closely at the implications of South^Lancashire'
Police decision to effectively evade an investigation into
the role of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

Although I have copied this letter quite widely to a
number of interested parties, it has not been written with
a view to publication.

There is, however, a very serious issue at stake here,
namely the fact that at the time of the Hillsborough tragedy,
the families were given very clear assurances by not least
a person than the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, that
everything would be fully investigated and that no stone
would be left unturned.

Vvhilst I realise that it might be convenient to leave this
matter as it stands, I am painfully aware that all of these
people are left feeling that every promise they were made
has not been honoured, either in the spirit or the letter.

It is in this part that I seek your intervention in finding
some way—of properly investigating in detail the role of
South(Lancashire Police in general and the role of the
officers' responsible specifically, in the policing of
that day of that events

Yours sincerely



            rth M.P.


c.c. Mr   Peter Joynes
     Mr   P Hammond, Hillsborough Family Support Group
     Mr   Peter Kilfoyle M.P.
     Mr   Eddie O'Hara M.P.
     Mr   Eddie Loyden M.P.
     Mr   Bob Parry M.P.                         '
     Hr   Bob Wareing M.P.
     Mr   Frank Field M.P.
     Mr   Joe Benton M.P.
     Mr   John Evans M.P.
     Mr   Gerry Bermingham M.P.
                          November 1991




HTT.-LSBORQHGH DISASTER

Thank you for your letter of 4 November to
the Home Secretary.
Enquiries our being made and a substantive
reply will be sent to you in due course.




          Assistant Private Secretary




 George Howarth Esq MP
