                                                         WP89(M)2

TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY

NOTE OF A MEETING HELD IN THE OLD COMMITTEE ROOM, REGISTRAR'S
OFFICE, UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE ON THURSDAY 2 NOVEMBER
AT 11am


Present:   Professor L Maunder        (Chairman)
           Mr N Bush
           Dr C Nicholson
           Mr B Stickley
           Mr M Overton
           Mr J Sweet                 (Secretary)


                                                      Action


Professor Maunder welcomed Mr Overton who was
standing in for Mr Carter. Apologies for absence
had been received from Mr Dickson.


AGENDA ITEM 1
Minutes of Previous Meeting


2.   The minutes of the previous meeting were
agreed.


AGENDA ITEM 2
Report on Visit to Nimes


3.   Professor Maunder summarised the visit to
Nimes undertaken by Lord Justice Taylor, Mr B
Johnson, Professor Maunder, Bob Whalley and
Jonathan Sweet on 20/21 October.     Some useful
information had been obtained, including a better
understanding of the close working relationship
which existed between the club and the local
authority. The Mayor of Nimes, Mr Bousquet, was
also President of Nimes Olympique, and the multi­
millionaire owner of a very large clothing company.
The local authority had contributed some 16m Francs
of the 17m Francs which the stadium cost to build
and were closely involved in the running of the
site, which was regarded as a multi-purpose
facility intended to be in full-time use.   The
design incorporated offices as well as sports
halls, and seemed to have attracted reasonable
public support.   It was recognised in discussion
that European local authorities were far more
likely to be the owners of sites and to have a more
"hands-on" approach to the running of stadia than
their counterparts in this country.


4.   Detailed consideration was given to the
mechanism of the fencing at Nimes, which had been
installed and designed after the stadium itself,
apparently to comply with UEFA requirements. The
mechanism was essentially a simple one, relying on
gravity to pivot each gate once the first had been
released by an electro-magnetic switch. It took
approximately 40 seconds for a 20 gate section to
open, although the on site demonstration appeared
to rely to some extent on physical assistance.      The
test loads required to satisfy the French football
authorities appeared substantially lower than those
laid down in the Green Guide (1.68 kN per metre as
opposed to 6 kN per metre) and there was concern
about the dangers of tripping should spectators be
disgorged suddenly onto the pitch.


5.   The Inquiry team had doubts both about the
long term effects of wear and friction on the gate
hinges, and, more generally, about the
transferability of the scheme to stadia in the UK.
At Nimes the fencing worked because space was
available between the fencing and the crowd, and
because it had not been tested by large crowds
pressed against it.
                                                       Action


The situation would be very different at older,
cramped stadia here. The Working Party took note
of the Inquiry team's views.


AGENDA ITEM 3
Advice on Future Visits


6.   The Chairman sought Working Party guidance on
the issues to be raised on future visits abroad to
Utrecht, and Rome/Milan.   Concern was expressed
that visits both here and abroad had so far
concentrated on the larger clubs with newer stadia;
where possible the Inquiry team should also visit
3rd and 4th Division clubs and older stadia.     It    Professor
was agreed that this view be passed on to the          Maunder/
Inquiry team.                                          Mr Sweet

7.   After detailed discussion, the following
topics were noted as being of particular interest
on visits:


     i.    general location and approach routes;


     ii.   terms of the Safety Certificate,
           including in particular capacity and exit
           times;


     iii. condition of the barriers - signs of
           corrosion, loose bolts etc;


     iv.   perimeter fencing;   and


     v.    the extent to which clubs abroad met the
            terms of our Green Guide. Working Party
           members were aware, for example, that
           Belgium had translated the Green Guide:
           had other countries done the same?
                                                       Action


8.    It was agreed that any Working Party             Mr Bush
information on sites to be visited would be
forwarded to the Secretary as soon as possible.

AGENDA ITEM 4
Review of Structures


9.    Dr Nicholson apologised for Mr Dickson's
absence, but explained that the paper he was
tabling was a joint document, resulting from their
discussions together. It was an attempt not so
much to suggest new ideas to be included, but to
comment generally on current wording.


10.   Chapter 4 of the Green Guide (on Inspection
and Testing) was recognised as needing further
elaboration. It consisted currently of two pages
only and had a number of weaknesses. The Chapter
would need to emphasise that details of the types
of testing/methodology should also be submitted to
the local authority, should perhaps also emphasise
that inspection was not a rubber-stamping exercise,
and should generally be more specific about setting
down standards on matters such as exit signs and
intervals between testing.   The Working Party noted
that differences in the size of a club and ground,
would not reduce the need for testing, but might
reduce the time required to carry out such tests.
                                                         v

11.   Paragraph 38 raised the whole principle of
barrier testing.   There was an argument that more
damage was done to a barrier by the actual testing
process than would otherwise occur by natural
corrosion, and that it was often possible to
condemn a barrier as unsatisfactory by visual
inspection long before it would fail under a
mechanical test. If a barrier looked unfit, but
nonetheless met the formal test-loads, it should be
kept under review and re-tested.    The dichotomy
between the visual and mechanical approaches
suggested either that the visual criteria were too
hard, or that the mechanical test was deficient.


12.   In addition, there was the particular question
of whether new barriers required testing.     In
discussion, comparison was drawn with i) the
procedure for assessing aircraft fatigue and ii)
with more general building regulations approaches.
It was accepted that the Inquiry would want a
Working Party view on how far uniformity of
approach should be enforced and by what methods.
It was agreed that the building regulations
approach offered a suitable framework;    the Green
Guide would indicate preferred criteria, but
departures from those criteria could be authorised
specifically by the local authority with an
explanation of the rationale underlying such
departure. The onus would therefore be on the
individual seeking the variation to justify it in
detail, and there should be a requirement that all
supporting documentation be available.


Barriers


13.   It was also important to reach agreement on
the actual design of barriers, and their terrace
layout.    There was evidence that the 'A' frame
design resulted in people toppling over the support
stanchion if they were subject of lateral pressure
from the crowd.    Should the use of clips, which hid
corrosion, also be prohibited?     The Working Party
agreed to give further thought to such issues and
to whether the Guide would include a separate
Chapter on corrosion.


Records


14.     Paragraph 43 of the Green Guide referred to
the keeping of records but needed elaboration.
Should all such records be kept centrally by a
clearing house, thereby enabling the speedy
dissemination of information to other clubs, and
should such a clearing house be under the auspices
of the FA, the local authority, or perhaps the
Football Licensing Authority?     Mr Bush felt that,
under existing financial arrangements, local
authorities would be unwilling to take on such
work.     Currently they received no income from their
monitoring work, and very little from the issuing
of Safety Certificates.     Without some charging
mechanism, he doubted whether they would be
persuaded to do additional work.     If the work was,
however, undertaken by the Football Licensing
Authority, there was doubt as to how the position
of non-football grounds be dealt with.     It was
agreed, after detailed discussion, that the Working
Party recommend to the Inquiry a clearing house
forum, leaving the precise nature of thebody to be
established by the Inquiry.


Chapter 9 - Crush Barriers and Handrails


15.     It was accepted that the introductory section
needed wholesale re-drafting to provide more
detailed guidance on materials, corrosion
resistance and corrosion traps, lateral movements
                                                        Action


and the identification of the areas of likely
corrosion.     It was agreed that such guidance did
not need to provide specific figures, but should
identify the areas, leaving the Inquiry to specify      Dr
exact terms.    Further advice would be forthcoming.    Nicholson


16.   It was essential to remember, both in relation
to barriers and more generally, that the Guide
applied equally to small clubs as it did to large.
Although lax interpretation of the Guide should not
be tolerated, there might be occasions when small
clubs might prefer, for example, to reduce terrace
capacity rather than condemn barriers which
although marginally outside existing standards
would nonetheless never be tested by large crowds.
There was an argument for allowing a certain
density in ideal conditions (eg a maximum of 54
persons per 10 sq metres) but for setting a greatly
reduced figure (eg    20 per 10 sq metres) if those
ideal conditions were departed from.    An element of
discretion would be removed, to be replaced by an
automatic two-tier standard.


17.   It was agreed that greater cross-referencing
was needed between the sections of the Guides which
had, especially following revision after the
Bradford disaster, become rather disjointed.


18.   Consideration was given to the possible need
for a revision of barrier height, in the light of
Dr Nicholson's understanding that both the French
and German authorities stipulated a higher figure.
Nonetheless, in view of the original research
carried out in formulating the figure for optimum
height, it was accepted that 1.1m should remain.
It was agreed, however, that it would be helpful if
the Green Guide were to incorporate a diagram
indicating the point on the barrier from which
measurement was to be taken.


Spacing of Crush Barriers


19.   Detailed consideration was given to the
wording of paragraphs 114 and 115 of the Guide, and
it was accepted that the figure of 60° quoted in
paragraph 114 was somewhat arbitrary, but was
designed to guard against undue lateral sway.    The
figure remained acceptable.


20. After discussion, it was agreed to recommend
the removal of the reference to "Other areas" in
Table 1 of Chapter 9, since for football, it was,
in practice, difficult to distinguish "peak" from
"non-peak" areas.   At a big match, all areas were
"peak" areas.


21.   It was agreed. however, to retain the
distinction in Table 1 between "A" and "B",
although these figures were, in turn, to be related
to capacity and the two-tier process outlined above
(paragraph 16).


22.   Table 2 in Chapter 9 was given careful
consideration. It was agreed that more consistent
labelling should be adopted. The distinction
between "force" and "load" was wholly artificial
and merely caused confusion.   The differential of
20% between the design load and the test load was
considered acceptable, as was the safety factor of
2 referred to in paragraph 119.     It was agreed to
round up figures to one decimal place, using the
metric figure as the primary one.
                                                        Action


Chapter 15 - Pitch Perimeter Fence/Wall


23.   The role of the perimeter fence was examined
in some detail. At Hillsborough, individuals were
being crushed at head height, which was clearly
unacceptable. Such a fence could not be regarded
as a crush barrier, and where it existed,
consideration would need to be given to
construction of a proper crush barrier attached to
the fence. Thought ought alternatively to be given
to the possible need for a sterile area, or a
walkway controlled by police/stewards. There were
obvious difficulties in converting existing
facilities some of which, like those at Newcastle
United, were positively dangerous.   Nevertheless,
the experience at Liverpool and Everton, where
safety corridors had been introduced, showed that
it was possible to do so. There was also,
following Hillsborough, greater experience of
working without perimeter fencing at all, and this
was an aspect which needed further examination. If      Working
fences were required, as they might be under UEFA       Party
regulations, they should be of a uniform design.        Members


24.   it was agreed that where perimeter gates or
gaps existed, they should be a minimum of 1.1 metre
wide or not less than the width of the connecting
gangway whichever was the larger.    Where exits onto
the pitch did exist, they should link direct to
radial gangways to facilitate speedy evacuation.
The spacing of such exits should take into account
the emergency evacuation times.
                                                       Action


Annex C


25.   This was an area needing careful scrutiny.
The loading in paragraph 1 had been derived from
Home Office research in 1973, and was deemed still
to be acceptable.   Different equipment was employed
by different engineers to apply the test, and Dr
Nicholson favoured the four-pronged implement used
by Dr Eastwood at Hillsborough. It was accepted,
however, that other systems might be equally as
suitable, and the suggestion that diagrams of the      Working
type of equipment should be included was reserved      Party
for further discussion.                                Members


26.   Consideration was given to the best method of
preventing deficient testing, as had occurred at
Hillsborough.   It was accepted that at least 2
"bays" should be tested at a time, but that the
figure of 10 equal increments in paragraph 3 of
Annex C was unnecessary;   four would probably
suffice.   Thought should be given to the creation
of a formula describing the worst-loading scenario,
so that the local engineer could devise an
alternative method provided it met those minimum
criteria and also satisfied the local authority.
Any test proposal would have to be authenticated
and agreed by the authority.


27.   Although it was accepted that recovery
remained the best (and only practical) measurement,
it was felt essential that misinterpretation such
as that which had occurred at Hillsborough had to
be avoided. Recovery of 75% was adjudged
satisfactory but it was agreed that the Annex
should recommend measurement not just of the level
of deformation but more specifically of where that
deformation occurred.   If the distribution of load
was not uniform , it should be such as to stress
the structure at highly stressed points at least as
severely as a uniformly distributed load.
Measurement of all significant deflections of the
barrier under test should be taken and recorded so
as to enable a satisfactory assessment of
structural performance overall to be made. Subject
to any views which Mr Dickson might have on behalf
of the Institution of Structural Engineers, it was
agreed that if a barrier failed the first test, it
should be deemed to fail totally, unless a valid
reason for this failure could be identified and
corrected.


28.   Dr Nicholson felt that specific advice was
needed in paragraph 6 of Annex C about corrosion.
It was agreed that where a barrier passed the
mechanical test, yet visual inspection showed
deficiencies, the engineer should be able to test
again at more frequent intervals.


AGENDA ITEM 5
Review of Flows


29.   Mr Bush outlined his paper, explaining that
Chapter 5 of the Green Guide on ingress needed
substantial expansion, since it ought to reflect
not only the position inside the ground, but also
that obtaining outside eg the transport patterns.
The Working Party accepted that it need not be
prescriptive in tone, but should rather draw
attention to all of the factors, both inside and
outside the ground affecting ingress.
                                                       Action



30. It was agreed that paragraph 44 of Chapter 5
needed expansion so as to refer specifically to:


      i)    positive counting and recording of those
            passing through, with a warning to
            turnstile operators of the need to close
            when capacity about to be reached;


      ii)   the exclusivity of turnstiles to one
            enclosure; and


      iii) very clear signposting.   "Very clear"
            might be explained as "signposting such
            that a spectator new to the ground could
            find his way quickly and safely to his
            seat/terrace".


31.   Further thought needed to be given to the need
to draw together in a single chapter all the tests
and inspections to be done in the interests of
safety and to specify the relevant timescales
involved. As an example of the type of document,
Mr Bush agreed to circulate copies of one of his       Mr Bush
club's Safety Certificates which already
incorporate this.


32.   It was felt that there might be merit in
distinguishing between pre-match, routine
maintenance, and annual Safety Certificate tests,
and the Working Party therefore agreed to give         Working
further thought to the format such classification      Party
might take.                                            Members
33.    It was also agreed that Mr Bush would minute
Lord Justice Taylor separately on his views for i)
special certification when two away clubs were
playing at a ground and ii) a possible provision
for review of the certificate on occasions when
attendance was likely to be eg 50% above normal
capacity.


AGENDA ITEM 9
Date and Place of Next Meeting


34.   In view of the amount of work remaining, it
was agreed that the next meeting of the Working
Group would take place on Tuesday 7 November in
Room 749 Home Office, Queen Anne's Gate, commencing
at 10.30am.     It would continue to use the Agenda
for WP(89) 2nd meeting as the basis for discussion.
                            FAX MESSAGE



FROM              Professor L Maunder
                  Department of Mechanical Engineering
                  University of Newcastle upon Tyne

                  FAX NO:     091 261 0191


TO                Jonathan Sweet
                  Hillsborough Inquiry
                  Queen Anne's Gate
                  London

                  FAX NO:     01 273 2190


DATE              6 November 1989


NO OF PAGES       1


ADDITIONAL INFO   Jonathan,

                  Excellent draft minutes.

                  Suggestions:

                  (i)  "Wear and friction" instead of     "fatigue"
                  In para 5;

                  (ii)   "systemCs)” for "implenient(s) " in para 25;

                           reference to the quoted extracts from my
                      e of 10 July possibly in or near para         27
                    measurements of all significant deflections of
                  the K i • ler under test should be        taken and
                  re • •U        so as   to enable    a   satisfactory
                            t;fit of structural performance overall to
                  b e .satie" and "if the distribution of load is not
                  uniform,       it should be such as to stress    the
                  structure at highly stressed points at least, as
                  severely as a uniformly distributed load".
