                                                HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne’s Gate London SWJH-QAT
                                                 Direct line: 01-273
                                               Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference:
Your reference:

       J E Mortimer Esq
       HM Treasury
       Great George Street
       LONDON SW1P 3AG                             22 May 1989



                  'So,
      HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

      We spoke a few days ago about the problems that are emerging
      regarding the cost of the investigations which the West Midlands
      Police are carrying out in the context of the inquiry.

      2.   The Home Secretary has publicly stated that the additional
      costs of these investigations should not fall on the West
      Midlands Police Authority.  In the normal way they would fall on
      the South Yorkshire Police Authority, but following a meeting we
      had on 18 May with the clerk to the authority, I thought you
      would wish to know how matters now stand.

      3.   You will know that the decision to invite West Midlands to
      undertake an investigation into South Yorkshire's policing of the
      event was taken by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. This
      is accepted by South Yorkshire Police Authority.  South Yorkshire
      do not however accept that it follows from this decision that
      they should be responsible in principle for meeting the cost of
      the police investigation.

     4.    South Yorkshire argue that the West Midlands investigations
     are designed to serve the broad public interest.   Indeed, once
     the public inquiry was announced, the Chief Constable of South
     Yorkshire had to set up his own internal inquiries with his own
     officers and counsel in order to supply evidence to the West
     Midlands police.   The Chief Constable of West Midlands is not
     reporting in any sense to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
     but direct to Lord Justice Taylor; he is operating under the
     instructions of counsel to the inquiry and of the Treasury
     Solicitor._ Against this background, South Yorkshire argue that
     the analogies of large-scale mutual aid and complaints and
     disciplinary investigations (in which cases it is normally the
     responsibility of the requesting force to reimburse the outside
     force) fall down, since the inquiries being undertaken by West
     Midlands cannot be regarded as at the behest of South Yorkshire.
5.   South Yorkshire are also greatly concerned that the scope
and direction of the inquiries by the West Midlands police have
gone f&r wider than had been envisaged at the time they were
called in; but South Yorkshire have no control over this nor do
they consider that they will derive any benefit from the police
investigations.  In their view the police investigations are an
input into a publicly-funded inquiry which is directed more
towards the general principles of safety at sports grounds than
towards the events of 15 April.   They also consider that the
costs of the West Midlands investigations are being increased by
the decision to supply an interim report from the inquiry in time
for the next football season.   In their view, both the scale of
the investigations and the need for such speed are dictated by
reasons of national importance and by the demands of the public
inquiry.  They thus conclude that the whole cost of the West
Midlands investigations should be met from public funds. The
police authority have now asked for a meeting with our Ministers
to put forward their case.

6.   We for our part have made it clear that we were not
convinced by South Yorkshire's arguments.  There was no question
but that the investigations had initially been requested by their
Chief Constable.  Once such a decision had been taken, it
followed from the very need for independence that the chief
officer of the home force would lose a great deal of his scope
for directing and controlling the operation. We also argued
that, had the Taylor inquiry not been set up, many of the
inquiries which the police were undertaking would still have been
needed, and the liability would have fallen on South Yorkshire to
meet the cost. We did not therefore accept that central
government should as a matter of principle meet the costs of the
police inquiries; in our view the responsibility lay properly
with South Yorkshire.

7.   What is apparent, however, is the scale of the costs of the
police investigations, over which South Yorkshire have no
control. As we see it, without prejudice to the point of
principle, it would be open to South Yorkshire to make out a case
to the effect that the costs were of such a magnitude as to
threaten the efficiency of the South Yorkshire police. We
understand that West Midlands estimate that for the next two
months the additional costs will be of the order of £3.5 million.
From South Yorkshire's point of view, such costs are clearly
unexpected and could not have been budgeted for. They have a
total police budget of £86 million for the year, and an end-year
balance of £2 million.  The product of a penny rate is £1.37
million.  Under the current RSG arrangements, the amount of block
grant is fixed and will not increase if they have to spend more
on the police budget. We believe that, with these figures in
mind, it would be open to South Yorkshire to make out a case for
a special payment on the lines of those made in respect of the
miners' strike and the disturbances at RAF Molesworth.

8.   We have not of course any authority to offer such a payment,
nor have South Yorkshire requested it. But there must be a very
strong likelihood that they will, as a fall back position,
request such a payment when they come to see Ministers, if it is
clear that 100% funding is not an option.  The Home Secretary has
indicated that he does not wich to engage in a public wrangle
with the two police authorities over the question of payment.
The longer it takes to settle the separate questions of liability
and government assistance towards the cost of the police
investigations, the greater the risk that West Midlands will
start making difficulties.  (Representatives of West Midlands
Police Authority are coming to see Lord Ferrers on 25 May, no
doubt to press their demands for early payment, possibly by means
of direct reimbursement from the Home Office.)

9.   At this stage I am not putting to the Treasury a firm
proposal that some special payment be made to South Yorkshire.
If, as seems probable, such an arrangement becomes necessary, I
envisage that the Home Secretary will write to the Chief
Secretary.   But I ought to put you on notice that the case for
some special assistance to South Yorkshire is extremely strong,
given the scale of expenditure entailed by the West Midlands
investigations, and that the political considerations in favour
of making such an arrangement are likely to be equally cogent.
We may therefore need to come to you at short notice to devise an
arrangement on the lines of the special payments made in respect
of the miners' strike.




                                   N A NAGLER




hcc    Mr Malone-Lee
       Mr Addison      ,   .22 y
      v'Mr SandifaedT^^        5
       Mr Whalley
       Mr Archer
