CHAPTER 2


Video evidence about the disaster


1.    At the heart of many of the allegations about the disaster which I have heard
      over the last few months has been the suggestion that video evidence of what
      happened has been distorted or concealed. Several different possibilities of
      this sort have been put to me. Their common theme is that, had the full video
      evidence been available, the culpability of the police would have been even
      clearer than it already is. That might have meant inquest verdicts of unlawful
      killing rather than accidental death, or led to criminal prosecutions of senior
      police officers, or both. It is said that the police themselves concealed the
      video evidence to hide the true facts.

2.    I have found that there is considerable confusion and misunderstanding about
       the video evidence of the disaster. Before moving on to discuss the
       allegations in detail, I think it is necessary to explain what video cameras were
       operating on the day and what has happened to the tapes that were made.

3.    The police and Sheffield Wednesday FC were each operating their own
      separate video systems at the ground. BBC cameras were also present to
      record the game.

4.    The West Midlands Police team which investigated the disaster used footage
      from all these sources to create a ‘compilation tape’, lasting about 2 hours,
      giving an overall picture of the disaster. This tape was shown both to Lord
      Taylor’s Inquiry and to the jury at the Inquests.


The Club CCTV System

5.     Sheffield Wednesday had 19 fixed closed circuit (CCTV) cameras which were
       trained onto the various turnstiles around the ground. There were 19 CCTV
       monitor screens in the club’s Control Room showing what these cameras
       photographed - the club’s Control Room was inside the South Stand, just off
       the players’ tunnel (and had no direct view of the pitch). The club recorded
       the output of all these cameras. One of the club’s CCTV cameras showed the
       Leppings Lane turnstiles, in particular the turnstiles A to G through which
       spectators going to the Leppings Lane standing terrace would normally come.
       It also showed the exit gate, Gate C, which the police opened to relieve the
       pressure outside these turnstiles.

6.     The pictures from this camera were recorded on tape JH2. The West
        Midlands police officers investigating the disaster took custody of this tape
        and used footage from it in the compilation tape.
7.     As well as the 19 screens linked to their own CCTV system, Sheffield
       Wednesday’s Control Room also contained a further screen, linked to the
       police CCTV system. This allowed people in the club Control Room to see
       what was being shown by any of the five police CCTV cameras. But they
       could not record these police pictures.

8.     The club also had a mechanism which automatically monitored the number of
        spectators passing through the turnstiles.

9.     There were three people in the Sheffield Wednesday Control Room as the
        disaster took place. One was Mr Lock, the club’s security officer. Mr Lock, a
        former policeman, gave evidence both at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and at the
        inquests. He left the Control Room at about 2.45 p.m., at about the time when
        Gate C at Leppings Lane was opened briefly so that police could eject
        somebody. He returned just after the kick-off.

10.    The second person in the Control Room was PC Guest, who has since died.
        He was police liaison officer with the club, and gave evidence at Lord Taylor’s
        Inquiry. The third was Mr Houldsworth, the club’s video technician.


The Police CCTV System

11.    The police had five fixed CCTV cameras situated around the ground. The
       police Control Box contained one screen for each of these five cameras.
       The screens are shown in photograph 48 in Appendix 2 (48 was the number
       this photograph was allocated when it was used as an exhibit at Lord
       Taylor’s Inquiry). I need only be concerned with cameras 1, 2, 3 and 5.
       Police camera 4 was situated outside the ground, on Penistone Road, at the
       far end of the ground from Leppings Lane where the tragedy occurred.

12.    Police camera 1 was mounted on the rear of the West Stand. It looked out
       from the ground towards the Leppings Lane turnstiles, in particular
       turnstiles A-G through which the standing spectators would come. It could
       also show Leppings Lane itself, part of the area outside the turnstiles, and
       part of the concourse between the turnstiles and the West Stand. Its
       pictures were in black and white.

 13.   Police camera 2 was mounted on the South Stand and it commanded views
        all round the ground. It was in colour. Police camera 3 was also mounted
        on the South Stand, but was nearer the Penistone Road (Kop) end, where the
        Nottingham Forest supporters were standing. It was in black and white.

 14.   Police camera 5 is the important one from the point of view of my scrutiny.
        It was mounted near the scoreboard at the south east comer of the West
        Stand and was the closest one to the police control box. It provided views
        of the West Stand and the West Terraces. It was in black and white.
15.   A plan which formed Appendix 1 of Lord Taylor’s interim report showing
      the five police cameras with their numbers forms part of Appendix 2 to this
      Report. All five police cameras were operating continuously from about 12
      noon to 17.20 on the 15 April. They were under the control of PC Trevor
      Bichard. All five could zoom and pan. (PC Bichard in fact referred to
      camera 2 as camera 3, and to 3 as 2. I have adopted Mr Houldsworth’s
      numbering of the cameras).

16.   Additionally in the police Control Box were two video recorders, each
      linked to a monitor screen showing what it was recording. The recorders
      could be operated in one of two ways. They could operate on ‘auto­
      sequence’, in which mode the recording would move around the five police
      CCTV cameras at pre-set intervals. Alternatively, the operator could
      override this and record output from whichever of the five cameras he
      wanted, for as long as he wanted. The monitor screens can be seen without
      numbers on the right in photograph 48, Appendix 2, one above the other.

17.   Both of these tape recording machines could record in two ways, either in
      continuous or normal play, or in ‘time-lapse’, recording a new still frame
      every half second. ‘Time-lapse’ is jerky when played back, but it allowed
      tapes to be used for longer. Police made four tapes from these two
      recorders in the course of the day. One (TB1 - TB for Trevor Bichard) ran
      from 12 noon to 15.04, the second (TB2) from 12 noon to 15.34. These are
      the tapes with which we are primarily concerned. TB3 continued on from
      TB2, and TB4 from TB1 but with a 30-minute gap. TB3 and TB4 both ran
      up to 17.20. The reason why there was a half-hour gap between TB1 and
      TB4 is that PC Bichard forgot, in the anxiety of the moment, to replace the
      tape when it expired at 15.04. TB2 lasted longer than TB1 because of
      greater use of ‘time-lapse’.

18.   PC Bichard sealed the four tapes at the end of the day and handed them to
      other South Yorkshire police officers for safe custody. South Yorkshire
      police later gave them to the West Midlands police investigating team. I
      have inspected the originals of tapes TB1, 2, 3 and 4. They are intact.
      Each of the four tapes is timed throughout and there are no gaps in these
      times. The four tapes were all made available in their entirety to Lord
       Taylor’s Inquiry and the Coroner.


Other video cameras operating on the day

19.   The police had a hand held video camera operating from time to time
       between 11.45 and 17.30. The tapes from this are identified as VRM1 and
       VRM2.

20.   The BBC had a number of cameras, both mounted and hand held operating
      during the day. Tapes from these are identified as MAPI to MAP9.
Theft of two videotapes

21.    Between 4.30 p.m. on the afternoon of the disaster and 9 a.m. the next
       morning two tapes were stolen from the club’s Control Room, which was
       locked. One of these tapes was entirely blank (the club camera concerned was
       wrongly placed and pointing at a wall). The other showed turnstiles 9 to 16 at
       the Leppings Lane end of the ground, which were next to turnstiles A to G.

22.    The theft of these tapes was investigated by the West Midlands Police but
       remains unsolved. There is no proof of who was responsible for their
       disappearance. During the course of my scrutiny I have heard allegations that
       they were taken by South Yorkshire police officers as part of a ‘cover-up’.
       There is no evidence for this suggestion. The loss of these tapes could not
       have hindered Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, the Inquests, or any of the other
       proceedings. They would not have shown anything relevant.


The Compilation Tape

23.    This tape, which lasts about 2 hours was made by the West Midlands Police
       in conjunction with the Treasury Solicitor. It was designed to ‘show what
       was felt to be the most important scenes and sequence of events’ (Inspector
       Layton, inquest transcript, Day 1 page 64).

24.    It consists of extracts from tapes TB1, TB2, and RJH2, together with BBC
        footage. The tape shows scenes in Leppings Lane and at the turnstiles there
        prior to about 15.00, and then scenes inside the stadium up to 16.44. It
        begins with some footage of the layout of the ground which West Midlands
        Police shot specially later on. The compilation tape was shown at the
        Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest. It includes no scenes taken by police
        Camera 5.


The evidence of Roger Houldsworth

25.     Mr Houldsworth was the technician responsible to the club for the working
        of the club and police CCTV systems. The Family Support Group have
        presented him to me as having evidence that what the police said about the
        capacity of their CCTV system and what it showed on the day was false.
        During my scrutiny I have considered a number of written statements from
        Mr Houldsworth and oral evidence which he gave me at an interview with
        him.

 26.    First there is a statement in writing which Mr Houldsworth made on 16 May
        1989 to Sheffield Wednesday’s solicitors, which appears in Appendix 3, Part
        1. In this he described the police and club CCTV systems. He said that
        on the day of the disaster he had been called to deal with a fault on police
camera 5. He says he rectified the fault and the camera then worked OK.
He then described his experiences in the club Control Room on the day, in
particular what could be seen on the club screen showing turnstiles A-G
(recorded on tape RJH2) and the monitor screen from the police system,
which was showing output from police camera 1, including the influx of
supporters through Gate C at 14.52. He continues

       “A t that point in time I realised, from the numbers already displayed
       on the monitor as having entered from the Leppings Lane turnstiles,
       that a dangerous situation was being created. I left the room and
       went down the players ’ tunnel to the pitch and ju st as I did so the
       Referee stopped the match as I recall I looked over to the West
       Stand area and I saw fans climbing over the fence and my first
       thought at that time was that it was a pitch invasion, and the match
       had been stopped fo r that reason. ”

Finally in this statement Mr Houldsworth deals with the two tapes missing
from the Club Control Room. I have found an exact transcription of this
statement by Mr Houldsworth in the West Midlands Police computer records
(HOLMES) of their investigation. It is dated 27 May 1989.

There are two written statements by Mr Houldsworth dated 28 April and 5
December 1989 to West Midlands Police. These statements are concerned
with the tapes which went missing from the club Control Room. They are
not material. Thirdly there is a transcript of an interview which Mr
Houldsworth gave for a Yorkshire Television ‘First Tuesday’ programme
about the disaster, broadcast on 6 February 1990. This is at Appendix 3,
Part 2. It adds very little to his 27 May 1989 statement. But he makes it
clear that it was the scenes from the club camera pointed at turnstiles A to G
and police camera 1 of supporters coming through Gate C that caused him
concern, together with the numbers of spectators shown on the clubs
monitors as having already come into the ground.

Fourth, in an affidavit sworn on 25 November 1996 Mr Houldsworth
exhibits, as ‘GH2’ certain comments on the evidence which PC Bichard and
PS Goddard gave to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Inquest, and the evidence
of PC Ryan given at the Taylor Inquiry. I set out the material parts of this
document in Appendix 3, Part 3. The most important statement here is
numbered 1, where Mr Houldsworth says

        7 was able to see what the police could see on their monitors and I
        specifically remember checking to see the state o f Pens 3 and 4 when
        the order was given to open the gate. I could see very clearly that
        the pens were fu ll to the point o f overcrowding. ”

Mr Houldsworth says in this affidavit that he disagrees with the police
evidence that the pictures from their Camera 5 were less than perfect or that
      the zoom capacity on cameras 2 and 5 were not sufficient for clear
      identification of spectators.

31.   Finally, I interviewed Mr Houldsworth on 14 October 1997. He repeated
      the points I have just mentioned. The transcript of his evidence is at
      Appendix 3, Part 4.


The submissions and allegations made by the Hillsborough FamilY Sunport
Group.

32.   Two of the most important issues both at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the
      Inquest were

      a) whether the police in the control box, and particularly the two senior
      officers Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray, realised that pens 3 and 4 were
      already full when the order was given to open Gate C so that a dangerous
      situation would arise in them if a large number of supporters were to enter
      them through the tunnel in a short space of time; and

      b)   if they did not realise this, whether they should have done so.

33.   In the light of this, Mr Alun Jones QC, Counsel for the Family Support
      Group made a number of submissions to me. These were

       1.      that the police blamed their failure to see the overcrowding in pens 3
       and 4 on the fact that Camera 5 was defective (paras 12 and 23 of Counsel’s
       written submissions of 27 September 1997). Their argument is that what
       the police said about this was deliberately false, and that this is shown both
       by Mr Houldsworth’s evidence that Camera 5 was working perfectly and by
       the ‘discovery’ that the police tapes show footage taken by camera 5, which
       demonstrated that it was working (written submissions para 46(viii); oral
       submissions page 12 lines 15 to 22);

       2.      that the evidence from the video tapes of what was filmed by Camera
       5 was deliberately suppressed and concealed, presumably by the South
       Yorkshire and/or West Midlands Police, because it would have revealed the
       falsity of the police claim in submission 1. This would, prima facie, be a
       perversion of the course of justice (written submissions paras 52 and 55 and
       56);

       3.     that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of the
       ‘missing footage’. He ought to have summoned West Midlands police
       officers to explain its disappearance (written submissions para 52);

       4.    that PC Bichard, PC Ryan and PS Goddard all gave deliberately false
       evidence that camera 5 was not working properly and that cameras 5 and 2
       were not good enough to show distress on the faces of those in pens 3 and 4
       (written submission para. 46); and finally

       5.      that Mr Houldsworth in the club Control Room could see and
       appreciate from the screen monitoring the police cameras (in particular
       Cameras 5 and 3) that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded and that a dangerous
       situation was likely to arise because of the influx through Gate C. The
       allegation was that this evidence was withheld from the jury, presumably
       deliberately.

34.    The first and second submissions are particularly serious. If they are made
       out they might affect the verdict of accidental death and the decision of the
       DPP not to prosecute for manslaughter. The third submission is a grave
       allegation against the Coroner even taken on its own. If it is to be taken in
       conjunction with the first and second submissions it could affect the verdict.

35.    On its own the fourth submission would not affect any of the prior
       proceedings. But consideration would have to be given to prosecuting the
       officers concerned (Bichard, Ryan and Goddard). If the last submission is
       made out, the failure of the police to appreciate that a dangerous situation
       had arisen because pens 3 and 4 were already full to their safe capacity when
       gate C was opened could be further criticised if Mr Houldsworth realised
       this simply from seeing scenes depicted from Cameras 3 and 5.

36.    I must examine these five submissions in detail.


Submission 1

37.    The central allegation here is that the police blamed their failure to see the
       overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on Camera 5 being defective when in fact it
       was not. In his oral submissions to me Mr Jones accepted that this was
       crucial to the Group’s submissions in relation to the video evidence
       (transcript 30.9.97 page 12). The submission involves the proposition that
       the police in the Control Box were saying that they could not see with their
       own eyes through the windows of the control box the state of the terraces,
       but were dependent on camera 5 which was not working properly.

38.     M r Jones originally put this submission to me with respect to the evidence
        given by police officers both at the Taylor Inquiry and at the Inquest. As to
        the former, it was said:

               “[Lord Taylor] accepted the police evidence that they were unable to
               see the terraces [were overfull by 2.50] because o f the faulty camera”
               (written submissions para 12).

 39.    This is not correct. Lord Taylor made the following findings:
       “ [The police box] has windows commanding views across the pitch
       and straight along the west perimeter fence ” (Interim Report para
       49).

       “The cameras [operated in the police control box] have a zoom
      facility to close in on any point o f interest. Specifically there were
       good camera views o f the west terracing         ” (para 50 and see also
       para 170).

        “It should have been clear in the control room where there was a
       view o f the pens and o f the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had
       to be closed” (para 231).

       “[Officers in the control room] had a direct view (of pens 3 and 4)
      from an elevated position through their window.... In the event pens
       3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place, fans
       were shouting and signalling distress. None o f this was seen or
       recognised in the control room” (para 244).

At paragraph 38 of the written submission, after references to the evidence
of PC Ryan, PC Bichard and PS Goddard, none of whom said that defective
pictures from Camera 5 was the reason why they failed to realise that there
was a dangerous situation, Counsel said that

        “Chief Superintendent Duckenfield .... did not refer to any faults with
       the camera system. On the 25 May 1989 at page 129 he said that he
       did not use this zoom facility but mainly (my emphasis) looked out o f
       the window” .

The implication is that Mr Duckenfield was saying that he was partly reliant
on the cameras. This does not accurately represent his evidence which was:

       Q. “Did you use or was the zoom facility used at all to have a close
       look at the situation in pens 3 and 4 once it was apparent somebody
       was climbing over the fence? - A. Not that I am aware o f sir, that
       may have been the case, but I looked through the window ”.

There was abundant evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry that the police in the
control box had a good view out of the windows (Inquiry transcript, day 8
pages 10 and 47, day 9 page 35, day 20 page 13, day 18 pages 76 and 88 -
references are to evidence by Duckenfield, McRobbie and Goddard). PC
Ryan said he very rarely looked at the TV monitors because they were over
his head (day 18 page 59). Superintendent Murray never suggested that he
was reliant on the TV cameras. He had an excellent view out of the
window.

In the course of his oral submissions to me Mr Jones accepted that the
submission was not correct so far as the police evidence at the Taylor
Inquiry was concerned (page 15). But he submitted that the effect of the
evidence of those officers at the inquest was quite different and supported
the submission that they had lied about Camera 5 being faulty.

In my judgement this submission is equally ill-founded. So far as Mr
Duckenfield is concerned, he never said anything about a faulty camera 5,
still less that that was the reason he failed to appreciate the overcrowding.
Although he pointed out that he was standing behind the officers seated at
the front of the Control Box and did not have quite such a good view
through the windows (inquest day 68, page 59) he never suggested he could
not see the terraces sufficiently to form a judgement. On the contrary at
(Day 69 page 23C-E) he said:

        Q. “You had the vision from the Control Box, which we have all
       been to, through the windows? - A. Yes.

       Q. You also were able to see the video cameras, the cameras which
       were showing the terrace? - A. Yes.

       Q. They have a zoom facility, do they not, as fa r as the Leppings
       Lane terrace goes? - A. Yes, they do.

       Q. You still say that in that period between 2.52 and 3 o ’clock you
       never noticed even this huge surge into the terrace? - A. Let me ju st
       direct you to where I was and what I was doing. Yes, I was in the
        Control Box and I was standing towards the back o f that Control Box
       and when you stand in the back o f that Control Box and look across
       you have a view. As you rightly say you have the other facilities, but
       I did not see anything untoward on those terraces from my position,
       from my viewing position and from the angle at which I was in the
        Control Box ”.

At page 45 (inquest day 69) he gave substantially the same evidence as he
gave to Lord Taylor, to which I have already referred. He said specifically
he was “looking with my eyes at the scene on the terraces” - not at the
television screen.

So far as Mr Murray was concerned, he was seated in the front row of seats
in the Control Box, on the left hand side. He would therefore have an
excellent view out of the window. This is shown in photo 52 (Appendix 2).
He would not be well placed to see the CCTV monitor screens, which were
above his head. At Inquest day 67 (page 48F-49B) he said

        Q. “You in the police Control Box had access to the following, didn’t
        you? First o f all you were able to look out o f the windows to view
        specifically the state o f the Leppings Lane Terraces? - A. Yes. Q. I
        think everybody has visited the ground who needs to visit the ground
        and I need not ask you questions about what you can see because we
       can observe them, but in addition to that you have access to I think it
       is five monitors, do you not? - A. Yes, that is correct in the Control
       Room

He was then asked about the cameras that show the terraces. There is no
suggestion that they were not working properly; still less that that was the
reason he failed to realise there was a danger of overcrowding. At page
50C-D:

       Q. “So you are in a position in the Control Box not only to see that
       which you can see with your own eyes o f the terrace, but also, if you
       so choose, to have the cameras so operated that you can look at a
       particular part o f the terrace if you want to do so? - A. Yes, I can
       identify, or the operator can identify, a particular part that we should
       look at. ”

Then at page 78E he says:

       Q. “You were in a position from the Control Box to see the state o f
       the Leppings Lane terraces and M r Duckenfield was too? - A. I
       would think we could both have looked at the terraces and seen the
       state o f them, yes. ”

In further written submissions to me Counsel for the Family Support Group
stated that Mr Murray told the inquest jury specifically that he could not see
what was happening on the terraces because of the allegedly faulty cameras.
They cite an answer he gave at inquest day 67, transcript page 79F.

In my view this answer is taken out of context. The passage when looked at
as a whole does not support the assertion that is made about it. Mr Murray
was being asked about photograph C326A. This photograph appears at
Appendix 5 of Lord Taylor’s interim report. It is a still photograph taken at
2.59 p.m. from the North Stand looking across the Leppings Lane terraces
towards the police box and Camera 5. The relevant extract reads in full
(inquest day 69, page 79 D to G):

        Q. “I f we can move to C326A we get an even better view o f pen 6 at
        some five minutes later? A. - Yes.

        Q. Going back to the position just before the order was given to
        order the gates to be opened, because we know gate C was opened at
        2.52, if one looked at the west terraces it would be clear that pen 6
        had marked empty spaces in it? - A. From where that photograph is
        taken, yes.

        Q. Even without the photograph, the position on the photograph, it
        must have been obvious, must it not, from your use o f the cameras
        you had from the Control Box that pen 6 was markedly empty? That
       was not difficult to see, was it? - A. From the views that we were
       getting from the cameras, from the views that I could see from the
       Control Room, it wasn’t obvious.

       Q. A t the end o f the day that will be a matter o f evidence. You are
       saying that from the Control Box with your use o f the videos, the
       cameras, and you had the ability to look along as we have already
       described? - A. I think you have got to look at the individual
       cameras. I think the colour camera was unfortunately focused on the
       problem area in the Kop and that is where it stayed until about three
       o ’clock. The camera on the gantry next to the Control Box was
       unfortunately not working up to its potential. I do not know how that
       affected it but I can see from the angle that that photograph is taken,
       326A, yes, there is a lot o f room on the front o f pen 6 but I didn ’t
       have that view and if I had had that view it might have affected my
       decisions

It is true that Mr Murray says that Camera 5 was not working up to its
potential. But he does not claim this as a reason for his failure to see that
pen 6 was relatively empty. On the contrary he says that he does not know
how that affected it. His point is that although one can see from photo 326A
- taken from the other side of the ground - that there is a lot of room in pen
6, that is not the view he had from the police control box. But at Day 68
pages 26D-27B the Coroner specifically raises this question with Mr Murray
at the instance of the jury. This very important passage runs:

       Q. On the day o f the disaster were you able to monitor the different
       parts o f the terrace at random? I think what the Jury is asking is
       with the cameras, not with the eyes. - A. The camera that would be
       best equipped fo r that was the one that was in the centre o f the South
       Stand, which would show a slightly oblique picture o f the terraces
       and the Kop. Unfortunately fo r most o f the event that was trained on
       the problems that we had in the Kop, particularly after some
       ejections and arrests had been made from that area. What we
       normally use the cameras fo r is evidence gathering and you can only
       gather and preserve the evidence o f what you are actually looking at,
       at the time. When we foresee problems in a certain part o f the
        Ground we will record that particular area fo r the whole o f the
        event, and that gives us the chance to then take still photographs
       from the video and blow them up later, and utilise them as evidence
        and identify people who are wrongdoers.

        Q. The next question is a supplemental one on that really. Did you
        rely more on your own physical view from the Control Box or on the
        monitors, and I think we must be talking about the terracing still
        because you could not, o f course, see outside, could you, without
        looking at the monitors ? A. No. We had a good view o f the
        terraces from the Control Box. We could see the terraces, had a
       good view o f the terraces. I probably relied more on what I could
       see with my own eyes than anything else. I f I had seen a particular
       problem I would have tried to get the video operator to zero in but
       their capabilities are only as good as the actual lens, and the better
       the lens the much more expensive they are. They seemed to be all
       right fo r our purposes. ”

I find it surprising that Counsel did not see fit to draw my attention to this
passage. Along with Mr Duckenfield, Mr Murray was much the most
important officer in the Control Box, since they were the decision makers.

There is nothing in the evidence of PC Ryan or PS Goddard which supports
the submission that the police could not see what was happening because of
faults on Camera 5. I will come in due course to what these officers said
about the quality of the pictures from Camera 5.

PC Bichard, of all the officers in the control room, might be expected to be
watching the screens rather than looking out of the window, since he was the
video operator. He was asked (inquest day 71 page 82D)

       Q. “D id you see it through a window or did you see it on a monitor?
       -A . It is very difficult to remember. The view is partially obscured
       o f what is happening out on the terrace because o f people walking
       across the front o f my position. I am not sure. ”

I should add that Mr Houldsworth also said, in evidence to me, that the
police would not rely on the cameras to see what was happening in the pens.
They had a good view out of the window. (See transcript of my meeting
with him on 14 October 1997, page 23 line 33 to page 24 line 38).

The Coroner’s jury had a view of the scene. They went to the police control
box. They could see for themselves the view which each police officer had.
Mr Houldsworth also demonstrated the CCTV cameras to them during this
visit, so they could see their capability for themselves.

The evidence of all the police officers in the control room was that they
could see the west terraces but they did not realise that the central pens were
becoming dangerously overcrowded. They thought the numbers were
normal for a big match. The matter was accurately summed up to the jury
by the Coroner (inquest day 77, page 127 of the transcript of his summing-
up).

The submission that the police tried to blame their failure to see the
overcrowding on a fault in Camera 5 seemed to me to be so at variance with
the evidence given at the Inquest that I asked Mr Timothy King QC about it.
Mr King was Counsel for the families at the inquest. He said that so far as
he was concerned it had never been the police case that they could not see
that pens 3 and 4 were full because their CCTV was not working correctly.
      The issue was not whether they could see the state of the pens, but whether
      they appreciated that they were full and what steps they took to deal with the
      situation once Gate C was opened.

59.   In his further submission put forward on 11 December 1997 Mr Knowles,
      junior Counsel for the Family Support Group, advanced another argument in
      support of this submission. He said:

               “In his evidence to Lord Taylor Mr Duckenfield admitted that he was
               concerned about the disparity in the numbers o f supporters in the
               centre pens compared with the numbers in the side pens. This caused
               him to request that a Tannoy announcement be made asking
               supporters to move forward (Day 8, p9-14)....

               It is significant that the Tannoy announcement ordered by Mr
               Duckenfield coincides with a shot from Camera 5 at 14.18.07 (shown
               on the footage supplied by Yorkshire TV), which shows young people
               standing in space at the front o f the Leppings Lane terraces. It
               would therefore appear that the Tannoy announcement was made as
               a result o f what had been observed on the video, and that Mr
               Duckenfield was, in fact, using the cameras to assess crowd build up
               inside the ground. ”

60.   In my view this argument is not well founded. The passage referred to at
      Day 8 p l2 referring to the Tannoy announcement relates to 14.30 (though
      according to Lord Taylor the announcement was at 14.15 - paragraph 59 of
      his interim report). It does not relate to 14.18 and has nothing to do with
      the scene captured by camera 5 at that time. There was never any
      suggestion from Mr Duckenfield that he depended on Camera 5 to see the
      state of the Leppings Lane terraces. Indeed the contrary is the case as I have
      already pointed out. The argument advanced by Counsel is a non-sequitur
      even if the timing was correct.

61.   In my judgement the submission that police blamed their failure to
      appreciate the overcrowding onto a faulty CCTV camera is quite untenable.


Submission 2

62.   The allegation here is that evidence of the video tapes taken by camera 5 was
      deliberately suppressed and concealed. It appears to be based on the
      following propositions:

               1 - that the compilation tape had no footage from Camera 5.

               2 - that footage from Camera 5 had disappeared and was not
               available at the inquest. This is based on the following exchange
between PC Bichard and the Coroner, at inquest day 71, page 80A-
E:

       Q. The film we saw this afternoon o f the Leppings Lane end,
       which came from what I have called camera 1, I don’t know
       the camera number. - A. I would know it as camera 5.

       Q. The one beneath or near the Police Box ? - A. Yes, sir.

       Q. That scene began at about 15.02? - A. Yes, sir.

       Q. Where was that camera looking before 15.02 as fa r as
      you can recollect? - A. My recollections are that the
      particular camera had been faulty and in fact you saw some o f
       the problems that occurred. You were getting what is called
      flare. It is reflection o f light coloured objects and you lose
       the picture. The camera was not really being used as much as
       it would normally be because o f the sub-standard picture. It
       was just left in position. That is why the picture never really
       moved at all because it was set and left in that position.

       Q. That is what I am coming to. Given that it started at
       15.02, let us assume I am right on that time, was that the time
       you moved it and located it and then left it to take that shot? -
       A. No, that probably would have been done before that.

       Q. Would it have been recording before that? - A. Yes.

       Q. So there ought to be a film o f it, prior to that? - A. I
       would have thought so, yes.

       Q. O f that same scene? - A. Yes.

       Q. I f I tell you we cannot find it would that make any
       difference to your answer? - A. I have no idea at all where it
       could have gone to. It was part o f the tape and the tapes
       were all sealed up at the end o f the day. ”

       (The film which the Coroner says was seen by the jury that
       afternoon was not included in the compilation tape. The jury
       saw it in addition to the compilation tape, in circumstances I
       shall refer to later).

3 - that between 14.18 and 14.23 there is footage taken from Camera
5 which shows a number of fans in pen 2 of the Leppings Lane
terraces. Pen 2 lay between Camera 5 and pen 3. The footage
clearly shows Camera 5 zooming and panning. Prior to 1400 there
were other scenes taken by camera 5 and recorded on tape TB2 as the
       tape flicked from one camera to another. This footage indicates that
       camera 5 was operating satisfactorily. It was never shown to the
       jury. It was only discovered when the Family Support Group saw
       the video material shown to them by Yorkshire Television.

       4 - that the purpose of the ‘concealment’ was to prevent the exposure
       of the falsity of the claim in submission 1, to the effect that the
       reason why the police could not see the overcrowding was because
       camera 5 was faulty.

Since, as I have already pointed out, submission 1 is misconceived, it can be
said that this submission must also fail. There would have been no point in
the police suppressing or concealing the video evidence unless they had a
reason for doing so. But in fact there was never any disappearance or
concealment of video footage from camera 5.

The facts are these. At the end of the day of the disaster the tapes from the
police monitors were secured. They were made available to Lord Taylor’s
Inquiry and appear on its exhibit list as documents 109 (TB1) and 110
(TB2). Lord Taylor’s Inquiry had a detailed schedule of the contents of
these two tapes. TB1 has no scenes from camera 5. It ends at 15.04.

Tape TB2 is automatically switching at intervals between the five police
cameras, including camera 5, until 1400. There is nothing of note.
Between 14.18 and 14.23 TB2 shows scenes taken by camera 5 of fans on
the Leppings Lane terrace. The camera zooms and pans. The police trained
Camera 5 on this small group of people because they thought someone in
that area had been misbehaving (though there is no sign of that on the tape).
The schedule for Lord Taylor’s Inquiry described this scene as a ‘view of
Leppings Lane and terraces, plenty of room in the pen in view, insufficient
detail to identify which pen’. But it is almost certainly pen 2.

Tape TB2 shows scenes from Camera 5 again from 15.02 until 15.25. This
sequence shows supporters climbing over the fence from pens 3 and 4 onto
the pitch. The camera, once focused on this scene, remains static. The
sequence is in ‘time-lapse’, and is described in the schedule which the West
Midlands Police provided for Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.

The incident between 14.18 and 14.23 is referred to in PC Bichard’s
evidence at the Taylor Inquiry (Day 19 page 45) and also in the evidence of
Chief Inspector McRobbie (Day 20 page 20). Mr McRobbie was asked
about his statement:

        Q. “You say “Police Constable Bichard operated the camera and I
        watched him to be able to zoom onto him which I thought was a
        super facility fo r spotting troublemakers in the crowd. ”
        A. That is correct sir.
      Q. No difficulty with the picture at all? - A. Well when you say “no
      difficulty ” it certainly brought this person closer to us than I think it
      would have been possible fo r a Police Officer to select the correct
      person that Control were identifying without any problem

All the exhibits which the West Midlands Police had prepared for the Taylor
Inquiry - including Tapes TB1 and TB2 - were made available to the legal
representatives at the Inquest. The evidence required for each day was
placed in a side room at the hearing. The rest of the unused material
including tapes TB1 and TB2 and the schedule were kept locally at a police
station where access was given to any legal representative who required it.

I have tried to find out whether the legal advisers then representing the
families, namely Mr Hytner QC, Mr Tim King QC, Mr Fraser and Miss Steele,
can recall whether or not they saw TB1 and TB2. Not surprisingly after this
lapse of time they cannot. However, I think it very likely that some or all of
them did so. This is because they were exhibits at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and
they were obviously potentially important evidence. I would certainly expect
the legal advisers to have seen the videotapes relating to the build up to the
disaster, TB1 and 2. Mr Fraser recalls watching many hours of video footage.
That being so, he must have looked at those tapes.

I have asked the Hon Mr Justice Collins (then, as Andrew Collins QC,
Counsel to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry) about this. He cannot recall any specific
occasions when the families’ lawyers viewed these tapes. He told me that
since they were exhibits and freely available, he would have expected the
lawyers to have looked at them. I agree.

None of the camera 5 scenes on tape TB2 were included in the compilation
tape which the West Midlands Police and the Treasury Solicitors made up for
Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. It is quite plain that no-one considered the footage
from pen 2 at 14.18, or any of the earlier views from Camera 5 of the Leppings
Lane terrace, to be of any help in illustrating the sequence of events leading up
to the disaster.

The footage from Camera 5 after 1502, showing fans climbing over the
perimeter fence to get out of the fatally crowded pens 3 and 4, is also not
particularly helpful from the point of view of illustrating what happened.
There was much better coverage of this part of the disaster from the BBC
cameras, so the compilation tape uses that instead.

During the inquest (Day 69, page 53) the Coroner said that the jury had
twice asked about video evidence of the terraces. He said that the videos
(clearly a reference to TB1 and TB2) had been looked at and there was
actually next to nothing on them because not everything was recorded.
There was a tiny bit showing the terraces on the compilation tape, and
another bit from 15.03 for a few minutes. He had had that ‘clipped’ and
      would show it to the jury. He said it was of poor quality and he did not
      think it would help very much. It became exhibit C539 at the Inquest.

74.   The jury saw exhibit C539 on day 71 (transcript page 61). The footage
      they saw was the material from 1502 onwards from tape TB2 (though
      Sergeant Killock of the West Midlands Police incorrectly identified it as
      coming from tape TB1). It extended only to 15.16, whereas the camera 5
      footage on TB2 continued to 15.25. The sequence was in time lapse. I
      have seen the original and I agree with the Coroner’s comment that it is of
      poor quality and not much help. It is this film that PC Bichard is referring
      to in the passage which I have cited above.

75.   It is plain in my judgement that PC Bichard was mistaken in thinking that
      there was tape from camera 5 of the same scene prior to 15.02.

76.   It has been put to me on behalf of the Family Support Group that the vital
      parts of tape TB2, namely those showing scenes taken by Camera 5, were
      concealed from Lord Taylor, the Coroner, and the families of victims, but
      were later on made available to the families by Yorkshire Television.
       Yorkshire Television have kindly let me have the tapes they have, and which
      they previously showed to the Family Support Group. They are copies
       which they made of tapes TB1 and TB2 (also TB3 and TB4). The police
       had given these to them to help them make their “First Tuesday” programme
       (transmitted in February 1990). It seems to me to be a bizarre way to
       conceal or suppress evidence to make it available to a television company.

77.   In my opinion the allegation that police hid videotape evidence is completely
       unfounded. There was no suppression or disappearance of footage from the
       vital tapes TB1 or TB2 which were at all times, together with the schedule
       of their contents, available to be seen by the legal representatives of the
       families.

78.   It is entirely understandable that the compilation tape contains no footage
      from Camera 5. It would be surprising if it did, since footage from Camera
      5 was not helpful or relevant in illustrating the causes of the disaster.


Submission 3

79.   The allegation is that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of
      the ‘missing footage’. This submission is unfounded for the reasons I have
      just explained. There never was any missing footage from the relevant
      tapes. The two missing club tapes have nothing to do with this. The
      Coroner dealt perfectly properly with the jury’s request to see the camera
      footage of the terraces. He was right to regard the incident in pen 2 at 14.18
      as irrelevant.
Submission 4

80.   The allegation is that Constables Bichard and Ryan and Sergeant Goddard
      deliberately gave false evidence that camera 5 was not working correctly.
      Their evidence to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was as follows:

               PC Bichard (day 19 page 43)

                      Q. “We have heard that on the day in question there was
                      something wrong with that one; is that correct? - A. For a
                      number o f weeks we have had difficulty with the camera and
                      they have been looking into having the camera replaced or
                      improvements made. In fact, on the day when I arrived at the
                      ground M r Roger Houldsworth, who is the Technical Officer
                     fo r the Club, was in fact working on that camera to try and
                      upgrade the picture that we were actually getting.

                     Q. What was the trouble? - A. When the system had been
                     switched on, after an amount o f time, the picture would go
                     white - you would lose actually what you could see. We
                     believed initially it was in relation to the lighting inside the
                     ground but we seem to think that it may be a problem with the
                     electrical supply to that camera.

                     Q. What was the effect o f that on the day in relation to your
                     ability to look properly at the terraces, the West terraces ? -
                     A. On that particular day, the picture had been —the quality
                     had been improved. It was not up to mark but it was a lot
                     better than it had been. We were getting pictures, that is the
                     best way o f describing it.

                     Q. Could you zoom in in the normal way on to the terraces if
                     you wanted to? - A. The actual control facilities were fully
                     available. ”

81.   PC Rvan. who was sitting in the front row next to PS Goddard and could
      therefore not easily see screen 5 (which was overhead) said (day 18 page 53)
      in relation to camera 5:

                     A. “Roger Houldsworth, yes. He attended and came out and
                     worked on that camera fo r some time. Quite how long he was
                      there I do not know. He was certainly there working on it fo r
                     some considerable time. The picture was never satisfactory as
                     fa r as I recall that day although that was not my specific duty
                      to look at that.
              Q. I follow that. When you say the picture as fa r as you can
              see was not satisfactory what was wrong with it? - A. It was
              not as clear as you would hope the picture to be.

              Q. Did that mean the zoom facility was rendered in any way
              inoperative or less adequate than normal or ... - A. As fa r as
              I recall the zoom was operative. It was the quality o f the
              picture that was the problem. ”

Sergeant Goddard did not deal with this point.

None of this evidence from Bichard or Ryan persuaded Lord Taylor that
there was anything wrong with Camera 5, since he made the specific
findings to which I referred earlier in this Chapter when I was discussing the
Support Group’s first submission (paragraph 39).

At the Inquest PC Bichard’s evidence on this point is that to which I have
already referred (paragraph 66 above). PC Ryan gave no evidence at the
Inquest and Sergeant Goddard, who did, did not deal with this point. As
against this Mr Houldsworth, in his statement of 16 May 1989 (Appendix 3,
Pt 1 page 3) says that after he had made the necessary adjustments the
camera was working OK. In his later comments (Appendix 3, Pt 3) he says
it was working perfectly.

I have interviewed PC Bichard. He told me that while he was operating a
particular camera his concentration would be mainly on the screen relevant
to that camera and not on the recording monitors. He said that if he was
operating a camera to film some point of interest, he would record this. He
also told me that after he had operated a particular camera he would
normally leave it parked in the position where it was last focused. This is
what one would expect. He maintained that the quality of what he was
seeing on screen 5 was not as good as that on the other screens - he
described it as misty or foggy - though he accepted that the footage recorded
from camera 5 at 14.18 was perfectly adequate.

An examination of tapes TB1, 2, 3 and 4 does show that Camera 5 was
being used (in the sense of moved about) less than the other cameras.
Before 14.00 the scenes recorded from Camera 5 were static, as the
recording flicks from one camera to another, though the position of the
camera is moved so that three different views of the West Stand are shown.
After 14.01 the only time Camera 5 is zoomed, panned, or changes position
in any other way is between 14.18 and 14.23 and for a few seconds at 15.02
when it focuses on the perimeter fence at pens 3 and 4 (shown to the
Coroner’s jury as C539). It stayed there, static, until 15.25.

Although there is a half-hour gap between the end of tape TB1 and its
replacement tape TB4, it is clear in my view that PC Bichard is operating
Camera 2 (the colour one) during this time, except when he turns Camera 3
onto the Leppings Lane terraces and leaves it in the parked position. This
can be seen on tape TB2 at 15.25. Camera 3 stays in this static position
until 15.59 (seen on tape TB2 until 15.34 and thereafter on TB3). Moreover
it is quite clear that PC Bichard’s attention prior to 14.58 (when Camera 2
swings from the Kop end to the pens at Leppings Lane end) is concentrated
on Camera 1 and what was happening at the turnstiles. It was not directed
to Camera 5 and had not been since 14.23. There is a full analysis of the
movement of the police CCTV cameras between 14.30 and 15.34, as
recorded on videotape, at Appendix 4.

I have some doubt whether the pictures from Camera 5 appearing on screen
5 in the police Control Box were substandard to any material extent, though
there are certainly examples of Camera 5 flaring on tape TB2. But in any
event this is largely a matter of opinion and degree. No-one other than PC
Bichard and Mr Houldsworth is likely to have looked at screen 5 in the
police control box. Mr McRobbie, not surprisingly, could not recall
whether he saw the incident at 14.18 on screen 5 or the monitor. The
Coroner’s jury saw the Camera 5 extract from 1502 onwards for themselves,
though the quality of the copy they saw is not as good as the original.

In my opinion, even if PC Bichard did to some extent exaggerate any defect
in what Camera 5 was showing, it is of no consequence. As I have already
said Lord Taylor took no note of it and the only circumstances in which it
might be relevant, namely if any of the submissions 1-3 above were made
out, do not arise.

There is a difference of opinion between Mr Houldsworth and PC Bichard as
to the degree of definition it is possible to get with the zoom on cameras 2
and 5 for the purpose of identification. I do not regard this as significant.
The Coroner’s jury had the cameras demonstrated to them and they could
see for themselves what the situation was. There is a great deal of
difference between identifying a single person or a small group, each of
whom stands out individually, and trying to pick out individuals in a large,
compact crowd where there is almost constant movement and only a partial
sight of the face and body.

Moreover having seen the original of tape TB2 at 15.02 when Camera 5 is
focused on pens 3 or 4 I am inclined to agree with PC Bichard on this point.

At 14.58 Camera 2 swings down towards the Leppings Lane terraces. It is
possible to identify some of the people on the pitch, for example WPC
Richardson, who has a distinctive pony-tail and is seen ushering people into
pen 2 via its perimeter gate. However I do not think it would be possible to
identify a person in the centre pens from their face and it is certainly not
possible to see their facial expressions. Moreover even if the police had
focused either of these cameras onto those at the front of pens 3 and 4 at the
material times, that would not have enabled them to pick out the distress
which was being experienced.
93.    The other matters raised by Mr Houldsworth on the evidence of PC Bichard
      and PC Ryan are in my view of little consequence for the same reason. In
      my opinion the evidence is wholly insufficient to warrant consideration of
      criminal proceedings against any police officers.


Submission 5

94.   The allegation here is that Mr Houldsworth in the club Control Room could
      see from pictures on the Control Room monitor from police cameras 3 and 5
      that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded at 14.50, and that the influx of extra
      spectators through gate C would create a dangerous situation. I have no
      doubt that it is true that there were times when Mr Houldsworth and others
      in the club control room switched their monitor on to see what the police
      cameras would show of the Leppings Lane terraces.

95.   This accords with the evidence of PC Guest to the Taylor Inquiry. At Day
      19 page 121 he said:

               Q. “But it was obvious at twenty to three that the two wing pens
               were virtually empty, was it not? - A. Yes, sir. As fa r as I am
               aware, I don’t know, sir, because I wasn’t looking at that particular
               screen. I was only looking at Leppings Lane on the outside; I was
               not looking on the inside o f the ground.

               Q. Are you saying you never saw ... ? - A. I did, yes. I did
               actually look on the inside o f the ground but this was later. This was
               after the gates was broken - well, either broken or opened, and once
               the crowd had got in. It was after the crowd had got in, then when I
               turned to that camera that would cover the West Stand and the
               Leppings Lane.

               Q. Are you saying that prior to the quarter to three, ten to three,
               you never saw on the monitor the inside o f the ground at the
               Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, I did look at it earlier on, before
               twenty to three, yes, and at that stage it was quite normal.

               Q. When did you last see the terraces on the monitor? - A. I
               couldn’t be exact, sir, but I would think it would be something in the
               region o f probably half past two, probably twenty-five to three.

               Q. At twenty-five to three? - A. Something like that.

               Q. At twenty-five to three the wing pens were virtually empty, were
               they not? - A. They were, sir. ”
I do not however accept Mr Houldsworth’s evidence that he realised from
looking at coverage from police cameras 3 and 5 that pens 3 and 4 were
overcrowded and that the influx of people through gate C would create a
dangerous situation. I reject this evidence for the following reasons.


1.    It is hard to believe that if this were so Mr Houldsworth would not
      have said as much before 1996 (see his comments at Appendix 3,
      Part 3 para numbered 1). I do not accept that he can have been
       inhibited either in making his statement to the club solicitors or in his
       interview with Yorkshire Television. I do not find convincing Mr
      Houldsworth’s explanation as to why it was only in 1996 that he
      realised this evidence was important, (see transcript of his evidence
      to me, page 20 lines 18 - page 21 line 17 - Appendix 3 Pt 4). There
       is no record of any interruption by the police officer until the end of
      the interview.

2.    What Mr Houldsworth now says is in fact inconsistent with what he
      said before. In his written statement he attributes his concern to what
      he could see on the police monitor in relation to Gate C and the club
      monitors of the numbers. (See Appendix 3, Pt 1 pages 5 and 6). In
      the television interview the references to the police cameras are
      throughout to camera 1. It was submitted to me by Counsel that Mr
      Houldsworth’s references to Camera 1 in the first paragraph of page
      1 of Appendix 3, part 2 was in fact a mistake for Camera 5. The
      context shows that this is obviously not correct, and Mr Houldsworth
      confirmed this to me when I interviewed him. The same reasons are
      given for his concern, namely what is seen in relation to gate C and
      club monitors of the numbers (page 1, last para) and an appreciation
      that people coming through gate C would be likely to go into the
      centre pens (page 3, last answer).

3.    It was not until 15.05 that Mr Houldsworth got onto the pitch. It
       took less than half a minute to get there from the control room. Even
       so, like almost everyone else observing the situation, he thought he
       was looking at a pitch invasion. He could not have thought this, if
       what he now says about noticing overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
       terrace before Gate C was opened at 2.52 p.m. were correct.

4.    The last shots from police Camera 5 which are recorded before 15.02
       are those at 14.23 when it is focused on pen 2 and does not give a
       view of the centre pens. It is unlikely in my view that it was changed
       from this position until 15.02 when the recording shows it trained on
       the perimeter fence, picking up the fans climbing out. This accords
       with PC Bichard’s evidence to me. It is also consistent with PC
       Guest’s evidence which I have quoted above (paragraph 96). If he
       could see that the wing pen at 2.35 was virtually empty, this strongly
       suggests that he is seeing the same area that was filmed by Camera 5
at 14.18 - 14.23. Camera 3 was trained on the Kop end, for which it
was primarily designed. I think it likely that it remained there till it
was swung round to show the Leppings Lane terraces at 15.25. Mr
Houldsworth does not suggest that he saw the state of the pens from
Camera 2. That too was focused on the Kop end until 14.58, when it
is focused on the Leppings Lane end (TB1). In my opinion it was
probably not until Mr Houldsworth saw the scenes from Camera 5 at
some time after 15.02 that he realised that there was a problem and
went to investigate. This fits with the timing of his arrival on the
pitch and his belief that there was a pitch invasion.

At a very late stage of my Scrutiny (11 December 1997) junior
Counsel for the Family Support Group submitted that Mr
Houldsworth’s evidence about spotting the overcrowding from the
monitor of the police CCTV system in the club Control Room was
supported by that of PC Guest. He referred to PC Guest’s statement
of 10 May 1989 (which is in identical terms to an earlier one dated
29 April but on the standard Criminal Justice Act statement form).
Counsel did not cite the relevant passage. It reads:

       7 then turned to the camera that was inside the ground and
       covered the area o f the West Stand and it was obvious that the
       situation was getting out o f hand and people were being
       pushed up against the fencing on the perimeter o f the ground.

       I could see that all available officers were being sent to this
       area o f the ground to assist with the injured and dying. ’

This makes it quite plain that what is being shown by the camera
inside the ground is occurring after 15.00. (This description might
be thought to describe more accurately what was shown by Camera 2
(colour) after 14.58. But Mr Houldsworth said what he saw was on
cameras 5 and 3). What is cited by Counsel (in fact wrongly, the
incorrect words are in square brackets) is a passage from a later
undated statement by PC Guest, where an additional passage has been
inserted between the first and second sentences quoted above from
the earlier statement.

        ‘At the [this] point where [while] things seemed to be getting
       out hand outside the turnstiles I tried to use my personal radio
       in order to contact Police Control that further Police
       assistance was required urgently at the Leppings Lane end o f
       the ground, but each time I tried to use the radio I was
       blocking others already using the radio, so I did not try
       further to use it.

        I then tried to use the internal telephone system to contact
        Police Control but again each time I tried the line was
       engaged and could not get through. A t this point M r Lock
       then left the video room in order to organise some safety
       measures with the security personnel.

       Also present during this time in the video room was a Mr
       Roger Houldsworth, he is the person who installed all the
       videos and computer system.

       As he could also see what was taking place he also left the
       room in order to assist in any way he could. ’

This passage was inserted because of comments made by Hammond
Suddards, solicitors to South Yorkshire Police, when the force sent
PC Guest’s original statement to them for comment (I shall have
more to say about this in Chapter 4, Part 2 of this report). In a letter
dated 25 May 1989, after referring to PC Guests’s statement on page
2 of the earlier statement that ‘it was obvious that looking at the
crowd outside trying to get in, that there would not be sufficient
room for all to be accommodated’, the solicitors said:

        7 wonder why he did not use either Club radio or the internal
       telephone system to reach the control box, if he did not wish
       to interrupt transmission by using his personal radio. It may
       be helpful if PC Guest recalls, as accurately as possible, the
       actual figures fo r the north stand, west stand and Leppings
       Lane, when he studied these at, or shortly after, 2.40pm. ’

Unfortunately the inserted passage dealing with this point breaks the
continuity and chronology of PC Guest’s original statement.
Moreover the final sentence of the inserted passage makes it clear
that what was being looked at was after 15.00, because we know that
Mr Houldsworth did not leave the control room until about 15.05.

Analysis of tapes TB1 and TB2 from 14.30 until they finish shows
quite clearly which cameras PC Bichard was manipulating and
concentrating on. In particular from 14.35 to 14.49.02 he is
operating Camera 1. There is then a brief point at 14.49 when
Camera 2 is operated on the Kop end before at 14.49.38 he reverts to
Camera 1 which is more or less continuously used until 14.58.42
when Camera 2 pans from the Kop down into the West Stand
Terraces. Thereafter he is operating cameras 1 and 2 until 15.02.53
when he operates Camera 5, which after a very short while is fixed
on the perimeter fence (the part shown in C.539). This analysis
(Appendix 4) supports the conclusions which I have set out in sub-
paragraph 5 above.

If Mr Houldsworth is correct in what he now says, it is to say the
least surprising that he did not draw the attention of PC Guest to the
            reasons for his concern, namely that he could see the serious state of
            the terraces on the monitor screen. It is clear from PC Guest’s
            statements and evidence at the Taylor Inquiry that he did not do so.
            PC Guest has unfortunately since died.

      8.    It was submitted to me at a late stage in my scrutiny by Miss
            Adlington, Solicitor to the Family Support Group, that a comparison
            of three photographs showed clearly that Camera 5 had been moved
            between 14.52 and 14.59 and that this supported Mr Houldsworth’s
            evidence to this point.

            The photographs in question were taken by supporters in the North
            Stand. They show the scoreboard on which Camera 5 was mounted,
            together with the scoreboard clock. The first two, with the
            scoreboard clock showing respectively 14.52 and 14.54, are taken
            from about mid-way up the top of the North Stand, about a third of
            the way along the pitch from the west (Leppings Lane) end of it.

             The third photograph is timed at 14.59 by the scoreboard clock. It is
             the one which appears at Appendix 5 in Lord Taylor’s Interim
             Report. It is taken from a position higher up the North Stand and
             nearer to the Leppings Lane terraces. Both in the copy of this
             photograph at Appendix 5 of Lord Taylor’s report, and in the copy
             of it submitted to me by Miss Adlington, it is almost impossible to
             distinguish Camera 5. However I obtained the negative and enlarged
             the relevant area.

             Bearing in mind that the photographs are taken from different
             positions they do not in my opinion show that Camera 5 was moved
             between 14.52 and 14.59 - still less do they show this, as I was told,
             ‘clearly’. On the contrary, although I do not attach much weight to
             the point because it is not sufficiently clear, I am inclined to the view
             that the three photographs show that Camera 5 was not moved and
             that it was at 14.59 still trained onto the same comer of pen 2 as it
             was when it was used to take the shots recorded at 14.18 to 14.23 on
             tape TB2.


Conclusions about the video evidence

97.   In my opinion the importance of Mr Houldsworth’s evidence has been
      exaggerated out of all proportion. Mr Houldsworth’s existence, and his
      evidence, were known both to the Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner.

98.   There is no reason why he should have been called to give evidence, since
      what he was then saying as to the police and club systems was dealt with by
      other witnesses, notably PC Bichard and PC Guest.
4




    99.    The only sense in which Mr Houldsworth’s evidence is new and might have
           an effect on the previous proceedings is in relation to submission 5. For the
           reasons I have given I am unable to accept that his recollection of events
           now is accurate. Even if it was correct it would not have any effect on the
           previous proceedings.     It would simply have been the evidence of one
           more person who thought that the central pens were full at 14.52.

    100.   The propositions advanced in submission 1, 2 and 3, which are by far the
           most serious, are in my view untenable.

    101.   There is nothing in any of the submissions about the video evidence that
           calls for any further inquiry or consideration by the prosecuting or
           disciplinary authorities or further resort to the Divisional Court. The
           evidence is quite insufficient to consider any proceedings against PC
           Bichard, PC Ryan or PS Goddard.
