hi                                                                           ....
n s :n<-   "A.'i i'i'l T 29 >4n§C2 '    TREVOR HICKS                                       ®03




                     HILLSBOROUGH DEBATE - 8* May 1998

     20 QUESTIONS TO JACK STRAW / HOME QFELCZ.EBOM THE
                 ffllim        RQVQK FAMILY srfPQaT-Gsmse.



Lora Justice Stuan-Smitb glosses over the theft of rwo video tapes from the Sheffield
Wednesday Control Room on the eight of the disaster because the tapes showed
"'nothing relevant”. The key issue is the theft and its motive. The tapes were taken
from a locked cupboard, in a locked and aianned room on a major incident/scene of
crime site guarded by South Yorkshire Police.
How on earth can the Home Secretary accept Lord Justice Stuart-Sraith’s
dismissal of this act.

The Coroner advised PC Bichard in the presence of the Jury that police video tapes
from score board camera 5 were missing Lord Justice Stuart Smith states that the
same footage was never missing.
Can the Home Secretary explain this dear contradiction and what he intends to
do about it?

Why did Lord Justice Stuart Smith completely ignore the variety of excuses from
South Yorkshire Police in relation to the performance of camera 5?
                                                            * •+ * * ■»


At the inquest it was stated to be faulty ai:d therefore not used. This was confirmed in
a South Yorkshire Police press statement in January 1997 which stated “although the
camera was operating, interference from live TV broadcast equipment rendered h
useless”. This was the first ever reference to Outside Broadcast Unit interference, and
the families cannot find anyone who believes let alone accepts this spurious technical
argument.

When actual footage from camera 5 was retrieved by the families and it proved that
camera 5 was working perfectly, South Yorkshire Police changed their stance yet
again. In a press release dated 1MApril 1997, South Yorkshire Police stated that they
had never claimed that camera was feulty, the fault lay with the monitor in the police
control room. Copies of both press releases were submitted to Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith who did not even see fit to comment oh them

 Does the Home Secretary accept that thu is hardly the action of a fair and even
 handed judge?

 Why did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fail to address the Group’s submission re iate/non
 implementation of major disaster plan as per Wardrope’s article in the British Medical
 Journal published subsequent to the inquest.
 Wardrobe categorically states that the horpital never received notification of a major
 incident taking place at Hillsborough. This failure meant that there was only a small
 number o f staff to deal with the exceptionally large workload.
Way didn't ’- ora Justice Stuart-Smith interview any ambulancemen? Surely this is
indicative of bis dosed rr.in d and that he v,as firmly behind the '"sudden death” theory
nvhich conveoientlv renders irrelevant any evidence of ambulancemen and or other
rescuers

Why did Ambulanceman Icnv Edwards have to literally beg Stuart- Smith for an
Lmer/iaw? He was then ‘old he wotud have to pay bis own expenses as he was not
attending the meeting at me uivnahon of the Jucgei Was this an attempt to dissuade
lam from attending77

Lord Justice Stuait-Smith dismisses the importance of Reger Houidsworth’s evidence
on the grounds that the Jury had been to tha ground and had viewed the scene for
themselves. The jury of course visited the ground when u was empty and would ha^e
had a different perspective to that on the clay of the disaster. In any event Dr. Popper
himself made it clear that visits to the ground were not pan of the court proceedings.

The Judge makes no comment on why Rouldsworth was not called as a witness to the
Inquest other than to say in any event his evidence wa£ the same as PC Guest. Sadly
PC Guest died before the Inquest took pir.ee leaving Houldsworth as the only non­
police witness as to the capability and extent of the police CCTV system.

Can the Home Secretary defend this ridiculous analysis or will be accept it is yet
another example of bias in the scrutiny.

Why does Stuart-Smith make no reference to Ed Walker’s allegation that Sgt, Julie
Appleton was not present when he made his statement and simply added her signature
as a witnessing officer ax a later stage. Instead, in response to allegations that
Appleton pressurised SPC Debra Martin, he states he found her a very impressive
witness.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smiih has commented Gn the editing of police statements. The
families understand that some form of undertaking was given by Mervyn Jones, the
then Assistant Chief Constable, West Midlands to Peter Wright, the then Chief
Constable, South Yorkshire in respect of this tampering with evidence

Can the Home Secretary comment on the covert nature of this undertaking and
is he prepared to place a copy of it, along with any relevant correspondence, in
the public domain

The Home Secretary undertook to place in the House of Commons library all
supporting documentation Why are the key police statements not yet in the House of
Commons library and why were they not in the document bundles recently supplied to
the family group, despite them being on the index?

Does the Home Secretary agree that families are entitled to believe they have
been removed deliberately?
Lord Justice Tayicr's terms of reference were '~o yc are into the events at Sheffield
Wednesday football ground on the 15.4 89 and to maxe recommendations for the
needs of crowd control <md safety at sports events. '

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has taken it upon himself to re-write those terms ot
reference and states that the first pan of the Taylor enquiry was to find out what
happened and why ami to consider the response of the emergency services.

Stuan Smith however, accepts the criticisms contained in the statement of
Ambulanceman Peter Howes which was net made until_aft£E the Taylor Inquiry.
Howes was not called as a witness at the inquest.

Does the Home Secretary really feel confident that sufficient enquiry has taken              o v w **c*
place into the implementation of the disaster plan and the emergency response.

 South Yorkshire Police have admitted, that they had been givena copy of the scrutiny
 report some days in advance of its presentation to the House of Commons. Surely tb s
 is a breach o f parliamentary privilege and is indicative of police bias at the Home ^ ^        ^^
 Office
                                                                      I .’   •   w e    J -fi?
 Is the Home Secretary prepared to name those responsible for this oreacn o
 privilege and to denounce the reports use by South Yorkshire officers in press
 in t e r v i e w s , both prior and immediately after the announcement in the House.



 Is the Home Secretary prepared to give access to all witness transcripts,  "
 submissions and other supporting documentation to the Family Group s legal
 representative?


 Why was the Hillsborough Family Support Group toid in March that they could have
 no information from South Yorkshire Police while PC Greenway was away on hohday.            'r /

 Resources were however “found” to enable South Yorkshire Police to o ffe r‘briefings”
 to Mersey side MP’s, to throw down the gauntlet to ITV and for .Assistant Chiei
 Constable Daines to write a series of articles for the media.


  In earlier statements to the house, Mr. Straw made public his disapproval of failures by
  police forces to properly implement existing police disciplinary rules.

  Can he confirm his approval or otherwise of Chief Constable Richard Wells
  decision to allow Duckentleld to retire on ill health grounds while facing
  disciplinary charges for neglect of duty and could he further confirm whether
  that decision was in accord with the disciplinary code in place at that time.
The Police Complaints Authority placed cc recc'd that they had “had to use their
statutory powers" ',o initiate "‘neglect of dicy charges” against Messrs Duckeniieid and
Murray.

Can the Home Secretary comment on this quite dear example of South
Yorkshire's failure to take action within ihe oiscipiinary codes?


When addressing the families at the Commons and Southport, Mr Straw three times
used the term “gross negligence” m relation to the execution by the police of their
duties.

Can the Home Secretary offer an explanation of the fact that despite hia
assessment that there bad been grass negligence. no-one has been charged with
unlawful killing or indeed anything.


The Home Secretary has open'y stated he is prepared to meet the families and'or their
representatives again. He is also on the record ai not being prepared to alter his
position of supporting Stuart-Smith’s report.

Can he indicate what purpose a further meeting would serve and/or is he
prepared to receive further representation with an open mind. I f not what is the
purpose of this debate?


Following the Hillsborough Disaster, major changes have been made in tootball ground
licensing legislation, there are proposals to strengthen up the poiice disciplinary code
and its implementation, and the Home Office Working Party has recommended a major
overhaul of the current relationship between the Inquest and any Public Inquiry.

Can the Home Secretary comment on how an “accidental death” verdict can be
acceptable when alm ost everything associated with Hillsborough has been found
grossly wanting.



Can the Home Secretary confirm whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and others
associated with the scrutiny are Freemasons?


When the West Midlands police serious crime squad was disbanded following
investigations into its conduct, the officers were supposedly transferred to menial tasks.

Could the Home Secretary comment on how Superintendent Beechy of that
discredited squad came to be a key player in the collating of Hillsborough
evidence for Lord Taylor, the Inquests, the DPP and the police internal
investigations!!
