                                                           k
                                                                   »




•1^

                                                      cc       Mr Yates
                                                               Mr Chilcot
                                                               HMCIC
                                                               Mr Boys Smith
                                                               Mr Malone-Lee
                                                               Mr Nagler
                                                               Mr Sandiford
                                                               Mr Whalley
                                                               Mr Archer
                                                               Mr Durbin
                                                               Ms Ransford
      Miss Edwards
      Legal Advisers Department

      HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY - POLICING COSTS

      You will recall that Lord Ferrers wrote to Sir   John Layden,
      Chairman of the South Yorkshire Police Authority, on 27 June
      offering a special payment towards the costs of the police
      investigation being carried out by the West Midlands Police into
      the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

      2 . I attach a copy of my note of 26 July to Ms Adams which
      reflects the latest developments in South Yorkshire. It seems
      that they are likely to refuse to meet the costs or else tohold
      out for an improved offer. I have recommended    that Lord Ferrers
      should ask Sir John Layden for a response fairly soon after the
      full police authority are due to meet and should indicate that
      the offer of a special payment cannot be regarded as running
      indefinitely.

      3.   However it seems that we may need to prepare ourselves for
      the worst and, bearing in mind the Home Secretary's assurance to
      the West Midlands that they will not have to meet the additional
      costs of their investigations, consider what options are
      available.

      4.   We can see 6 possible options.

      5.   a.   The central government might reimburse all of West
                 Midlands additional costs from central funds. This
                 would need Treasury approval (unlikely to be
                 forthcoming) but seems to present no legal
                 difficulties.

      6.   b.   If South Yorkshire indicate that they would be prepared
                 to meet a proportion of the costs, but not £975,000, to
                 agree to meet a greater proportion from central funds
                 through the special payment. This again seems more a
                 matter for negotiation than for legal advice.
      7.   c.   Advise West Midlands (subject to your advice on how
                 good a case they might have) to take court action
                 against South Yorkshire to recover

                i.   all the additional costs
           ii.   the additional costs remaining after we have made
                 them (rather than South Yorkshire) the special
                 payment offered to South Yorkshire.
8.   West Midlands' response, in either case, might be to sue us
rather than South Yorkshire. In that case, what chance would we
stand of making an effective defence and how far would we be
likely to succeed in joining South Yorkshire to the action? You
may recall that Mr Wright accepts that he initially requested an
investigation but suggests it was subsequently largely taken over
by the Taylor enquiry (with results going direct to the enquiry
and not to him); Mr Dear claims that he entered the
investigation on the clear understanding that he would be working
for Lord Justice Taylor. HMCIC recollects clearly that he made
Mr Wright's interest in the investigation clear to Mr Dear; there
is apparently no contemporaneous written record of the
discussions and no written remit given to Mr Dear. South
Yorkshire, however, issued a press statement which referredto Mr
Wright's request. This read "Mr Peter Wright, Chief Constable of
the South Yorkshire Police, has requested that inquiries into the
planning and operational decisions of South Yorkshire Police be
undertaken by another force and has asked that the results of
their work should be given to the Inquiry. Accordingly the West
Midlands Police will conduct these enquiries and will report them
to Lord Justice Taylor".

9*   d-   To reimburse West Midlands ourselves and seek to
          reclaim the money from South Yorkshire through the
          courts. This looks like a non-starter, since
          presumably South Yorkshire could claim that even if
          they had owed the money to West Midlands, by paying it
          ourselves we were effectively making them a gift.
10* e *   To reimburse West Midlands and deduct the £975.000
          from South Yorkshire's police grant, under the existing
          police grant order. It seems to me that this might be
          done under Article 1(2)(b) or under Article 2. Article
          1(2)(b) reads "In reckoning the net expenditure for the
          purposes of paragraph (1), the following shall be
          deducted from the gross expenditure

     .... (b)    any other expenditure not recognised by the
                 Secretary of State as expenditure in aid of which
                 a grant should be payable under this Order".
11. The argument would be that, by inviting the West Midlands
in, South Yorkshire had (however indirectly) incurred the
expenditure in question. They had then refused to meet it, since
they had refused to reimburse the West Midlands despite the offer
of a special payment from the Government. The Government had
therefore repaid West Midlands direct but in so doing had
incurred expenditure which, under the terms of the special
payment offer, fell to South Yorkshire. That amount was
therefore being withheld from South Yorkshire's grant.

12. A possible weakness may be that South Yorkshire have not
directly expended any money.
13. If so, Article 2 may be more promising. This makes the
payment of grant "conditional upon the Secretary of State being
satisfied that .... adequate cooperation is afforded by the
police force to other police forces ___ and if he is not
satisfied on any of these matters he may withhold the grant in
whole or in part permanently or for such time as he may
determine".

14. I would argue that, by calling in another police force and
then refusing to enter into arrangements for reimbursing the
costs of the force called in, despite the offer of a special
payment, South Yorkshire have failed conspicuously to afford
adeqifte cooperation to at least one other police force and that
the Home Secretary could withhold part of the grant permanently
because of his lack of satisfaction with South Yorkshire's
affording of cooperation to other police forces. But I would be
grateful for your views and for any other comments you may have
on our ability to withhold £975,000 worth of grant from South
Yorkshire in these circumstances.

15.     f.   In the Guildford and Woolwich case, the Treasury
             suggested recouping the costs bv making specific
             provision in setting the rate of grant for the
             authority in guestion. which would entail making an
             amendment to the Police Grant Order. Section 31 of the
             Police Act 1964 is the enabling power but I can recall
             Mr Bentley advising in the context of our discussions
             on the possibility of cash limiting police grant that
             primary legislation would be needed to differentiate
             between police authorities. This probably rules out
             this course.

16. We resisted the Treasury's suggestion in the Guildford and
Woolwich case, however, not on grounds of lack of powers but on
thegrounds that it would be improper for the Secretary of State
to use the grant order to recover money which he had been
advised could not be claimed from the authority concerned in the
courts.

17.  Subject to your views, the legally viable options seem to be
(a )t(b), (c) and (e). I hope that South Yorkshire may yet
decide to accept our offer and meet the costs but, if, as looks
quite likely, they turn it down, we shall need to consider which
course to recommend to Ministers. It would be helpful to have
your views urgently in preparation for that.




                                          M J ADDISON
26 July 1989
FI Division
