                                                                                                                      f 2 £
                    ASSOCIATION                                                       Dorset Ambulance Service
                                                                                      Headquarters
                               OF
                                                                                      Ringwood Road
                                                                                      St. Leonards
         CHIEF AMBULANCE OFFICERS                                                     Nr. Ringwood BH24 2SP
                                                                                      Tel: Ferndown (0202) 896777
     V .N . JOLLIFFE
     N A TIO N A L SECRETARY

                                                          W     r-


                                                                ’.          \y{. C-   I
VNJ/ae      PR

                                          vs (-3T o'-         vV v«.   vX                 ^ \-W U   a u ,;,   c   M

5th May 1989


                                                                                                                      r
R M Whalley, Esq
Secretary to the Hillsborough Inquiry
Room 662
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT


Dearxmr Whalley

                                    Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

On behalf of the Association of Chief Ambulance Officer, I enclose a
Submission to the Enquiry which we ask should be presented.

Please would you acknowledge receipt of this, for which a stamped
addressed envelope is enclosed.

Yours sincerely




V N JOLLIFFE
National Secretary
mzkiSP
     Inquiry into the Hillsborough
           Stadium Disaster


               Subm ission by
The A ssociation of Chief A m bulance Officers
                                    S u b m issio n


I            The Association of Chief A m bulance Officers ( the Associa­
tion") wishes to su bm it the follow ing views concerning the needs
of safety at sports events in the light of the H illsborough Stadium
disaster.

2.           The Association w as fo u n d ed in 1949 to, inter alia, p ro m ote
an d m aintain efficient and economical am bulance services wdthin
the N ational H ealth Service. The sixty or so m em bers of the
Association com prise all of the Chief A m bulance Officers in post in
    the U nited K ingdom , the Republic of Ireland and the C hannel
    Islands.      The view s expressed here are, how ever, directed at
    m atters w ithin the U nited Kingdom.

    3        The Association understands that ambulance service resources
    at H illsborough on the 15th April 1989 com prised thirty St. John's
    A m bulance Brigade personnel w ith tw o am bulances, an d tw o
    officers from the South Yorkshire M etropolitan A m bulance Serv­
    ice ("SYMAS") w ith a similar num ber of am bulances an d their
    crews.

    4.        N o direct inform ation is available to the Association concern­
     ing contingency planning, first aid and casualty evacuation equ ip ­
     m ent, or life su p p o rt training of stadium staff at H illsborough.


     5.        In terms of am bulance sendee resources, if p erh ap s not other
        m atters of m edical provision, those at H illsborough w ere greater,
        in the Association's experience, than are to be found at m an y sports
        events which attract large crowds. W hether they w ere adequate,
        indeed w hether medical resources as a w hole wTere adequate, are,
        however, different questions.

        6.     That said, the adequacy of medical resources at H illsborough
        is a question for the Inquiry to consider on the basis of evidence
        from those directly involved. The points w hich the Association
        wishes to raise are rather that:

                 (a) if the resources w ere adequate, then that w as essentially
                 fortuitous;
            (b) if the resources w ere inadequate, the extent to w hich
            that situation m ight have been prevented w o u ld also have
            d ep en d ed largely on chance.


7.         The reason w h y the Association takes this view lies in the
absence of statu to ry su p p o rt for the provision of m edical resources
com parable to th at available to the police an d fire services.


8.         The su p p o rt referred to is that given by the Safety of Sports
G rounds Act 1975, as am ended by the Local G overnm ent Act 1985
an d the Fire Safety a n d Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987, ("the
Act").

9.         The Inquiry wTill know that safety certificates issued un d er
section 2 of the Act are required generally to "contain such terms and
conditions as the local authority consider necessary or expedient to secure
reasonable safety". The section goes on to specify certain particular
requirem ents, including terms and conditions as to "the number,
 size and situation of entrances to and exits from thestadium [or regulated
 stand] or any part of it (including means of escape in case of fire or other
 emergency) and the means of access to any such entrances or exits ■


 10.        O n the face of it, section 2 of the Act w ou ld ap p ear to em brace
 the possibility of a safety certificate including term s and conditions
 as to the provision of medical resources. In practice, how ever, the
 operation of section 2 is limited by the consultation provisions of
 section 3, an d no w sub-section (2A) of section 2 introduced by
     am endm ent. T he requirem ent as to consultation extends only to
     " the chief officer of police and where the local authority is in Greater
     London or a metropolitan county the fire authority or, in any other case,
     the building authority". W here a certificate contains a condition as
     to the provision of police services, the sub-section referred to
     reserves the extent of such provision "for the determination of the chief
     officer of police”.


     11.     A n incidental effect of these provisions is that they address
     the pocket of a " person concerned with the organisation or management
     of a sports stadium ". Such a person can be com pelled to lay out
     m oney on fire precautions and pay for the attendance of police
     officers. M oney is not necessarily the answ er to e v e r y th in g — but
                                     3



questions of funding police resources and fire precautions are in
this w ay answ ered to som e degree.


12.     The principal effect, however, is that the police and fire
services are given substantial "clout in dealing w ith organisers or
m anagers. In term s of advance planning and equipm ent, as well
as levels of m ann in g and organisation on the day, police and fire
officers are in positions of authority from w hich to im pose their
professional judgm ents in m atters of public safety.


13.     N o tw ith stan d in g that public safety is in the Association's
experience receiving m ore attention today than ever before, the
position is w holly otherw ise writh regard to am bulance services.
The chief am bulance officer has no part in the issue or refusal of a
safety certificate. H e has no authority', and no m eans of compelling
an organiser or m anager to co-operate in the provision of medical
cover, let alone pay for it.


 14.    This is not to say that the provision of am bulances and crews
on the day, or the general advice of am bulance officers, is entirely
 neglected.


 15.      The St. John's A m bulance Brigade or the Red Cross are a
 custom ary and welcome presence at almost every sporting and
 sim ilar event. Likewise, NHS am bulance services will often make
 voluntary provision at larger events.


 16.      Again, there is som e voluntary co-operation at local level.
 A m bulance services are able to advise m anagers an d organisers in
 such m atters as first aid equipm ent, basic life su p p o rt training for
 stadium staff, and the setting aside of facilities to receive casual­
 ties—and there are instances of such advice being taken and acted
 upon.

  17.     N evertheless, the operative w o rd is "voluntary7'. Thus the
  Association un d erstan d s that SYMAS placed officers and am bu­
  lances at H illsborough on its ow n initiative, w hile the St. John's
  A m bulance Brigade is of course an entirely voluntary organisa­
  tion.
                                    4




18.    The fortuitous nature of things is in fact well illustrated by
w h at h ap p en ed at Hillsborough. There are practical limits to the
n u m b e r of am bulances and crew7s that can attend throughout an
event. A major incident will inevitably involve mobilising a d d i­
tional resources, an d doing so quickly. It is the universal experi­
ence of the Association's m em bers that the first problem faced by
the am bulance service in a major incident is the com m unication of
reliable inform ation on w hich to base its response.


19.    The Association un d erstan d s that it w as the two officers from
SYMAS w7ho initiated m obilisation at Hillsborough. It was fortu­
nate indeed that they w ere present and in a position to do so. It
m ight be asked w hether m obilisation w as in any w ay handicapped
by the fact that the SYMAS officers w ere present voluntarily and
th u s not at the centre of operations, for exam ple in the police
com m and post. But be that as it m ay, the material point is that,
w hatever role the SYMAS officers w ere able to play, no m eans
currently exists of ensuring that professional officers will be in a
position to act similarily at future sports events.


 20.    As for the funding of am bulance resources, the Association
 u n d e rsta n d s that SYMAS acted w itho ut paym ent, while the St
 John's A m bulance Brigade w o uld have received no more than a
 contribution to its expenses at the rate of £5 per 5,000 spectators,
 th u s aro u n d £35 in all. That is not a criticism of Sheffield W ednes­
 d ay Football Club— at som e events the brigade receives nothing at
 all. But it can hardly be described as funding in any real sense.



 21.    H aving regard to the foregoing, the Association respectfully
 invites the Inquiry to find:


          (a) that on-site medical resources, provided on the basis of
          professional advice an d judgem ent, are an essential element
          in m eeting the needs of safety at sports events; and


          (b) that the provision of such resources can only be secured
          by statutory means.
                                   5



22.   The Association futher respectfully invites the Inquiry to
recom m end am end m ent of the Act to provide:


       (a) in section 2 sub-section (2)(c) that a safety certificate
       shall include term s an d conditions as to the provision of first
       aid facilities and training in use of the same;


       (b) in section 2 subsection (2A) that no condition of a safety
       certificate shall require the provision of the attend ance at
       the g ro und of any m em bers of an am bulance service unless
       the extent of the provision of their attendance is reserved for
       the determ ination of the chief am bulance officer of the
       service;

        (c) in section 3 subsection (3) that the local authority shall
        send a copy of an application for a safety certificate to the
        chief am bulance officer for the area in question (and that
        accordingly the d u ty of the local authority to consult shall
        extend to such officer); and


        (d) for such further and consequential am endem ents as are
        appropriate.




                            V N Jolliffe
                           N ational Secretary
                            Association of Chief A m bulance Officers
                            Dorset Am bulance Service H eadqu arters
                            R ingw ood Road
                            St Leonards
                            R ingw ood, BH24 2SP


                            5th M ay 1989
