                Tl_,

                       |?w i A-o           f^Jvi-olf
h s .9.3/hacttee.peb                                                 WU
                                                                      •}£pr^L
                                                                           &^| ^

                       KC>f~^ j7^ 7 C7                 cc   Mr Burns     !Ti
                                                                            feW
                                                            Mr Angel
                                                            Mr Boys Smith
                                                            Mr Turney
                                               15/          Mr Addison
                                                /t          Miss Edwards
                                                            Mr Heal
                                                            Mrs Catto

                                                                   Goose
                                                            Mr   Grant
                                                            Mr   Cogbill
                                                            Mr   Hickson
                                                            Mr   Haslam
                                                            Mr   Clayton
                                                            Ms   Jago

                                   1 i/C
Mr Goddard



HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE:       INQUIRY INTO THE POLICING OF FOOTBALL
HOOLIGANISM

Thank you for your note of 21 August.     I have one or two
observations, some of which relate to parts of the report on
which you did not ask me to comment.

Paragraph 2.2

We understand that the capacity of Wembley is now 80,000 for
football matches.

Paragraph 2.3. Line 4

After "record", insert "and that of visiting supporters".

Paragraph 4.8

After the first sentence add "copies of the guide have been sent
to all league football clubs and to local authorities responsible
for safety certificates.    Costs of installing or uprating CCTV
equipment at all league football grounds are being met in full
by the Football Trust."

After paragraph 4.20, add the following new paragraph.

      "To assist the local authority in exercising its functions
      in connection with the safety certificate for the ground
      (issued under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975)
      recommendation 31 calls for the setting up of an advisory
      group consisting of appropriate members of its own staff and
      representatives of the police of the Fire and Ambulance




                                                                           2/ )
     Services and the building authority. This emphasises that
     the approach to safety at the ground must be
     multi-disciplinary."

Paragraph 4.2 3

Add at the end, or as paragraph 4.24:

     "Equally the guide is likely to emphasise the need for the
     police, no less than the others concerned, to recognise that
     the safety arrangements of the ground, which will be
     prescribed in the safety certificate issued by the local
     authority, are often a carefully balanced package and that
     proposals for changes in the arrangements or procedures of
     the ground should normally be pursued through the advisory
     group, and not unilaterally with the club if safety is not
     to be prejudiced.

Paragraph 9.2

Delete the last sentence and substitute:

     "Similarly in the field of safety, though the police may
     have heavy responsibilities, they must act with proper
     regard for the overall safety arrangements of the ground
     which are determined by the local authority responsible for
     issuing the safety certificate. These arrangements will in
     due course be under the supervision of the Football
     Licensing Authority. The co-operation and increasingly the
     initiative of the clubs is also essential.

Summary 7

Amend the first line to read:

     "Apart from his recommendations about all seated stadia and
     safety matters".




                                           P E BOLTON
                                           G2 Division



3 September 1990
