                                PERMA
        b d t .i<\"
                                SVSTEM
                               The Components o f Excellence
Perma System Limited, Second Avenue, The Pensnett Estate, Kingswinford, West Midlands DY6 7PR.
               Tel: 0384 271111. Fax: 0384 270189. Telex: 335251 PERMA G.


 )at/ $ h/jtk
 Atfune                  id
                                  W ith Com plim ents
SUPPLIERS   OF   BLIND   MATERIALS,   COMPONENTS   AND   ASSEMBLED   PRODUCTS   TO   THE   TRADE,
                Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                      7 November 1989

Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor
Inquiry Into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT


Dear Lord Justice Taylor

Re:   Hillsborough Family Support Group Submissions

The Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) as you are probably
aware was formed by the bereaved families and we now represent the
majority of the families so affected.

The HFSG has taken a great interest in the Inquiry and we are
indebted to you and your team for producing an Interim Report that
so clearly presented the errors and shortcomings that cost us all
so dearly.

Both at our family meetings and "in committee" we have given
careful consideration to both the Interim Recommendations and the
wider aspects you intend to include in your Final Report.      We
respectfully submit our comments for your attention and would ask
you to give them due consideration.

It is a matter of deep regret, especially to us, that the many
previous Inquiries, Reports and Recommendations failed to prevent
Hillsborough occuring. Apart from the failures and errors "on the
day" many of the contributory factors have been highlighted many
times before and yet in April, and even todaym many still exist.

We have revised our objectives (copy attached) in the belief that
we owe it to the memory of our loved ones to do everything we can
to prevent a re-occurrence.     We reluctantly accept that the
"Football League" and the "Football Association" Managements are
unlikely to show the leadership and resolve required to make
significant change themselves.   The many other agencies involved
do so on a "piece-meal" basis and we conclude therefore that
legislation to ensure compliance with improved guides and
procedures is the only secure way forward.
Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor                       7 November 1989
Page 2


It is our belief that the Secretary of State at the Home Office
already has the power under Safety at Sports Ground Act 1975 -
Section 6(2) and the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987 to     issue an order that could encompass the necessary
improvements to the Safety Certificate procedure. These could be
made bothmandatory and "standard" throughout the land.   It is our
hope that   this time that power will beexercised.

Should you feel it beneficial, a small delegation from our
Committee would be delighted to meet with you and expand on the
attached submissions, which for clarity have been deliberately kept
somewhat brief.

Yours sincerely




Trevor Hicks - Chairman                 Barry Devons ide - Secretary
Hillsborough Family Support             Hillsborough Family Support
Group                                   Group
c/o   Perma System Limited
      2nd Avenue
      Pensnett Estate
      Kingswinford
      West Midlands
      DY6 7PR

      Tel:   (0384) 271111
      Fax:   (0384) 270189
                   Hillsborough Family Support Group




                 SUBMISSION TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




          INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

                       50 QUEEN ANNE'S GATE

                              LONDON

                             SW1H AT




                                                        ISSUE:    No 2

• .   •                                         DATE:   7 November 1989
                               Contents                Page
Copy of Introductory Letter to Justice Taylor         2 & 3

Objectives of the Hillsboroguh Family Support Group       4


Section A:-     Comments on General Issues

      1 .0   Green Guide                                  5
      2.0    Safety Certificates                          5
      3.0    Perimeter Fences                             6
      4.0    Radial Fence/Pen                             8
      5.0    Alcohol at Ground                            8
      6.0    Betting at Ground                            9
      7.0    Pre-match Entertainment                      9
      8.0    Ticket Touting                               9
      9.0    Admission without Ticket                     9
     10.0    Enforced Membership                         10
     11 .0   Access Control Scheme                       11
     12.0    All-seater Stadia                           11
     13.0    Segregation                                 12

Section B :-    Comments on Interim Recommendations

     Maximum Capacity for Terraces                        13
     Filling/Monitoring Terraces                          14
     Fences and Gates                                 1 4-15
     Crush Barriers                                       16
     Safety Certificates                                  17
     Duties of each Football Club                     18-20
     Police Planning                                  20-21
     Communications                                   21-22
     Co-ordination of Emergency Services              22-23
     First Aid                                        23-24




                                  1
                      Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                           7 November 1989
    Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor
    Inquiry Into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
    50 Queen Anne's Gate
    LONDON
    SW1H 9AT


    Dear Lord Justice Taylor

  ^jpe:    Hillsborough Family Support Group Submissions

    The Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) as you are probably
    aware was formed by the bereaved families and we now represent the
    majority of the families so affected.

    The HFSG has taken a great interest in the Inquiry and we are
    indebted to you and your team for producing an Interim Report that
    so clearly presented the errors and shortcomings that cost us all
    so dearly.

    Both at our family meetings and "in committee" we have given
    careful consideration to both the Interim Recommendations and the
    wider aspects you intend to include in your Final Report.      We
    respectfully submit our comments for your attention and would ask
    you to give them due consideration.

    It is a matter of deep regret, especially to us, that the many
    previous Inquiries, Reports and Recommendations failed to prevent
    Hillsborough occuring. Apart from the failures and errors "on the
    day" many of the contributory factors have been highlighted many
    times before and yet in April, and even todaym many still exist.

    We have revised our objectives (copy attached) in the belief that
    we owe it to the memory of our loved ones to do everything we can
    to prevent a re-occurrence.     We reluctantly accept that the
    "Football League" and the "Football Association" Managements are
    unlikely to show the leadership and resolve required to make
    significant change themselves.   The many other agencies involved
    do so on a "piece-meal" basis and we conclude therefore that
    legislation to ensure compliance with improved guides and
    procedures is the only secure way forward.




>SB0R0(f



                                      2
 Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor                        7 November 1989
 Page 2


 It is our belief that the Secretary of State at the Home Office
 already has the power under Safety at Sports Ground Act 1975 -
 Section 6(2) and the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
 1987 to     issue anorder that could encompass the       necessary
 improvements to the Safety Certificate procedure. These could be
 made both   mandatoryand "standard" throughout the land. It is our
 hope that   this timethat power will be exercised.

  Should you feel it beneficial, a small delegation from our
  Committee would be delighted to meet with you and expand on the
  attached submissions, which for clarity have been deliberately kept
^|omewhat brief.

 Yours sincerely




 Trevor Hicks - Chairman                 Barry Devonside - Secretary
 Hillsborough Family Support             Hillsborough Family Support
 Group                                   Group
 c/o   Perma System Limited
       2nd Avenue
       Pensnett Estate
       Kingswinford
       West Midlands
       DY6 7PR

       Tel:   (0384) 271111
       Fax:   (0384) 270189




                                3
     H XL L S B O R O U G H     FAMI LY              SUPPORT       GROUP




                               OBJECT X\/ES



1)     To support and assist each other.



2)     To seek justice.


      # ■
3)      To press for a National Body to standardise and supervise the Safety
       Certification process.



4)     To improve safety at all sports stadia by revision of "The Green
       Guide" and the introduction of such other              recommendations   from
       Lord Justice Taylors Reports as are necessary.



5)     To press Parliament     for the    introduction of           the   necessary
       legislation to ensure (4) above becomes mandatory.



6)     Press   for immediate   improvement of        the Administration of Justice
       Act 1982 ( incorporating the Fatal Accident Act 1976 ) and for
       the introduction of "non - liability" compensation legislation.




                                      sfc He He He




                                       4
                               SECTION A

  1.0 Guide to Safety at Sports Ground ("Green Guide")
  (ISBN 0 11 340840 4)

  It must be said that the 1986 (new) edition has made a major
  contribution to safety considerations at sports grounds. However
  the lessons of Hillsborough clearly illustrate glaring gaps in the
  "guidance" and degrees of ambiguity not previously appreciated.
  We assume that this will be dealt with as part of the proposed
  review/revision of the guide and all the "if possibles", or
  "ideally1s" can be replaced by clearly defined minimum standards.

^ ^Point 1.0 - Revise the Green Guide again



  More fundamentally however, it is only a guide, without legal force
  or statuatory requirement. When it is the "key document" in this
  particular safety scenario its importance must be underlined by
  making it mandatory, with the full power of law to enforce its
  implementation and continued observation.

  Point 1.1 - Make "Revised Green Guide" Mandatory


  2.0 Safety Certificates

  The revelations during the Taylor Inquiry Oral Evidence, clearly
  illustrated that Local Authorities alone cannot be relied upon to
  ensure the safety certification "fails safe". It also highlighted
  problems of standardisation in Local Authorities interpretations,
  practises, procedures etc.   While accepting that many functions
  are currently administered by Local Authorities the diverse and
  "specialised" knowledge required to successfully manage safety
  calls for a National overview of the Safety Certificate
  arrangements.

  We strongly feel that an independant, national body should be
  empowered to standardise and supervise Safety Certification. This
  should not be a "quango" but a formal and full time body whose
  officers/executives would be legally culpable in the event of
  failure or "dereliction of duty". This would ensure the necessary
  vigilance.

  Point 2.0 -   Introduce   "National   Supervisory Body"   for Safety
  Certificate


  It is already accepted that "management" of the ground is
  responsible for ensuring safety within the ground (including
  holding current safety certificate).   To clarify responsibilities
  further it should be made clear that in accepting an event, stadia




                                  5
 management accepts that the venue is entirely suitable for the
 event and crowd envisaged (including pop concerts and/or other
 use).

 Point 2.1 - Clarify responsibility for venue suitability


 The "promotor" (in Hillsborough case the F.A.) should be made
 responsible for ensuring that the venue being asked to stage the
 event has current Safety Certificates.     This would assist the
 policing of the Certification process while making clear the role
 of the "prime mover" behind the event/competition.

   Point 2.2 - Promotor responsible     for   ensuring   that   Safety
^ ^ertificate is current/valid.

 To enable spectators to establish whether or not a club has a
 current Safety Certificate it is suggested that photocopies should
 be displayed at selected key access points around the ground.

 This may seem like a chore to the club but is no more than the
 legal requirement for all companies to display their "Third Party
 Liability" insurance certificate.

 Point 2.3 - Certified Photocopies of the current Safety Certificate
 to be prominantly displayed at selected key access points around
 the ground.


 3.0 Perimeter Fences

 We have no hesitation in stating that attempts to control pitch
 invasion/hooliganism have gone too far. Many of the 95 lives lost,
 would have been saved had pitch access been possible. There can
 be no compromise on emergency access to the pitch area.

 We cannot find evidence of a single life being lost due to pitch
 invasion - anywhere in the world, or at any time in football's long
 history.

 Hillsborough illustrated the dreadful price of over-reaction to the
 relatively minor problems that non-emergency pitch access by unruly
 fans create. In the main these "invasions" are nothing more than
 excited teenagers wanting to congratulate their favourite team or
 player. They are a nuisance, regretable and on very rare occasions
 have enabled rival fans to "attack" each other.

 This nuisance has led to a fortress mentality that on 15 April
 claimed many, predominantly young lives.

 Chapter 15 of the Green Guide clearly and repeatedly points out the
 emergency access requirement - yet Hillsborough (and other grounds)
 have adopted high fences, barbed wire, even rotating spikes and at
 one time a proposal for an electric fence (Chelsea?)      It is our



                                  6
 belief that challenges the undesirable hooligan to reach the pitch.
 It furthers the "territorial" argument (see 13) and cannot but
 reduce the safety of spectators.

 Point 3.0 - Completely remove excessive pitch side fencing

 This recommendation will require UEFA to reconsider its requirement
 for 2.2 metre minimum perimeter fences. Should they refuse, the
 FA/League should consider withdrawing our clues from European
 competition (assuming current ban is eventually lifted) and even
 consider withdrawing from international competitions where this
 requirement applies.

  We all now appreciate crowd dynamics much better and each of the
^^ootball disasters have shown large scale "involuntary" movement -
^llmost a human tidal wave - that has killed and seriously injured
  both those in it and those affected by it.

 We have considered the electrically operated "swing-open" fences
 (as the French example widely reported in the media) and are
 concerned that they could lead to trample injuries (even deaths)
 should they suddenly open. The people at the front (often the
 small/children) could be overwhelmed by the crown involuntarily
 surging forward - exactly what happened when barrier 124a in Pen
 3 failed at Hillsborough.

 Rather than "gates" this nominal barrier should be continuous or
 have gaps protected by another crush barrier, set back from the
 perimeter fence line - just as if it was a gap on the terrace and
 built in accordance with Green Guide rules.


 Point 3.1 - Perimeter fence should be a ''nominal'1 barrier of 1 .1M
 height built to crush barrier standard

 On occasions small children have been allowed by stewards to sit
 at the pitch side.    Whilst well intended this leads to others
 following suit and eventually youths join them, numbers swell and
 it becomes impossible to see a high spirited pitch ingress building
 up.   Stewards are helpless to prevent the final rush when the
 inevitable happens.

 Consideration should be given to a "sterile area" between the
 pitch/track side and the "nominal barrier" depending upon
 construction details of each ground. This is a good psychological
 barrier as well as providing more time for stewards to "head-off"
 the determined.

 Point 3.2 - Crossing the ''Nominal'' perimeter fence (except in
 emergency) shall result in immediate expulsion from the ground




                               7
4.0 Radial Fences/Pens
We can see no real role for radial fences other than between rival
supporters.   Their use to create "pens" has arisen from the
clubs/police desire to have flexibility of numbers/area allocated
and a reduction in manpower required to control them..

Utilisation of the ground and the economics of police manpower are
commercial considerations that again have overtaken safety.
Despite the unacceptable perimeter fence at Hillsborough, it is
clear that the radial fence prevented fans from spreading out along
the terrace and was a major contributor to the death toll.

Clubs should not be allowed to adjust the "away supporters standing
area" (depending upon the club that is visiting) by the use of high
^robust radial fences.

They should evaluate and then specify the area to be allocated and
formally fence it (setting maximum numbers to be admitted of
coursel).

Point 4.0 — Remove Radial fences/pens - except between rival fans

5.0 Alcohol at Grounds

The Green Guide (Paragraph 213) prohibits sale of alcohol at stadia
(under "The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 for
England and Wales and the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 for
Scotland).

Apart from the clear discrimination against football this is a
nonsense when one considers that a fan is able to enjoy a drink at
cricket, racing etc one day and yet the next day the same fan is
unfit to control his intake at a soccer match.

In the Interim Report the point was quite properly made that hot
weather encouraged delayed progress to the ground. Also we are all
well aware of the "supermarket four-pack" syndrome and the ease in
which those who wish to drink can (and will!) do so.

Anyone who has attended a big occasion also knows that the queues
(and prices) to obtain a drink from a stadium bar have a great
limiting effect. The time needed, the cost and the "inconveniece
factor" limits all but the really determined to a couple of drinks
at most.

It is argued that the extra revenue generated by alcohol sales
could help many clubs generate the funds to improve grounds (both
safety and comfort levels) and that the availability of a drink
would encourage some to arrive earlier at the ground.

Even ignoring the Civil Liberties aspect, this ban is a further
example of stereotyping a person into the "mindless hooligan"


                               8
  category - because he/she watches football. Furthermore, the ban
  appears to have had little effect on the so called "hooligan
  element".

  Having considered this highly controversial subject very carefully,
  we conclude that lifting the ban has more merit than its
  continuance.

  Point 5.0 - Lift the ban on Alcohol Sales


  6.0 Betting at Grounds

   This is a reasonably new development that we consider somewhat
^^suspect in terms of commercial viability. We do not consider it
S p o be relevant enough to be worthy of comment at this stage.

  7.0 Prematch Entertainment

  We believe that "worthwhile" entertainment is an encouragement to
  enter the ground early, it makes the wait more enjoyable for rival
  fans - lowering the temperature and boredom levels, and could be
  important in moving the game towards the American "family-fun"
  concept.

  It need not be expensive to stage (schoolboy football for example)
  but must be chosen carefully - if necessary in consultation with
  Supporters Clubs (as comments on Interim Recommendations 25).

  Point 7.0 - Provide sensible ''pre-match" entertainment

  8.0 Ticket Touting

  This is a practise that has probably done more to encourage fans
  to travel without tickets than anything. It is also undesireable
  in that it encourages violence, forgery and other crime. It makes
  a nonsense of selling particular tickets in the "home towns" to
  attempt to segregate rival supporters and serves only the money
  making aspirations of the tout. We should follow Scotlands example
  and legislate against the practise. (See also 9.0 below)

  Point 8.0 - Legislate against ''Ticket Touts'*


  9.0 Admission of Fans Without Tickets to "All Ticket" Games

 Much was made during Oral Evidence that "The Conspiracy Theory" is
 seen by many fans as a means of gaining entry "against the system".
 We do not believe this practise to be as widespread as alleged but
 accept that it is a possibility that should be addressed
 especially as the media have now drawn attention to itI



                                  9
  We believe that it is a symptom of "weak policing" and that only
  in an individual emergency situation should anyone be admitted
  without a ticket.   To do otherwise negates the whole purpose in
  having tickets, turnstiles, capacity monitoring etc etc.

  The emergency opening of Gate "C" became inevitable through
  inadequate policing on the ground approaches and it should not be
  cited as precedent for this practise.

   To reduce attempts at illegal entry and prevent possible pressure
   on turnstile approaches - the "filtering" out of those without
   tickets either by police or club stewards (tied in with handing out
   information leaflets as comments on Interim Recommendation No 23)
   should be adopted.   This activity could perhaps be incorporated
^^with "observations" aimed at the prevention of "touting" of
^Ptickets. (See 8.0 above).

  Point 9.0 - Do not admit without ticket


  10.0 Enforced Membership Schemes

  This is a clear breach of the Civil Liberties of the vast majority
  of genuine football fans and its effectiveness is highly suspect.
  It prohibits the "casual" visitor attending a game of football in
  a manner unprecedented in British Sporting history. It feeds the
  "football supporter = yob" argument and merely downgrades their
  reputation further. One can hardly expect a "bad guy" to behave
  well.

  We have seen many examples of successful multiple applications (at
  Luton Town for instance) for "membership" and this underlines our
  belief that the administration will be a nightmare and prove
  unworkable in practise.    Just as low value "dog licenses" are
  deemed too costly to administer/collect we believe this proposal
  will fail.

  Instead of creating "extra - revenue" as claimed by Government it
  will cost clubs money and lead to innumerable conflicts when bona
  fide supporters are turned away "due to computer error".

  Schemes on the Continent have been discontinued as "unworkable" -
  we do not believe the U.K. will have any greater success.     Why
  continue this most unpopular and fraught imposition!

  As an alternative, Government could recognise that violence is a
  problem of society overall and if it is convinced of the need to
  "identify the guilty" then it should introduce National Identity
  Cards for everybody.    These would have innumerable other uses
  (cheque guarantee for example) and cover all sports and social
  events in a more equitable manner.

  Point 10*00 - Abandon plans to introduce ''Football Membership
  Identity Cards" or introduce National I.D. Cards


                                     10
11.0 Computer Access Control Schemes
We believe this is totally unworkable in practise and moreover will
be dangerous.

Despite assurances otherwise, "wiping" the card through the card
reader will take time and slow access rates through turnstiles.
"Failure to read" rates are quoted as 2% minimum (ideal conditions
in retail premises). We have no experience of whether this will
double, treble (or be even worse) under damp Autumn evening
conditions.  There have been no full scale trials and apart from
the computer companies themselves, few people including many with
direct experience of similar technology believe the technology can
meet the enormous "peak" load in the hour before kick off.

J^nyone who has stood in the queue at the cash desk of a typical
retail clothing store on a busy Saturday and seen the assistants
repeatedly "wiping" the card and then waiting for the response will
understand both problem and the annoyance it can create to those
behind.

You do not need us to highlight what would happen if the computer
"crashed" at say 2.15 pm and thousands of fans are denied access.
Do the police open the gates as at Hillsborough?

Quite apart from the technical difficulties we are concerned at the
cost of these arrangements. Capital and maintenance costs will be
high and we are concerned that this money will only be found at the
expense of other works aimed at improving safety and/or amenities.

Point 11.00 - Abandon the proposal to impose electronic/computer
control systems


12.00   All-Seater Stadia

It is our belief that this will gradually happen without
legislation.  In the meanwhile all stadia should be made safe in
both seated and standing areas. The "atmosphere" that is enjoyed
is well documented but the freedom to choose between terraces and
the undoubtedly more safe seating areas may have to be removed.

We are not technically qualified to comment with accuracy on the
increase in safety on terraced standing since the implementation
of the Interim Recommendations. We must rely on others to guide
us in this specialised area and we will therefore limit ourselves
to supporting the call for "all-seater stadia" if there is any
doubt remaining on terrace safety.

We would add that we prefer that monies be spent on introducing
seated areas with good facilities rather than computer access
systems. (See 11 above)

One small cautionary note that    is worth repeating:- would the


                                 11
knowledge that someone has a seat encourage them to arrive even
nearer to kick-off time - increasing pressure on turnstiles at the
peak time.

Point 12.0 - All-sea ter stadia are inevitable, if there is any
doubt on standing in safety, then this evolution should be brought
forward

13.00 Segregation

This practice has been positively recommended in past reports.   We
consider it should be completely reconsidered.

The roots of this practise lie in the days of "Football Special"
trains, when large numbers of away supporters would arrive at the

•
station simultaneously (which was often in the middle of town).
They could be "ambushed" by home supporters or go on the rampage
through the streets.

Modern practice is that most fans travel by coach and/or private
car. Major teams have supporters throughout the country and they
travel from all directions, park in the same car parks as the
opposing side and are only "segregated" at the ground.

Segregation usually involves a very heavy police presence
"marching" groups to and from the ground. In reality it is another
example of "herding", and is partially responsible for creating
"seige" and "territorial" mentalities between rival fans).

Even the practise of segregating within the opposing teams area
becomes a "target" (and of course the fans therein) and the
"mindless" minority see it as a challenge.

Putting everyone together reduces these effects and although it
enables fans to confront each other these would be on           an
individual/small group basis. Experience has shown that problems
with groups of this size are generally short lived and much easier
to control should they break out.

It is our belief that the redeployment of some of the officers from
"segregation" to "around the ground" duties - where they could
react quickly (with small scale response) to small flare-ups -
would reverse the violence trend.

Hillsborough also     highlightedhow "segregation"     placed    an
additional burden on overloaded turnstiles and no doubt contributed
to the disaster.

Point 13 - Review the practise of Segregation




                                12
                             SECTION B
              Comments on the Interim Recommendations

Maximum Capacity for Terraces

1 *   Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas
      which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate should
      specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted
      to each such pen or areas.

 We agree with any existing subdivision being shown on Safety
 Certificate    - but   feel   "radial  fences/Pen"   principle  is
 undesireable within a viewing terrace area.    A segregation fence
^between "away supporters area" (including a sterile area if
  lesired) is acceptable but no others. Remove "radial fences" and
 have maximum capacity set for "the terrace". Allow fans to "find
 own level" on the whole terrace.


2 *   Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in
      accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide ("the Green
      Guide figure") subject to the following qualifications:-


      a   in arriving at "the Green Guide figure",
           proper and realistic allowance must be made
           for all factors which should reduce the
           permissible density in accordance with the
           range   of  maximum  figures   specified  in
          paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide:

      b   after assessing "the Green Guide figure", a
          deduction of 15% should be made to improve the
           safety margin.

Should form part of revision of Green Guide, especially as range
of 54 to 27 persons per 10 square metres is too wide without
greater clarification of factors affecting "packing density".


3 *   Arrangements should be made:-

      a   to limit the number of spectators entering each
           self-contained pen or area to the maximum
          capacity figure assessed in accordance with
          Recommendation 2 above either electronically,
          mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by
          counting or otherwise, and

      b   to close off further access to such pen or area
          when its maximum capacity is about to be
          reached.



                                 13
  Not required if "radial fences" are removed.       Set capacity for
  whole terrace and monitor that.


  Filling/Monitoring Terraces

  4 *   There should be a written agreement between the club and
        the police setting out their respective responsibilities
        for crowd safety and control and in particular for the
        filling of each self-contained pen or other terraced area
        and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area
        to avoid overcrowding. Any variation of the agreement
        in respect of an individualmatch should be agreed in
        writing in advance.

^j^greed, but repeat preference for   no "pens" (see under 1).


  5 *    Ateach match, there should be on the perimeter track,
        for each self-contained pen or other terraced area, a
        steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police
        officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty
        is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible
        overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area
        is occupied by spectators.      Whoever is so appointed
        should be in addition to any other steward or police
        presence.   He should have ready access to the police
        officer authorised under Recommendation 9 below, and by
        radio to the control room.

  Principle agreed, but recommend the wording be amended to "on the
  perimeter track or more suitable vantage point" and in view of the
  required access to police control, we feel that this should be
  clearly a police officer/police responsibility.


  Fences and Gates

  6     All police officers and stewards with duties in relation
        to the terraced areas and especially those with duties
        under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and
        trained with regard to the recognition of crowd
        densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and
        to   crowd   dynamics.       Training   should    include
        demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed
        to enable stewards and officers to recognise different
        crowd densities.

  We understand the intent of this recommendation       but feel the
  proposal to use photographs is impractical -         even suspect.
  Measuring total numbers onto a self-levelling        terrace would
  overcome the danger of localised overcrowding.       Monitoring of
  crowd dynamics and for "distress" would still         be advisable
  however.



                                 14
7     All gates in radial or perimeter fences or other self-
      contained areas should be painted in a different colour
      from the rest of the fence and marked "Emergency Exit".
Principle of highlighting "gates" as a temporary measure
understood, but we feel that safety cannot be compromised under any
circumstances and that rather than have high fences with gates
there should be no radial fences (except between spectator areas)
and that high perimeter fences should be removed and replaced with
a nominal barrier approximately 1.1m high of suitable crush barrier
construction.


8 *   Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch
      should be kept fully open during the period when
      spectators are on the terrace.

Principle agreed, but see comments on Recommendation 7.


9 *   There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter
      fence (or group of gates if they are close together) a
      police officer authorised to decide whether or not to
      allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
      The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should
      be identified for each match and known to be so by all
      stewards and police officers in that vicinity. He should
      be able to make radio contact with the control room
      either himself or via an officer close at hand.

Principle agreed but see comments on Recommendation 7.


10 * Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be
     provided by the club at each ground where there are
     perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of
     enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
     necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the
     equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade or
     stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do
     so.   Whether to use it should be a decision of a
     nominated senior police officer at the ground.

Principle understood and agreed but we feel it is impractical.
Oxy-acetylene would be dangerous when used in close proximity to
crowds. Bolt croppers would be of assistance on the mesh fence but
many constructions are too robust to cut with such equipment within
the time allowable (4 minutes before oxygen starvation could lead
to brain damage).

It could be argued by others that "excessive" fences are acceptable
with "cutting equipment" as an emergency back-up     - we believe
this is a dangerous scenario and prefer the fence construction as
comments under Recommendation 7.



                               15
Crush Barriers
11 * All crush barriers      should be visually    inspected
     immediately for signs   of corrosion. Any barrier found
     to be affected by a     significant degree of corrosion
     should be repaired or   replaced.

Corrosion can, indeed it usually does, take place from the inside
and is extremely difficult to observe.   It will be worst at the
junction between the upright and the ground (oxygen/moisture
present) and of course this is also the most stressed point when
crowd pressure is applied. No patching/repair should be allowed, -
the whole upright should be replaced.

In recognition of these problems (and other difficulties such as

•
(netal fatigue!), we believe that consideration should be given to
the introduction of a "maximum service life" for a crush barrier.
(Similar to the practise in aviation whereby highly stressed parts
that are safety related are automatically replaced before
undetectable faults and/or metal fatigue can result in failure).
After they have been installed for the "maximum life" they should
be automatically replaced.

If this is felt unrealistic, then a less safe alternative would be
to legislate that after "the maximum life" each barrier must be
tested annually rather than on a sample basis.

"Back-fill" of the sub-strata below the terrace concrete should be
with solid material/concrete to ensure rigidity.

The ambiguity of test methods was clearly illustrated by Dr
Eastwood's evidence and it is requested that all these aspects
would be attended to under the "Green Guide" revision.

Perhaps "ultra-sonic thickness testing" or other N.D.T. method
could be employed if doubt existed on validity of visual
inspection.


1 2 * The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area
      should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it complies
      with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green
      Guide.   If it does not, the assessment of the maximum
      capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in
      accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should reflect
      the fact.

Agreed, but guidance required on percentage reduction in capacity
purely as a short-term solution and full correction to revised
Green Guide standards within a specific time span/should be
essential for safety certificate renewal.




                              16
Safety Certificates
Before proceeding to comment on Interim Recommendations 13 through
to 17, we wish to register disappointment that these were not
"asterisked" - ie. to be implemented before the season commenced.

13   There should be an immediate review of each Safety
     Certificate by the responsible local authority, which
     should consult the club in respect of which the
     Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
     ambulance service and the building authority.     Such a
     review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
     object should be to ensure that the operative conditions
     of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
     substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a
I    matter   of   urgency   following   the   findings   and
     recommendations in this report.

Principle agreed - but time limits for review and standardisation
of requirements and assessment criteria should be introduced. We
feel an independent National Body should oversee these fundamental
requirements.
(See 2.0 regarding National Certification Process)
Local Authorities have thus far failed to convince of their ability
to carry out this function with diligence and vigour.        Indeed
Hillsborough highlights lack of expertise available, overwork/under
resource, etc. Can they be relied on to improve in the future???


14   Any local authority within whose area there exists a
     sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for which
     no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed
     forthwith to remedy the situation.

Agreed, subject to comments under 13 above.


15   Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local
      authority at least once annually and each Certificate
      should require to be renewed annually.

Agreed, subject to comments under 13 above.

16   Each local authority should review its arrangements for
      issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing, amending and
      renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require
      that there exists or is provided an accountable
      administrative structure whereby the functions of the
      local authority are regularly and effectively supervised
      by senior officers and elected members and decisions are
      properly taken in accordance with the local authority's
      rules.

Agreed, subject to comments under 13 above.



                               17
17   To assist the local authority in exercising its
     functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
     of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives
     of the police, of the fire and ambulance services, of the
     building authority, of the club and of a recognised
     supporters' club.      The Advisory Group's terms of
     reference should encompass all matters concerned with
     crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
     ground and attendance at matches.     The Advisory Group
     should have a chairman from the local authority, and an
     effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded
     and it should be required to produce regular written
     reports for consideration by the local authority.

Agreed, subject to comments under 13 above.

•
Duties of each Football Club

18 * Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate
     of flow measured. Thereafter, regular inspections should
     be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of
     admitting spectators at the rate anticipated.

Principle agreed, but again a "model procedure" for the measurement
test of "potential" flow rate is required (perhaps part of "Green
Guide" review!). A safety margin (X% reduction of optimum flow
rate) should also be considered.


19 * The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium
     and the turnstiles serving it should be such as to ensure
     that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that
     viewing area can pass through the turnstiles within one
     hour.   If that cannot be done, the capacity of that
     viewing area should be reduced accordingly.

Agreed fully.   However, we suspect the ability (even the desire)
of some clubs to comply at all times - (i.e. cup competitions with
visits of popular teams producing large crowds at grounds with
normally small attendance figures).    Commercial pressures would
steer many such clubs to err on the optimistic side and use (as at
Hillsborough) unrealistically high throughput rates.       As was
demonstrated this quickly produces a "reverse efficiency" effect
and dangerous "log jams" are inevitable.

Again, suggest Green Guide review could accommodate but maximum
flow rate limit required. If club can prove higher rate then this
should be endorsed onto safety certificate.




                               18
   20 * Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity
        of the area served by them is about to be reached and
        arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective
        communication with turnstile operators for this purpose.

   Agreed.   Specification and "Type Approval" of both counting and
   communication systems should be considered under Green Guide
   review.


   21   Closed circuit television should be so installed as to
        enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
        concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to
        be monitored before and throughout a match.

^^Agreed.   Presumably this was not "asterisked" on cost, expertise
   and delivery of equipment grounds rather than an inference that
   this is only "nice to have".       Hillsborough (and the incident
   Coventry City v Everton) shows this is an essential requirement for
   safety - with "nice to have" advantages of security and/or police
   manning reductions.


   22 * All signposting for spectators both outside and inside
        the ground should be comprehensively reviewed.         It
        should, in relation to the arrangements for each match,
        be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple and clear and should
        be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators
        to their appropriate viewing area.

  Agreed fully. Your emphasis on considering "for each match" rather
  than "normal attendance" figures must be reinforced if clubs are
  not to take extra revenue from large (e.g. cup competition) crowds
  without expending the extra monies needed for entirely safe access.


   23 * Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and
        clear   and  should   correlate   absolutely  with   the
        information provided in respect of each match both
        outside and inside the ground.    Retained ticket stubs
        should contain information necessary to guide spectators
        once inside the ground.

  Agreed fully.   Problems of "ticket size" could be overcome with
  cheap (photocopied) "fact sheet" issued at point of sale and/or
  readily available on approaches to the ground. This could easily
  accommodate all necessary information and/or guidance.


   24 * Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in
        position by a particular time should be reviewed by clubs
        in conjunction with the police to ensure that it
        corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting
        spectators to the ground.


                                   19
Agreed.   Essential police operational orders/actions reflect this.

25   Each club should consult with a recognised supporters
     club as to the provision of pre-match entertainment aimed
     at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.

Principle agreed. Once again cup competitions - with both groups
of supporters being "away fans" - are the difficulty. Suggest your
wording is amended to - "with the recognised supporters clubs"
rather than "a recognised supporters club".


Police Planning

It should be made absolutely clear (possibly mandatory) that
overall safety responsibility is that of the Police both in
planning and execution "on the day". Justice Popplewell (2.2 to
2.5) cites the Shortt Report which highlighted in 1923 the problems
of unclear "apportionment of responsibility" between the police and
the ground authorities, their stewards etc.

(Hillsborough in 1989 - (66 years later) illustrated that these
problems still existed to an incredible degree. You have already
identified many of these in your interim report.      We trust the
Final Report will re-emphasize the improvements required and
perhaps contain the means by which the "falling between two stools"
of the responsibilities of ground management and the police can be
prevented.

This highlights the police role on "approaches to the ground" where
of course the ground management has no legal duty.


26 * The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area
     there is one designated stadium or more should nominate
     a chief officer to liaise with the management of each
     football club and local authority concerned in respect
     of the safety and control of crowds.

Agreed.   This should be formal, documented and any "concerns"
copied through to the licensing authority for consideration as part
of the Safety Certificate issue/renewal process.


27 * The Operational Order for each match at a designated
     stadium and the pre-match briefing of all officers on
     duty there should alert such officers to the importance
     of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is detected,
     of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

Agreed. All references in Operational Orders such as "to forbid
access to the track" should be re-written and emergency procedures
clearly laid down and communicated to the officers of the day.



                                  20
28 * The Operational Order for each match at a designated
     stadium should enable the police to cope with any
     foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a
     match and in their departure.   It should provide for
     sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of
     officers to be made at any point inside or outside the
     ground.

Agreed. The Operational Order should also include plans for crowd
control (including ticket checks/filtering) on approaches to the
ground.


29 * The option to postpone kick-off should be in the
     discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
P    Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
     deciding whether to exercise it.

Agreed. It should be emphasized that TV screening schedules should
not be allowed to over-ride safety considerations.

30   There should be available in the police control room the
     results of all closed circuit television monitoring
     outside and inside the ground and the record of any
     electronic or mechanical      counting of numbers at
     turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the
     ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
     in the interpretation and use of these data.
Agreed.


Communications

Before proceeding, we wish to state we do not fully accept the
Police case regarding the "radio problems" on the day. We do not
believe that these problems would not have manifested themselves
on other prior occasions (- in which case the deficiencies should
have been overcome!) and it appears strange that others away from
the ground (Chief Inspector Edmundson and Police Constable Waugh
at Headquarters for example) were able to communicate and monitor
conversations.  We believe these "intermittent breakdowns" to be
a very convenient excuse - however we would comment as follows


31   There should be sufficient operators in the police
     control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
     received, evaluated and answered.      The radio system
     should be such as to give operators in the control room
     priority over, and the capacity to override, others using
     the same channel. Additional channels should be used,
     where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves.
     Consideration should be given to sound-proofing the
     control room against excessive crowd noise.



                                21
Agreed. Perhaps the use of a "Mayday" only emergency channel (as
in shipping, air transport etc) that is constantly monitored should
be introduced.


32   To complement radio communications, there should be a
     completely separate system of land lines with telephone
     links between the control room and key points at the
     ground.

Agreed.


33   Within the control room, there should be a public address
     system to communicate with individual areas outside and
     inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
     ground.   Important announcements should be preceded by
     a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite
     a high level of noise in the ground. This arrangement
     should be prominently advertised on every programme sold
     for every match.

Agreed.


34   Use should be made where possible of illuminated
     advertising boards to address the crowd. Consideration
     should also be given to the use by police officers of a
     simple code of hand signals to indicate to the control
     room   the   existence   of  certain   emergencies   or
     requirements.

Agreed.




Co-ordination of Emergency Services

We feel this was another area you clearly identified as difficient
in your interim report. Regretfully, many of us do not accept the
assessment that this did not cost some lives on April 15th. There
were some cases, admittedly few, where an earlier and more
efficient response may just have made the difference between life
and death. We agree this fatal shortcoming was predominantly one
of co-ordination rather that Ambulance or Fire Service error, but
feel these points need "following through" to ensure no repetition.


35 * The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain
     through senior nominated officers regular liaison
     concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

Agreed,   subject to this being formally documented,   minuted and



                                 22
actioned where appropriate.

36 * Before each match at a designated stadium, the police
     should ensure that the fire service and ambulance service
     are given full details about the event, including its
     venue, its timing, the number of spectators expected,
     their likely routes of entry and exit, and any
     anticipated or potential difficulties concerning the
     control or movement of the crowd. Such details should
     be readily available in the control rooms of each of the
     emergency services.

Agreed, but would suggest the word "match" (1st line of paragraph)
be replaced with the word "event" to ensure safety of other
Activities (e.g. pop concert).


37 * Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated
     stadium of emergency vehicles from all three services
     should be reviewed.     They should include routes of
     access, rendezvous points, and accessibility within the
     ground itself.

Agreed.


38 * Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground
     should be briefed as to the contingency plans for the
     arrival of emergency services and should be informed when
     such services are called as to where and why they are
     required.

Agreed.


First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances


39 * There should be at each stadium at each match at least
     one trained first aider per 1 ,000 spectators. The club
     should have the responsibility for securing such
     attendance.

Principle agreed fully, but it is our belief that the definition
of "trained first aider" should be made.    Similarly a number of
paramedic type teams (men and equipment) should be available - if
not at all grounds then certainly at major events.

40   There should be at each stadium one or more first aid
     rooms. The number of such rooms and the equipment to be
     maintained within them should be specified by the local
     authority after taking professional medical advice and
     should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.



                              23
  Agreed. Standardisation of type and number required would be best
  specified and controlled by proposed "Nationa Licensing Authority".


  41 * The club should emplby a medical practitioner to be
       present at each match and available to deal with any
       medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and
       competent in advanced first aid. He should be present
       at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should
       remain until half an hour after the end of the match.
       His whereabouts should be known to those in the police
       control room and he should be immediately contactable.

  Agreed, but there should be at least one "back-up" doctor at major
  events.

^ ^ o t h doctors to be made fully aware of their public responsibility
    and they should be stationed in the first aid room.


  42 * At least one fully equipped ambulance from the
       appropriate ambulance authority should be in attendance
       at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

  Agreed, but this first ambulance (see below) should be of "first
  response"/paramedic (with full resuscitation capability) calibre
  in all cases.


  43   The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches
       where larger crowds are expected should be specified by
       the local authority after consultation with the ambulance
       service and should be made a requirement of the Safety
       Certificate.

  Agreed.   The number and grade should be specified by the proposed
   National Licensing Authority" and should be a condition of the
  Safety Certificate.

  All grounds should have unrestricted emergency vehicle access to
  the pitch.




                                  24
