IAN THOMAS GLOVER




1.   Ian Glover, the son             of the Applicants John and Teresa

     Glover was born on             20th January,    1969, and was twenty

     years old when he died at Hillsborough football ground

     on 15th April,         1989.



2.   He     was accompanied to       the    ground by    his    brother's

     Joseph Glover and John McCarthy but only he and Joseph

     entered enclosure          3 of     the Lepping     Lane end     of the

     stadium.
            »




3.   At the       inquest the        jury heard     first from Professor

     Alan Usher about          the cause of death which           he gave as

     death through          traumatic asphyxia.        Evidence     was then

     put by Officer          Geraldine Evans in which          details were

     given, inter alia, of            what had happened to Ian Glover

     between 2.30 p.m. and             shortly after 3.40 p.m. when he

     was certified dead          by Dr. Alan Redgrave.            In summary

     that evidence          was to the      effect that Ian      and Joseph

     Glover took up a position in the centre of enclosure 2

     at approximately 2.30           p.m.     Following a      surge in the

     crowd they       were both       pushed forward.       Joseph states

     that       both were    being     crushed from     about 2.4 0    p.m.

     onwards.       Joseph managed         to escape from the enclosure

     via a       gate in the    front perimeter fence but           Ian was




ANNAAC
         left    inside        about     4     feet        from the       front     of     the

         enclosure.       Joseph tried to                 climb back in to help Ian

     but was pulled off the fence                         by a police officer.              He

         spoke    to     Ian     through            the     fence     until       Ian     lost

     consciousness.               There is           video evidence           of Ian       and

     Joseph together              in enclosure 3              and of Joseph             on the

         fence outside of the             enclosure.           Approximately twenty

     minutes later             Joseph saw            Ian being        pulled from          the

     enclosure on to              the pitch by two              unidentified police

     officers.            He attempted              to resuscitate          Ian who       was

     then carried on              a makeshift stretcher to                    a gymnasium

     which        was     serving        as     a temporary         mortuary.             The

     officer reported that Joseph                         had that morning said to

     her        that     while      in        the     gymnasium       a     doctor        had

     identified           Ian's     pulse           and      attempted,       for       about

     fifteen            minutes,         to     resuscitate           him      but        was

     unsuccessful.               Joseph        assented that          it was        himself

     together          with      other        fans     who     carried      Ian.          His

     statement was then                changed by a West              Midlands police

     officer           to read     "may       have carried          .... "         Shortly

     after 3.40 p.m. Dr.               Alan Redgrave, in the presence of

     P.C. Glave           certified that Ian                 Glover was dead.             The

     transcript           of this      part          of the     inquest hearing            is

     exhibited to this memorandum at Exhibit



4.   The jury never              heard from Joseph Glover                  himself,       but

     were merely           presented with              excerpts from          statements




ANNAAC
                                     - 3 -



     that he had made to the police.             They did not have          the

     benefit of       hearing relevant matters which             related to

     the period after        the 3.15 p.m. cut-off            point.     These

     matters are set       out in a note of a             statement made by

     Joseph     Glover    which      was    taken   by     Sheila      Coleman

         (researcher) and is      exhibited at exhibit                 to this

     memorandum.       Of particular        relevance are the notes at

     the     end of    the record      which state        first, that       the

     ambulances       had great      difficulty      in    getting to       tfte

^    gymnasium     because     of    the     presence       of   crowds      of

     supporters       trying to      leave the      stadium and        second,

     that Ian, upon being.taken out of the enclosure by the

     police, was left on the pitch lying on his back.



5.   These matters when        combined with the evidence              of   Dr.

     Phillips and Dr. Ashton are all highly relevant to the

     issue of whether Ian           Glover's death was aggravated by

     lack of     care, this being          an issue which        should have

     been left to the jury.




ANNAAC
 STATEMENT OF                RE IAN GLOVER

    brother of Ian Glover.
 Got Ian out of bed on the morning of the disaster to give him a ticket
 for the Leppings Lane terracing.

- John had a ticket for the North Stand.
He saw people spilling onto the track and turned to his friend and
said 'Our Ian and Joe are in there'.

He saw a fat man being carried from the Leppings Lane end to the Spion
kop~ end. His friend was trying to revive him.  He obviously failed as
he began punching the ground.  John knew then that the m a n was dead
and his fears for Ian and Joe grew.

He stayed in his seat because although he wanted to get on the pitch
 and search for them, police with dogs were lined up in front of the
^stands.

Another friend, who was on the front row of the stands, shouted John
and said: 'Your Ian's dead.  I'll take you to Joe'.  This was
approximately 3.25-pm.

The friend (                    took John to Joe outside the gymnasium
(3.30pm ap pr o x ) . Joh n asked:

        'Where's our Ian?'
        Joe answered:
        'He's in there.'

John and Joe then went to the door of the gymnasium.  There were two
police officers at the door (one had glasses on).  They said 'You
can't go in there.'  John replied:

        'My brother's in there.'

   moved them out of the way and entered the gymnasium.

Joe took him to Ian who was in the middle of a row of bodies.
Bodies were very close to one another.
John knelt down to see Ian and stood on somebody's head.
He began shaking Ian, trying to wake him up.
Ian had wet himself.  His stomach was compressed and his chest was
protruding.
His face was bruised.
John and Joe staying with Ian for what John thinks was about 5
minutes.
They were very upset and were taken outside.
John asked a police officer if he could use a phone.  He was directed
to a pay phone but could not get a line.  He returned to the police
officer who produced a telephone from under the table and he
immediately rang home and informed his Aunty of Ian's death.

Outside the gymnasium John saw people on stretchers. One of these was
Danny MacArthur (Ian's friend). He was looking at John but John was
unable to,respond to him in his state of shock.
John and Joe were taken in an ambulance to BARNSLEY Hospital (18 miles
away).  This was approximately 4.20-4.30pm.

   They arrived at the hospital where a doctor told them that they
were suffering from shock and were given a drink of water.

John Glover (father) arrived at the hospital and took them to look for
Ian.
They travelled to the Police Station and Hammerton Road Boys' Club
where he remembers names being shouted out.
Travelled on bus back to the Hillsborough ground.
Had to look through all the photographs and John picked Ian out.   His
(Ian's) body was brought to them and it was then that John noticed a
footprint on Ian's face.
They were taken to a table and were questioned by plain clothes police
officers (who we know to be CID).

NB    John remembers about 2. rows of bodies in the gym when he arrived
      at approx 3.30pm.  He estimates about 50 bodies.   This would be
      about right as there were bodies still at the back of Leppings
      Lane.

NB    John's timings as to his arrival at the gym are quite accurate as
      he remembers seeing Danny MacArthur on a stretcher before Danny
      was taken to hospital.

JOSEPH GLOVER RE IAN GLOVER

      Travelled to Sheffield with brother Ian.
      In Pen 3.
      Both being crushed from 2.40pm onwards.
      Shouting to get out.
     Gate was opened.    Few people got out then it was closed again.
     Gate opened    again.   Joe got out. Police directed him to side pens
     but he went   back to the fence toIan.
     Ian approx 5 yards from front fence.
     Joe was shouting to Ian to move.
     Ian was saying 'I can't, I can't move'.
     Joe was shouting to people around Ian to move and help him, but
     they said that they couldn't move either.
     Joe saw Ian's eyes closing.
     Joe climbed    on fence (see video) and was shouting to Ian.
     Joe ran to ambulanceman and pleaded with him to help Ian.
     Ambulanceman went to Policeman who said 'we can't do anything yet'.
     People were being pulled out.
     Joe was still on the fence.    Ian was unconscious but was standing
     up.
     Two police officers brought him out, laid him on the pitch then
     returned to get more bodies out.
     Joe tried to resuscitate him.
     Someone else also tried but said 'it's too late'.
     Ian was placed on a hoarding and Joe and Liverpool supporters
     carried him to gymnasium.
     In gymnasium Doctor (unidentified) felt for pulse and said 'There's
     a pulse there'.   He tried for about twenty minutes to resuscitate
     Ian but then said he was dead.
                               - 3 -


     Plain clothes police officers in Gym kept Joe with Ian.     They asked
     Joe for Ian's 'name and address and they wrote it on a tag and put
     it on his wrist.   They emptied Ian's pockets and put his
     possessions in a brown bag.
     The gym at this time was being partitioned off and Joe was asked to
     move to the side where the injured were b e ing dealt with.   Instead
     he went outside where he met                   friend
                Joe told him that Ian w as dead and        went to find
     John.

m     Joe remembers that the ambulances had great difficulty getting to
      the gymnasium area because of the Nottingham Forest fans leaving
      the ground (the gym was at the 'Forest' end of the ground).

m    When Ian was taken out of the pen by the police he wa s laid on hi s
     back and left.

JOHN GLOVER RE IAN GLOVER

Ian's father.
Was informed that Ian was dead and travelled to Barnsley Hospital
where he met Joe and John.
Was told at the hospital that Joe was dead - but Joe was standing with
him.
Went to Police Station then to Boys' Club.
   Was taken to ground on bus.
Looked through photographs for Ian.
John McCarthy picked out Ian (no 37).
   Ian was wheeled out.
He had a dirty blanket over him.
His leg was hanging off the trolley and his head was to one side.
John straightened his head and a catholic priest gave h i m the 'last
rites'.
John and family were then led to a table where they were questioned by
CID officers.
They were asked how Ian had travelled to Sheffield.  How much he had
to drink etc.
They were then told that they might as well go home.

NB   John states that looking through the photographs was "the worst
     think in [his] whole life".

NB   It was unnecessary for John and the others to go through this
     process of identification as Ian had a tag on him bearing his name
     and address from Joe's earlier identification.




                                &
                                                  15 October 1990

  Dr Stefan Popper
  The Medico-Legal Centre
  Watery Street
  Sheffield

  Dear Dr Popper

  I am the father of Ian Glover, one of the95 victims of the
  Hillsborough Disaster   and I am writing to you in order to voice my
  concern regarding the forthcoming inquests.    In particular, I am
  concerned that there are specific issues relating to Ian's death which
^^pight not be addressed.

  I am aware that the inquest held earlier this year was meant to deal
  specifically with who Ian was and when and where he met his death.
  However, I have to state that I found the limitations of this format
  extremely frustrating and intimidating.  Consequently, there were a
  number of issues relating to Ian's death which I felt were
  inadequately addressed yet I felt powerless to pursue answers.   It is
  for this reason that I am writing to you to ask that you consider
  calling evidence in an attempt to find the answers my family and
  myself so desperately seek.

   I fear that my family        has been irreversibly damaged by the
   Hillsborough disaster.        My wife and I have lost our son Ian, but we
   also have to watch our other sons suffer daily.         Our youngest son
   Tommy, who is 13 years of age, will not go upstairs alone nor sleep
   alone and he is presently undergoing psycho-therapy.         Our other two
   sons are consumed with guilt because they survived and their brother
   died.       John feels guilty because he gave Ian the match ticket for the
Hame.          Joe, our other son was in Pen 3 with Ian.    Both were being
^ c r u s h e d but Joe got out and despite his attempts to save Ian he could
   only talk to him through the wire fence until Ian eventually lost
   consciousness.       He attended to Ian on the pitch and helped carry him
   to the gymnasium.

  This horrific experience has seriously damaged Joe.    His condition is
  exacerbated by the fact that the true details relating to Ian's death
  are not being revealed.  Given that Joe was with Ian from his leaving
  home on the Saturday morning until he carried him to the makeshift
  mortuary I request that you consider calling him to give evidence
  relating to the specific details surrounding Joe- '
                                                    -s death.

 There are a number of other issues that I feel need raising.        These
 are as follows:




                               ©
                                             continued.
          one side and b l-n A r i — n a jt. from his neck. The undertakers had
          to be sent for and my brother-in-law who remained in the room
          whilst they attended to Ian has stated that when Ian was stripped
          what had appeared as a collar was in fact a harness covering his
          shoulders and chest.   I believe that my family is entitled to a.
          true explanation for the use of this device.      I thereby request
          that the coroner recalls the pathologist who carried out the post
          mortem examinations on my son Ian.

     4.   At the resumed 'mini' inquests my son Joe pointed to a factual
          error in the summary which was to be read in the court.   The
           summary referred to a named police officer carrying Ian across the
          pitch to the gymnasium.   In actual fact as I have previously
          stated, it was Joe and a group of fans who carried Ian across ;ne
          pitch.   When Joe indicated this inaccuracy the Summary Officer
           altered the summary so that it read that the officer may have
          carried Ian across the pitch.

           I am most concerned that a police officer's statement could, in
 \        effect, be altered with such ease and without the officer be in.
          consulted, particularly as this new information apparently
          contradicted the visual evidence.

          I request that an explanation be given as to how the sumcary
          officer could alter the summary and further request that ny sc:.
          Joe be called as a witness in order to give evidence relating to
          who carried Ian to the gymnasium.

  I would ask that you give serious consideration to the issues outlined
  and to the possibility of these being raised at the forthcoming
  inquests.

  Yours     sincerely




^^Fohn Glover
                                                  I. SOUTHGATE


               Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE;

, When the great big surge came whereabouts did it come?
  Go up to the plan and just point. - A. The surge seemed
  to come from directly behind and I seemed to get pushed
  this way and Phil got pushed forward downwards towards
  the pitch.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.         I am
 very much obliged to you.
                                /


      Mr. and Mrs. Hammond, your lad was very young and it
 is very very sad you have lost him.   I have said this
 before already I know, but it is.still the same.    I
 wrote to you to check on Mrs. Hammond's occupation.
 Have you sent it back?   In that case we will just use
 the note.   It pure formality.

                   (Short a dj ou rnm ent )

                   JOSEPH GLOVER Sworn

                     By TH E C O R O N E R :

 You are Joseph Glover? - A. Yes.

 Of                                   - A. Yes.

 You are the brother of Ian who unfortunately lost his
 life? - A. Yes.

 It is our dad at the back? - A. Yes.

You went by car with Ian and others to the match on the
15th April, 1989? - A. Yes.   In my statement I made a
while ago, it was the day after I buried my brother and I
have left a lot of things out of it.

Yes, that is why you have come so you can tell     us.     At
the moment I am trying to find out how you got     to
Sheffield.   You came by car? - A. Yes.

What time did you leave? - A. About eleven o'clock.

You had a ticket? - A. Yes.

Did Ian have   one as well?    - A.    Yes.

Having left by car, did you drive straight to Sheffield?
- A. Yes.

What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. It was
roundabout two o'clock, just after two o'clock.
                                                        J. GLOVER
 Q. Did you stop en route at all? - A. No.

 Q. That is quite a long time from Walton? - A. Coming up on
    the motorway we hit a bit of traffic, there were h o l d ­
    ups .

Q. Which way did you come?   Did you cdme across the Passes
   or did you come on the motorway? - A. No, on the
   motorways.

Q. You were in a car so I assume you weren't stopped and
   searched? - A. No.
            /
Q. Did you notice whether the Police were searching coaches
   as you were driving along? - A. Well, when we got. not too
   far away from the ground, I am not sure how many miles it
   was, I think we saw a few minibuses getting stopped and
   coach es.

Q. Of   you just drove on? - A. Yes.

Q. It was of no interest to you.       Having got toSheffield.
   You weren't driving? - A. No.

Q. Somebody else was driving.      Was the car parked up? - A.
   Yes.

Q. In fact you parked quite a long way from theground?      - A.
   I think it was a mile or a mile and a half.

Q. You then had to walk to the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you arrive at the ground, about? - A. I
   couldn't really say.

Q. How long does it take you to walk a mile or a mile and a
   half, normally? - A. Ten minutes, fifteen minutes.

Q. That is quite good walking.    Did it take as long as that
   or longer? - A. I am not sure.    I think it is at
   Penis tone...  I am not sure the road we parked in but it
   was just a straight walk down.

Q. Don't worry about the time. - A. I am not sure of the
   times.

Q. It isn't that important what time you arrived.  I just
   like to know if I can find out.   Walking down did you
   see other supporters? - A. There were a lot, all walking
   towards the ground.

Q. Did you see any of them carrying cans of alcohol? - A.
   No.
                                                               X /


                                                        J. GLOVER
Q. You didn't see    any? - A. No.

Q. None at     all? - A. No.

Q. Do you remember walking past a big roundabout before you
   got into Leppings Lane? - A. No, I can't place it.

Q. Were you checked for alcohol at any point as you were
   coming down? - A. No.

Q. Did you see whether anybody else was? - A. No.

Q. Of course you were driving in the car and you hadn't
   stopped from Liverpool to Sheffield? - A. No.

Q. When you got to the turnstiles, never mind what time it
   was, how did you enter?   Did you enter through a
   turnstile or through a big gate? - A. We entared through
   the turnstiles.

Q.   Do you remember the big outer perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

Q.    You do remember those. - A. As we walked down we got to
     the Leppings Lane turnstiles.       We left Danny, just me
     and   Ian, and we joined... They weren't queues.   There
     was   just like a crowd outside the turnstiles.    We joined
     the back at the turnstiles and then a lot of fans started
     coming down and getting behind us.        That is when we
     first started getting into trouble at the turnstiles.
     We started getting crushed at the turnstiles.

Q. Are you saying you were actually crushed at the
   turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see any Police horses there? - A. We noticed one.

Q. Was that outside the perimeter gates or inside the
   perimeter gates when you noticed that? - A. I think it
   was inside.

Q. Which way on was it to you?       Was it broadways or
   longways on? - A. Long.

Q. Was he communicating with you or the other people in the
   crowd?   Was he shouting or waving his arms or anything
   that you can remember? - A. No.   I think he was just
   longways by the gates.   There is like a barrier.

Q. How crushed were you in the area outside the turnstiles?
   - A. It started getting pretty bad.

Q. Could you feel any pressure from anywhere? - A. Yes.

Q. Where was it coming from? - A. From the back of us.
                                                J. GLOVER
Did you shout out about pushing or anything at tHat
point?    Pardon?   I didn't hear you. - A. There were
just crowds coming behind us.   I am not sure how many
turnstiles there are, but there didn't seem to be any
queues or any stewards or anything there.   It was just
people entering the turnstiles to queue up for the match,
but there were no queues.

Did you see any Police Officers outside the turnstiles? -
A. Not outside the turnstiles, no.

You didn't see any? - A. No.

Apart from the mounted Officer you saw no other Police
Officers? - A. I think there might have been two or three
on the side.   There wasn't any outside the turnstiles.

Were they saying or doing anything that you noticed?    - A.
No.

I didn't hear your answer to my question when I asked
whether you were shouting out to people not to push.
Did you do that or not outside the turnstiles, you
yourself? - A. Yes.

Did it make any difference as far as you could tell? - A.
I think there was just that many coming down and there
was no-one to stop them.   They just all tried to come
towards the turnstiles to queue up to get in.  With there
not being any queues it just formed into a crowd.

I don't know whether you will be able to help me on this
because the perimeter gates were behind you, but did you
notice whether they were open or shut? - A. I didn't
notice.

Did you hear any messages over the tannoy while you were
out there? - A. No.

Did you hear any messages from a Land Rover behind you? -
A. No.

Did you see it by any chance? -   A. No.   Me and Ian had
split up by then as we got into   the entrance to the
turnstiles and he shouted over,   "I'll meet you inside."
As I got through the turnstiles   Ian was waiting inside
for me.

So he had got in before you? - A. He got in before me.

So once you had got through - there is a biggish area
there? - A. Yes.
                                                               X   'J




                                                    J. GLOVER
 Q. Was it quieter in there?   Was it easier? - A. Yes.
    Once you got through the turnstiles, yes.

Q. Were you searched in that area at all? -A. No.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers? - A. No.

Q. None at all? - A. As we got through the turnstiles there
   was none on the turnstiles.

Q. Pardon? - A. There was no-one searching at the turnstile
   as we went through.

Q. Was anybody searching on any other turnstile? - A. I
   couldn t tell you.  The turnstile I went through,- there
   was no-one on that one.

Q. How long did you stay in this big area behind the
   turnstiles? - A. As we got through the turnstiles?

Q. Yes. - A.How do you mean?

Q. Did you go through the turnstile, saw Ian and walked
   straight into the ground or did you go to the toilet, did
   you buy a programme, did you buy a cup of coffee? - A.
   Ian was there waiting for me as I came through we just
   went straight down the tunnel.   That was the only
   entrance we saw.

Q. Had you been to the ground before? - A. No.

Q. So you could see the tunnel ahead of you? - A. That was
   the only place we could see.   Usually as we go through
   the tunnel we would usually go towards the left or the
   right, to the corner, so we could see.   We would h a v e a
   better view with only being small, but we didn't knov
   there were the dividing fences dividing it into pens.
   We just thought it was it was one big area.

Q. When you got to the tunnel entrance on the concourse
   side, were you able to see the pitch at all? - A. Through
   the tunnel?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes, we just seen the tunnel and like daylight.

Q. But you couldn't see what was happening on the pitch?   -
   A. No.

Q. Before you left the turnstile area had you noticed...
   There was a big gate there, we call it Gate C.   Did you
   notice whether that gate was open or shut? - A. I think I
   just caught it getting shut, so I presume it had just
   been opened.
                                                               19

                                                    J. GLOVER
 Q. Was it quieter in .there?  Was it easier? - A. Yes.
    Once you got through the turnstiles, yes.

 Q. Were you searched in that area at all? -A. No.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers? - A. No.

Q. None at all? - A. As we got through the turnstiles there
   was none on the turnstiles.

Q. Pardon? - A. There was no-one searching at the turnstile
   as we went through.

Q. Was anybody searching on any other turnstile? - A. I
   couldn t tell you.  The turnstile I went through, there
   was no-one on that one.

Q. How long did you stay in this big area behind the
   turnstiles? - A. As we got through the turnstiles?

Q. Yes. - A.How do you mean?

Q. Did you go through the turnstile, saw Ian and walked
   straight into the ground or did you go to the toilet, did
   you buy a programme, did you buy a cup of coffee? - A.
   Ian was there waiting for me as I came through we just
   went straight down the tunnel.   That was the only
   entrance we saw.

Q.   Had you been to the ground before? - A. No.

Q.    So you could see the tunnel ahead of you? - A. That was
     the only place we could see.   Usually as we go through
     the tunnel we would usually go towards the left or the
     right, to the corner, so we could see.      We would have a
     better view with only being small, but we didn't know
     there were the dividing fences dividing it into pens.
     We just thought it was it was one big area.

Q. When you got to the tunnel entrance on the concourse
   side, were you able to see the pitch at all? - A. Through
   the tunnel?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes, we just seen the tunnel and like daylight.

Q. But you couldn't see what was happening on the pitch? -
   A. No

Q. Before you left the turnstile area had you noticed...
   There was a big gate there, we call it Gate C.   Did you
   notice whether that gate was open or shut? - A. I think I
   just caught it getting shut, so I presume it had just
   been opened.
                                                 J. GLOVER
You actually saw it being shut? - A. Yes.

Did you notice whether a lot of people were still coming
through that gate at that point? - A. No, I just seen
them getting closed.   They were just finished filtering
through.

Are you quite sure that you saw it closed because in your
statement you say you actually saw it being opened?    Was
it being opened or was it being closed? -A. No, it was
being closed.




         Q.   H o w wide open — when
                                                                  21
                                                        J. g l o v e r


    0. How wide open - when you first caught a glimpse of it,
           r t let's assume it was being closed, was it at that
       okay,
       point when you saw it being closed wide open, or was it
       only a narrow little opening? - A. No, it was about
       three feet wide.
B
    Q. So it had been opened quite wide? - A. It was as though
       it had been open full, people have come in, they have
       let a few in and they have sort of like closed it, then
       we walked down to the tunnel and went into pen 3.

    Q. When you got into pen 3, when you first got into pen 3,
       did you have a quick look to see what was happening on
       the field? - A. There was nothing happening on the   ..
       field.

    Q. No one was on it? - A. No.

    Q. Now you are quite sure about that? - A. I think the
       players had been out, a couple of players, and had just
       gone off the pitch as we came in to pen 3.

    Q.   You are quite sure - I am going back to the gate,
D        because you say the gate had been wide open and was
         being shut, you are quite certain about that? - A. Yes.

    Q. And yet when you got out of the tunnel there was nobody
       on the field? - A. I think they had just left the
       field, yes.

    0.. Kick-off had not taken place yet? - A. No, it must have
        been about 20-to-3 by the time we came in, 25-to.   I am
        not sure of the times but it was a while before the
        players came out.

    0. How long did it take you, once you got to Leppings
       Lane, when you joined the crowd, how long did it take
       you to get through?  Have you any idea? - A. I couldn't
       tell you, no.

    Q. The reason why I ask you this is that if the gate had
       been wide open and it was being shut, we know from the
       video, at least we think we know, that that gate was
       opened at 8-mi nut es -to -3. - A. No, it was before that.

    Q.    And it was shut at 3-minutes-to-3. - A.  No, it was
         before that.   I would say the gate had been open before
         tha t.

    Q. Okay, so you went through, you think, at about 20-to.
       You don't know but you think it was about 20-to? - A.
       Yes, it was about that time, yes.

    Q. You thought the players had left the field? - A. Yes.
                                                J. GLOVER


But not pre kick-off?   - A. No, not pre kick-off, no.

You are right, there were players on the field at about
20-to-3 or thereabouts, and they were going off at
about that time.   Did you actually see them disappear
off the field or is that an assumption      you have made? -
A. That was an assumption, yes.

You are not sure, okay.  So you got into pen 3, yes?
Did you see at that point a beach ball being knocked
about? - A. I am not sure.   I can't remember, no.

You can't remember, or you didn't see it? - A. I can't
remember, no.  I never seen it.

Sorry? - A. I can't remember, no.

Did you hear the players being announced over the
tannoy? - A. No.

You didn't hear that? - A. No,   I never heard it, no.

Sorry? - A. I never heard it, no.

You didn't hear it, okay.  Did you see the players come
out before the kick-off for their .... - A. No, by that
time in pen 3 me and Ian, we were worried, before the
players came out.

Yes, I will come to that.  I am just trying to find out
what you. saw. Did you see .... - A. No, I never seen
the players come out.

Did you see any players on the pitch at any time? - A.
Just after kick-off or . .. .

So you saw them at that   .... - A. I ended up on the
pitch.

Did you see them before you ended up on the pitch? - A.
No..

Right, so you came out - now we will go back to your
story - you came out into pen 3, you say? - A. Yes.

Tell me in your words what happened.  You and Ian were
together, right? - A. We went into pen 3, sort of like
got through the crowd, took up positions to the right
of the gate.

Fairly near the front, were you? - A. Fairly near the
front, yes, and then we sort of like, I think it was
like a surge, we sort of like just got pushed over a
bit and then it just started getting tighter where you
                                                J. GLOVER


couldn't move.  You were just crushed against people,
where you couldn't move at all.  Then Ianwas, you
could see as though he was choking.

Sorry? - A. You could see him as though he was choking.
As I was looking at him, he just, I couldn't explain
it, his face was changing, and I couldn't move.  His
face just kept changing.

That is what you can remember, isn't it? -A. Yes.
Just changing colour in his face.

What happened after that?   Was that while you were ’
still in the pen or had you already left it when you . .
saw his face change? - A. It was just before leaving
the pen.   I was right by him and then there was a lad
in front of us who vomited.   There was a lad in front
of "us who vomited on his jumper and there was another
lad who fell onto the floor ....

Have a little drink of water.   - A. Could I just have a
break for a minute?

Yes, by all means.  Just leave us for a few minutes and
settle yourself down.

            (The Witness left the Court)

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, I should
perhaps, while he has gone, say that on the whole I do
not insist on relatives giving evidence.  Basically
where a relative gives evidence it is because he wants
us.  Of course this poor young boy is obviously very
distressed but I don t want you to think that I have
made him give evidence against his will and indeed, if
he were to say to me now, "I have had enough, I don't
want to say any more", I would stop because we have
plenty of evidence from other people and we can piece
it together.

     On the other hand, it is only fair that if
somebody was there who is a relative and he wants to
give evidence, that he ought to be given that
opportunity, otherwise quite rightly he will feel, "Why
wasn't I allowed to speak?", so we will wait for him to
settle down and then I might, in fact, ask him whether
he wants to carry on.  I suspect he does want to carry
on.

     While we are waiting, can I mention something else
to do with Rule 37 and documentary evidence?  You will
have noticed that I was asking earlier whether Mrs.
Hammond had filled in a form which I had sent to her,
to do with names and things of that nature.  What I
intend to do is right at the end we are going to have a
wad of these, and in fact those of you who were here in
April/May time may rememb er that with every single case
I referred to the form which I sent put,-where I asked
people to check that we had got the names and the
spellings right.  As far as I can see reading the
transcripts I don't think I actually said in so many
words, "and I admit these forms as documentary
evidence", so I think for the sake of good order, and
so that we have got a complete picture, rather than
just viva voce exchanges across the Court, right at the
end what I propose to do is to admit these documents as
documentary evidence.  I don't propose unless you'
insist that I read them all out in detail.   I will   ..
probably read one so that you know the format in which
they were.  They contain basically name, address,
occupation, date of birth, a little bit of information
about the GP which is not actually relevant but when we
did them we thought we might need that so we thought we
would get it.

      I am quite certain that these matters will not and
cannot actually be disputed, but I don't intend to do
it now, I will do it right at the end at a convenient
point, and finally, while I am on documentary evidence,
because of the way we took the medical evidence, you
will recollect those of you who were there, that I had
the pathologists.   Normally I get the pathologist to
produce his PM report and say, "Here it is, T produce
it", but for some reason I did not use my standard
formula and again, just as with these forms, certainly
in some cases, in fact, probably most, I did not
actually refer to the typed PM report, and again
similarly I intend to produce them as a wad, simply so
that the information forms part and parcel of the
Inquest proceedings.   All the information that is
relevant was given viva voce and in fact as far as I
know everybody who has wanted a copy of the PM reports
has had one anyway, but I take it that will be
acceptable?   I hope it will be acceptable to all of you
because I will be reluctant to read 95 PM reports in
full.

     MR. PAYNE:    Thank you for that information.   The
procedure certainly would be acceptable to us.    I think
I can speak for everybody.   I don t think anybody will
dissent from that.

     THE CORONER:   I will probably do it right at the
end, or at some point when I know that I have got five
or ten minutes, when I have got them here.  It is just
dotting "i's" and crossing "t's", so that the record
for the future is complete, rather than having little
gaps in it.
                                                   R« B. KING


I am   asking you    to look at the density of the crowd
that   you pushed    through? - A. I can't really tell you
from   looking at    the photo how thick the crowd is.   All
as I   know is it    was packed tight.

     THE CORONER:   Okay, that is fair enough.  What
you are saying is that when you started your movement
down towards the gate, you have no recollection of
anybody being on the pitch side of the ...? - A. No.

Forgive me, I just want to check this.  When you, were
actually outside, when you had got through, did you say
you do remember Beardsley hitting the crossbar or riot,
I can't remember? - A. No, I don t remember.  I don't. .
remember anything of the game.

No, but you do remember that the game finished almost
immediately after you came out?  That is what you told
me, and I just want to be sure that we have got that
right? - A. Yes.

You    are sure about that? - A. As far as I am concerned,
all    as I seen when I got on the pitch was my two mates
and    Bruce Grobbelaar was looking back.  I presumed it
had    stopped.

I see.     It is very difficult with times, I know that.
That is why we like, if possible, to get the witness to
say he saw this or that, because it is much easier, but
if you did not see it you did not see it, that's all
there is to it.     Okay, Mr. King, thank you very much
i n de ed.

     THE CORONER:   I think Mr. Glover is ready to
carry on, so we will go back to Hr. Glover.

                    JOSEPH GLOVER Recalled

                By THE CORONER (Continued)

Okay, Mr. Glover? - A. Yes.

Now, I think you and Ian were on the terrace, you were
telling me, and I seem to remember you said that you
could not really remember what was going on, on the
field, at all? - A. No.

But do you remember the little gate which leads onto
the field? - A. Yes.

You do remember that, and I think I am right in saying
that you managed to get out of that, fortunately? - A.
Yes.
                                                             47

                                                      J. GLOVER


Q. Were you able to walk out?  Did you walk out through
   it? - A. It was more like a scramble.

Q. Do you know whether you were one of £he first people to
   get out or not? - A.   No, not the first.

Q. Can you remember it   opening? - A. Yes, it opened, I
   think about ten people got out, and closed.     Then it
   opened again and I got out.

Q. What was the time interval between the two openings,
   can you remember? - A. I can't say, no.

Q. Okay.  I can't remember, as soon as you got out you   ■■
   turned round to look for your brother, didn't you? Is
   that right? - A. By the gate, before I got out the gate
   I could feel myself   standing on someone. There is like
   steps, I got out of   the gate but after standing on
   someone.  Then I got onto the pitch and just went
   straight for my brother because I knew where he was,
   then I climbed on the fence, just trying to pull the
   fence down or reach over, shouting to him to move.   He
   was saying he couldn't.

Q. You were actually shouting to him, you were talking to
   him? - A. Yes.  He was just talking back dead faint.
   You could see his eyes just closing in front of me.

Q.    Did he speak to you at that point?   Was   he speaking to
     you? - A. Dead faint.

Q. Pardon? - A. Dead faint.     His voice was sort of like
   going, yes.

Q.    In fact, you have looked at a lot of photographs and
     you have found yourself on a lot, haven't you? - A.
     Yes.

0.    Did you start calling to your brother as soon as you
     got out or was there a little time while you had to get
     your breath and sort yourself out? - A. Just a matter
     of seconds.

Q. So almost immediately you .... - A. I knew where he was
   straightaway, yes.

0.    Yes, because you had been with him, of course. - A.
     Yes.  Before I did get out there was alot of shouting
     to the Police at the gate, not the gate, sort of like
     the fence, we were shouting for help.   He was just
     looking and just waiting for something, something to
     happen, waiting for an order over his radio or
     something.
A
                                                         J. GLOVER


         Sorry? - A. As though he was waiting for an order to
         come to him over the radio, to do something.

    .Q. Can you speak a little bit slower because I am having
        difficulty hearing. - A. Before I got out of the gate
B       there was a lot shouting to the Police Officers, sort
        of like on the track, for help, to do something, but it
        was as though he was waiting for an order to come
        through before he would act.

    o.   Was it just one Officer who was there or were there
         several Officers at that point? - A. I think there was
         one or two.  There weren't many.

         There weren't many.  Did he have a radio, can you
         remember? - A. I couldn't remember.

         You can't remember.   Is there anything else you want to
         tell me, at least that you want to tell the Jury, that
         is? - A. As I was on the fence more Police Officers
         came round then.  I was just interested in my brother
         and one pulled me off and just dragged me away, told me
D        to get off the fence.

    Q. Mr* Glover, can I say how sorry I am that you lost your
       brother.   It is obviously a very distressing time.  I
       think you have also been very brave. I know,   because I
       have been told, that this was not going to be an easy
       session for you so you have done well, a credit to
       yourself and to your dad, and of course I ara sorry for
       him as well.   Thank you very much for coming.
E             MR. HUMPHREYS:     Sir, I am sorry ___

              THE CORONER:     Have you got a picture of 15.03?

              MR. HUMPHREYS:   This is PR1/12A - C354.  Perhaps
         Mr. Glover could identify himself on that for the Jury.

              THE CORONER:   Yes.  Did   he mark a plan, I can't
F        remember?  We will get him to
         What time is that one?
                                         do that at the same time.


              MR. HUMPHREYS:     The time is 15.02.

              THE CORONER:     The number again?

              MR. HUMPHREYS:     354.

              THE CORONER:   Go ahead, Mr. Humphreys.  Ask him
G        what you wish with regard to this photograph?




H
                                               J. GLOVER


           Cross-Examined by MR. HUMPHREYS

Mr-. Glover, could you go up to the screen?   Is that you
being pointed out now? - A. Yes.

It is.   Thank you.

     MR. HUMPHREYS:   Nothing more, sir, except that
the time of 15.02 should be recorded.

     THE CORONER:   Can you show us where you were with
your brother within the pen, on a plan?  (The Witness
marked his position on Exhibit C 4 0 2 )

     THE CORONER:   Did you say you had a time?    I
can't read it on mine?

     MR. HUMPHREYS:   Sir, I have a schedule of timed
photographs from album 2.  I don't know if that is the
list before you or one compiled by our team.  The time
shown on the photograph would be 15.03, but the true
time would be 15.02 because the clock was slightly out.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we have accepted that as being
an accurate representation of time.  Mr. Glover, thank
you very much indeed.




          HENRY JOHN CLARK Called
