                  REPORT OF THE TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY

     The Green Guide

            The Technical Working Party recognises the valuable
     contributions of successive editions of the Guide to Safety
     at Sports Grounds, commonly known as the Green Guide.     Its
     scope and status are described in its introduction as
     fo ll o w s : "This  booklet  provides   guidance  to  ground
     management, local authorities and technical specialists such
     as engineers on measures for improving spectator safety at
     existing sports grounds.   It is a voluntary guide and has no
     legal force".

          In view of the variability                   of existing sports g r o u n d s
     in function and in scale, there are serious difficulties in
     establishing comprehensive and general regulations^                    backed
     by legal force, to cover all the complex details of design
     and construction. ^Nevertheless,                 the Technical Working Party
     is strongly of t h e \ o p i n i o n that a           m uch higher degree of
     standard i sat ion s h Q u l d - b e s o u a ht in pract i c e T T            fridaA
14            prcvidf ft            ijgrunify   \a Mpetir '<&   y^k taV                   __
          l€ considers t:KaE “af revised issue of the Green Guide
     should form the basis on which a designated G r o u n d or /Stand
     is certified by the certifying authority, and recommends
     that   any  departures    from   its  guidance  on     technical
     provisions that may arise from local circumstances should be
     fully defined and should be subject to approval in writing
     by the certifying authority.

     A Centre of Expertise

          The Green Guide covers a wide range of material, much
     of which concerns the physical characteristics of ^Grounds.
     Its successive issues have been published in response to a
     number of serious accidents at football g r ounds.       This
     process has led to incremental advances in the Guide as
     experience has grown, but the Technical Working Party does
     not believe that such a process, although essential, is by
     itself sufficient to cope with present-day requirements.

          Many British        sports jSrounds were first constructed a
     long time ago, and        improvements have been introduced largely
     on an   individual         basis.    A central body of knowledge
     applicable to the        complex design o f ^ s portsjSrounds has been
     entirely lacking.        As a result, progress has been piecemeal.

          The Technical Working Party considers that this is a
     serious defect.    A continuous and expanding body of public
     knowledge, drawn from the relevant professional fields, is
     required to provide a basis for good individual designs at
     modern standards.    At a time when substantial improvements
     are under consideration, including a higher proportion of
     seated accommodation, it is imperative to establish and to
     disseminate rigorous standards of design if expectations are
     to be   fulfilled.     The work of organisations in other
                    countries,   including   the  Comitato   Olimpico             Nazionale
                    Italiano (CONI), can provide a valuable reference.

                         The Technical Working Party recommends the formation of
                    a central body, under a title such as The Advisory Council
                    for Sports Grounds, to provide an authoritative source of
                    knowledge   for   all those   involved  in  the  design  and
                    construction of stadia.     A detailed specification of its
                    structure and funding is not proposed at this stage but, as
                    envisaged,  its members would be drawn from the relevant
                    professional fields and would commission specialist advice
                    when   necessary.     It   would   be  independent   of  any
                    Inspectorate.    The relationship of such a body to other
                    organisations is a matter for further discussion, but it is
                    suggested that the Football Association might wish to play
                    the leading role.

            3•      Seating and Standing

 *                       The Technical Working Party not^ef that FIFA has agreed
                    regulations on   seating for certain classes of football
                    matches, and that the regulations are to be imposed within a
 x                  short time-scale.     It also r e c o g n i s e d that the British
                    tradition of standing on terraces runs counter to these
                    international requirements.

                           It is clear that if British Clubs are to continue
                    within the international community, they will be obliged to
                    close their standing accommodation for matches that fall
                    within     the   FIFA   definition.         For    other    matches, the
                    Technical Working Party recognises that, whilst standing
                    accommodation is not intrinsically unsafe, the benefits to
                    spectator comfort and crowd control brought about by all-
                    seater stadia are likely to accelerate the move towards such
                    venues.      The Technical Working Party accepts, however, that
                    although the introduction of all-seater stadia for large
                    football clubs may be both beneficial and practical, smaller
X                   clubs in the lower divisions may not find it so. Altaa-liW           s^'wrj
vW liM              m y Km              ‘wV                         Oa
     GvM   dbsLh-          In addition, it must be recognised that there are many
                    sports,
                    ,7     .   horse', greyhounds a**d motor
                                                        WvJVi'TV racing, foif ^bxample,
                                                                                     , where
                    the nature of the sporty requires large sections of the crowd
7^                  feo— b®— mofeiie and where viewing from standing areas is more
                    appropriate.      Any recommendations towards all-seater stadia
                    must therefore be carefully worded.

            4*      Capacities

                         The  safe  allowable  capacity  of  any  viewing  area,
                    whether seated or standing, is the least of (i) its holding
                    capacity, (ii) the number of persons who can leave through a
                    normal exit system within a prescribed time at the end of an
                    event, (iii) the number of persons who can leave through an
                    emergency exit system within a prescribed time, and (iv) the
                    number of persons who can be admitted through the turnstiles
                    serving that area within one hour.

                          The   theoretical   holding    capacity   of   a   seated   viewing
area is simply the number of seats in good condition which
comply        with   the  relevant    Green  Guide  recommendations
including those relating to distance from exits and gangways
and size and spacing.          (The corresponding packing densities
in some of the newer continental stadia lie in the range 3 .5
- 4 . 0 / m 2 .)   Determination of the holding capacity of a
viewing terrace or slope is not so simple;             factors that
must be taken into account include the strength and spacing
of    the      crush-barriers,    the  position  of  gangways,  the
dimensions and physical state of the steps, the effective
standing area, and the acceptable packing density.

      A packing density of 5.4/ m 2 is recommended in the
current Green Guide as the maximum allowable figure for
terraces and viewing slopes that meet all the specified
guidelines.   A reduced figure of 2. 7 / m 2 is recommended for
areas   deviating  materially  from  the     guidelines.    The
Technical Working Party sees no point in retaining reference
to the lower figure and recommends that there should be no
lower limit to the reduction;  ie if the terrace was in such
poor condition that it was totally unfit as a viewing area
the figure could be zero.

         As to the maximum figures, the Technical Working Party
c o n c l u d e d that a uniformly distributed density of 5.4/m2
should be safe in conditions in full compliance with the
Green Guide.           It recognises, however, that there may be
variations of density within a given enclosure, and that
conditions may not comply in full.

     The Technical Working Party recommends that the maximum
allowable average packing density determined by the Inquiry
should   establish      a  general   reference     for certifying
authorities.     For an individual ^.GSround, the packing density
applicable to a given standing area should be derived from
this figure, the full figure for areas in good condition and
reduced figures for areas in poorer condition.           Detailed
calculations of holding capacities should then be determined
on the basis of the agreed packing density for that specific
enclosure or other relevant factors.           These calculations
should take into account specific features of the crush-
barriers and fences and of step dimensions as illustrated in
the Green G u i d e . The Technical Working Party recommends a
thorough review of the diagrams currently contained in
Chapter 16 of the Green G u i d e .

Structural Elements

     It   is  a   fundam ental     requirement  of  safety that
structures at g r o u n d s should provide spectators with safe
accommodation and safe means of ingress and e g r e s s .  They
should also enable police and stewards to exert proper
control over crowd movements. If a conflict should occur
between these objectives, a substantial re-arrangement may
be required;  in no circumstances should safety standards be
compromised.    The Technical Working Party recommends that
references to sub-divisions in Chapter 14 of the Green Guide
be reviewed with these considerations in mind.
Separation of Viewing Areas and Pitch

      The Technical Working Party recognises the importance
of physical barriers as deterrents to pitch invasions.    It
also recognises that not all viewing areas present the same
risk,    an d recommends  that  consideration   be  given to
differentiating   those  areas requiring   higher  levels of
security and other areas, such as seated accommodation and
members' enclosures, where a lesser degree of security might
be acceptable.

     The general principle of separation endorsed by the
Technical Working Party is that the means adopted should
provide sufficient security against pitch incursions to
enable the police to take timely and effective action should
such incidents occur.     Clearly a balance has to be struck
between   crowd    control   and  safety.     A   configuration
recommended for wider consideration consists of a perimeter
wall on the pitch-side backed by a parallel and continuous
crush-barrier   on   the  terrace-side,   set   back  from  the
perimeter wall so as to provide a clear walk-way between the
two;  except in emergencies, spectators would not be allowed
to enter the walk-way.   Such an arrangement would reduce the
risks associated with a common feature of British >6tounds,
namely that the front steps of terraces are substantially
lower than the level of the pitch:         immediate attention
should be given to the elimination of this hazard.

     The Technical Working Party recommends that the maximum
height of perimeter fences should be determined in relation
to the UEFA standard of 2.2m.       It also recommends the
removal of overhanging sections and spiked or barbed-wire
attachments at the tops of fences.

     A form of separation increasingly adopted in new stadia
is the dry moat.          To be effective, a dry moat must be
sufficiently wide and deep,         and should be protected by
fences on both sides to ensure that spectators and players
do not fall into it.         Where enough space is available, a
moat may offer an attractive solution, but its application
to older g r o u n d s is likely to be restricted by limitations
of space.

Emergency Access to Pitch

     The Technical Working Party recommends that emergency
access to the pitch should be provided from a l l w adjacent
viewing areas.    It considers the provision of gatefl/^in any
formal barrier to be in all cases advantageous for the
evacuation of adjacent enclosures and essential except where
adequate alternative arrangements exist.       Where fences,
barriers or moats are installed the majority view of the
Technical Working Party is that there should be clear
gangways pleading to emergency exits on to the pitch. *<2rT h e ^
exit gates^should be at least 1.1 metres wide or as wide as
the gangways feeding into them, whichever is the larger and
should,^ sufficient  in   dimensions and   spacing  to   allow
                                                                   j
evacuation of the enclosure within a prescribed time.    The ^
Working Party recorded a minority view that the -peiieiag— of jwW
gangways exacerbated friction on terraces,              um
             -fo* l^nipftr Cvewd 06*«oV (wL .
Crush Barriers

     A review of the procedures for inspection and testing
of barriers is recommended.    The Technical Working Party
considers that greater emphasis should be given to thorough
recorded and certified annual    inspections of all crush
barriers for conditions which might impair their structural
performance.

     It is further recommended that 25% of barriers, evenly
spaced through each enclosure as designated by a competent
engineer, continue to be tested each year.   In addition, all
barriers which the inspection has identified as of possibly
sub-standard condition should also be tested.

     The adopted test method should be capable of applying
to barrier rail, post and foundation anchorage, a loading
equivalent to a uniformly distributed load 1.20 x the design
load of the barrier as at present.

     The test procedure should be revised in line with
current practice for structural testing to incorporate (i) a
detailed visual inspection of the barrier, (ii) a bedding-in
cycle taken to a percentage of the design loading and (iii)
a single cycle of proof testing taken as at present to 1.20
x the design loading with deflections recorded for the rail
and the tops of the posts at maximum load.

     After the full proof load has been held for a minimum
of five minutes the full deflection should be recorded prior
to release of loading and the residual unloaded deflection
recorded.

     It is recommended that barriers are considered to be
satisfactory where no significant defects are revealed by
the inspection and where the required percentage recovery
(dependent on the materials of construction of the barrier)
from the full deflection under the proof load cycle is
achieved for all elements.

Stands

     A substantial part of Chapter 10 of the Green Guide,
'Roofed  Stands  with   Seated  Accommodation',  deals  with
temporary structures.   It is recommended that this material
should be placed in a separate chapter, and that it should
give explicit references as required to British Standards
and to applicable regulations.

     The remainder, which might be called 'Covered Standing
and  Seated  Accommodation',   should  clarify  the  special
requirements for safety that are involved, nothing that fire
risk is not the only hazard and that statutory control of
the requirements may be vested in different authorities.
Appropriate references to Building Regulations should be
made.    It is important to ensure that all spectators can be
cleared into safe protected escape routes within prescribed
times, although such routes need not be exits from the stand
as a w h o l e .

Ingress/Egress

     The current Chapters on Ingress and Egress in the Green
Guide (Chapters 5 and 6 ) contain much useful information,
but are nonetheless in need of some revision.   Consideration
was given by the Technical Working Party to the possible
amalgamation of features common to both ingress and egress,
but despite the common ground it is recognised that emphases
might well differ.    The Working Party does not therefore
recommend amalgamation of the individual Gshapters.

Ingress

     The Technical Working Party felt that Chapter 5 needed
expansion to incorporate additional clauses on                (a) the
positive counting and recording of those passing through
each turnstile;       (b) the location of amenities inside the
ground to avoid obstructing or disrupting the flow between
turnstile     a nd   enclosures;        (c)  the     sub-division   of
enclosures;      (d) the adequacy of well distributed entrances
into large enclosures to facilitate even packing;              and (e)
the design of entrances so as to avoid local pressure on
spectators      caused,    for    ex ample,   by    downward    ramps.
Informative       diagrams   should     be  adopted      and   general
principles laid down, wherever possible.               The Technical
Working Party would not favour the introduction of numerical
examples   which     might,   in    any  event,    be   difficult   to
establish. Tjr The— Teohaica 1-— Working— Par-fey views the current
maximum notional flow rate per turnstile of 750 persons per
hour (as set out in paragraph 47 Green Guide) as too high,
and recommends a figure of 500 as the median for a normal
turnstile.    Furthermore, it recommends that variations up or
down be approved by the certifying authority, subject to a
maximum upper limit of 660 persons per hour.

Egress

     Greater   cross-referencing   with   other  Chapters  is
required, and the Technical Working Party favours expansion
or amendment of a number of paragraphs.    In particular, the
density  figure  set out    in paragraph   54 in respect of
reservoir areas is felt to be too high, and the members of
the Technical Working Party recommend that, where reservoir
areas cannot be removed from egress routes, a lower density
of 35-40 persons per 10 sq metres be substituted.         The
Technical   Working   Party   favours   greater  emphasis  on
networking, and believes that the Green Guide should include
a stipulation that each ground produce proper, networked
plans, delineating all aspects of ingress/egress.
Enclosures/Turnstiles

       The Technical Working Party strongly recommends that
 there should be a direct one-to-one relationship between
 turnstiles and enclosures in order to maintain accurate
 counts of entries.   A review of the current state of League
^^frounds had shown that sub-divisions such as had occurred at
 Hillsborough were rare, and had been initiated by police for
 crowd control.    Where such sub-divisions do exist, it is
 imperative that the totals entering each sub-division should
 be counted separately.

Inspections and Tests

          Inspection and tests of all equipment and structures at
g r o u n d s are vital features of good operation.   Their range
 is wide, extending from visual inspection before and after
each event to regular testing of structural components.        It
 is a matter of serious concern that the interpretation of
requirements by those responsible is unacceptably variable.
The Technical Working Party considers that action should be
 taken to ensure that common high standards of inspection and
 test are realised, and makes the following recommendations.

(i)     The   Green   Guide should  include a  comprehensive
tabulation of inspections and tests covering the essential
technical features of j&rounds.     It should prescribe the
minimum   frequencies   at which the inspections and tests
should be conducted.

(ii)   The required levels of competence of those       carrying
out the inspections and tests should be defined.

(iii)   Records of the results of inspections and tests,
including the identification of defects and the remedies
adopted, should be certified by those carrying out the work.

(iv)    A national Inspectorate should be established to
oversee the adoption of common standards of inspection and
test.  Its terms of reference should include the compilation
and maintenance    of a national register of organisations
employed to carry out      inspections and tests;     central
recording of the extent and type of the inspections and
tests adopted at individual jSrounds;    and the provision of
advice on inspection and test for those responsible for
carrying out the work and for certifying authorities.      It
would  be   in  the   interest  of  common  standards  if  an
Inspectorate of    this   kind dealt with the jSfroundsof all
relevant sports, and consideration should     be given to its
formation through an association of their governing bodies.

Fire Safety

     There is general recognition amongst Technical Working
Party members   that the current Chapter    on Fire Safety
(Chapter 11)  is well-defined.    It contains much useful
advice on egress and means of escape, application of which
is not   restricted to fire     risks   and   which   would   bear
repetition in other Chapters.

     The Technical Working Party considers that£ it is
essential to maintain simple, clear lines of authority and
communication;   independent input from individual bodies is
to be avoided. With that in mind, its members believe that
consultation on all safety matters should be directly with
the certifying authority who, in turn, would consult with
the fire, police, and other authorities.

Emergency/Auxiliary Power

         The Technical Working Party considers that the current
Green Guide contains insufficient information on auxiliary
p o w e r . It recommends a separate chapter on the topic with a
requirement that emergency power should be sufficient to
maintain an adequate level of lighting,          public address
system^ and to operate any electronic gates e t c .      \
                                                       * A 1?#
Is               'Hvnai 4   ^      AOrtrwii
Communications

     The Technical Working Party considers that too little
weight has in the past been attached to the need for a
comprehensive communications system,  capable of reaching
both inside and outside the ground.

     Chapter   12 of   the Green Guide    therefore requires
substantial amendment to reflect the importance of effective
communications   systems, the need   to make use of high-
technology equipment, and the value of closer co-operation
between club and police personnel.     The Technical Working
Party considers that Interim Recommendations 31-34 should be
retained permanently and incorporated into the Green Guide.

Disabled Spectators

     The current 'Green Guide' fails to address the specific
problems   encountered    by   dis a b l e d spectators and  the
Technical Working Party recommends the introduction of a
section  to  cover   these   aspects.        It  should deal  in
particular with Ingress and Egress and with the provision of
self-contained viewing areas.

Stairways and Ramps

     The Technical Working Party notes the dangers presented
by stairways and ramps,    particularly those used by the
public in large numbers, and recommends extensive redrafting
of the Green Guide to present more sharply the hazards
involved.    It recognises   that the standards of safety
required for stairways and ramps which form part of the
access between enclosures and an exit and those which exist
as gangways within enclosures differ and recommends that the
differences be explained in more detail.

     Similarly,   the  Working   Party   believes  that  the
channelling of flows by the provision of handrails should be
given greater emphasis.    The recommended width of channel
for both stairways and ramps should not exceed three persons
(unit widths) in ttfe^abreast, and the width of up to 1.8
metres permitted by paragraph 76 should therefore be reduced
accordingly.   Handrails should extend, by at least 300mm
beyond the top and bottom of any stairway or ramp.

     The   difference  between  handrails,  balustrades  and
barriers on or near the top and bottom of stairways and
ramps, and their appropriate strength requirements, needs to
be clarified.

     The Technical Working Party recommends the inclusion in
the Green Guide of a greater number of diagrams illustrating
the   potentially   hazardous   situations  in  relation  to
stairways   and ramps  and of    the principles  behind  the
provisions.
Egress

     Greater   cross-referencing   with   other  Chapters  is
required, and the Technical Working Party favours expansion
or amendment of a number of paragraphs.    In particular, the
density  figure set out     in paragraph   54 in respect of
reservoir areas is felt to be too high, and the members of
the Technical Working Party recommend that, where reservoir
areas cannot be removed from egress routes, a lower density
of 35-40 persons per 10 sq metres be substituted.         The
Technical   Working   Party   favours   greater  emphasis  on
networking, and believes that the Green Guide should include
a stipulation that each ground produce proper, networked
plans, delineating all aspects of ingress/egress.

Enclosures/Turnstiles

     The Technical Working Party strongly recommends that
there should be a direct one-to-one relationship between
turnstiles and enclosures in order to maintain accurate
counts of entries.   A review of the current state of League
grounds had shown that sub-divisions such as had occurred at
Hillsborough were rare, and had been initiated by police for
crowd control.    Where such sub-divisions do exist, it is
imperative that the totals entering each sub-division should
be counted separately.

Inspections and Tests

     Inspection and tests of all equipment and structures at
grounds are vital features of good operation.    Their range
is wide, extending from visual inspection before and after
each event to regular testing of structural components.    It
is a matter of serious concern that the interpretation of
requirements by those responsible is unacceptably variable.
The Technical Working Party considers that action should be
taken to ensure that common high standards of inspection and
test are realised, and makes the following recommendations.

(i)     The  Green   Guide should  include a  comprehensive
tabulation of inspections and tests covering the essential
technical features of grounds.     It should prescribe the
minimum   frequencies  at which the inspections and tests
should be conducted.

(ii)   The required levels of competence of those    carrying
out the inspections and tests should be defined.

(iii)  Records of the results    of inspections and tests,
including the identification of defects and the remedies
adopted, should be certified by those carrying out the work.

(iv)   A national Inspectorate    should be established to
oversee the adoption of common standards of inspection and
test.  Its terms of reference should include the compilation
and maintenance of a national register of organisations
employed to carry out     inspections and tests;     central
recording of the extent and type of the inspections and
tests adopted at individual grounds;     and the provision of
advice on inspection and test for those responsible for
carrying out the work and for certifying authorities.      It
would  be   in  the   interest of   common  standards   if an
Inspectorate of this kind dealt with the grounds       of all
relevant sports,    and consideration should be given to its
formation through an association of their governing bodies.

Fire Safety

     There is general recognition amongst Technical Working
Party members   that the current Chapter on Fire Safety
(Chapter 11) is    well-defined.   It contains much useful
advice on egress and means of escape, application of which
is not restricted to fire risks      and which would bear
repetition in other Chapters.

     The Technical    Working Party  considers   that it  is
essential to maintain simple, clear lines of authority and
communication;   independent input from individual bodies is
to be avoided. With that in mind, its members believe that
consultation on all safety matters should be directly with
the certifying authority who, in turn, would consult with
the fire, police, and other authorities.

Emergency/Auxiliary Power

     The Technical Working Party considers that the current
Green Guide contains insufficient information on auxiliary
power.  It recommends a separate chapter on the topic with a
requirement that emergency power should be sufficient to
maintain an adequate level of lighting,      public address
system and to operate any electronic gates etc for a period
of three hours from the time of failure of the normal
supply.

Communications

     The Technical Working Party considers that too little
weight has in the past been attached to the need for a
comprehensive communications system,  capable of reaching
both inside and outside the ground.

     Chapter  12 of   the Green   Guide  therefore  requires
substantial amendment to reflect the importance of effective
communications systems,   the need to make use of high-
technology equipment, and the value of closer co-operation
between club and police personnel.    The Technical Working
Party considers that Interim Recommendations 31-34 should be
retained permanently and incorporated into the Green Guide.

Disabled Spectators

     The current 'Green Guide' fails to address the specific
problems   encountered   by   disa b l e d spectators and  the
Technical Working Party recommends the introduction of a
section  to  cover  these   aspects.       It  should deal  in
particular with Ingress and Egress and with the provision of
self-contained viewing areas.

Stairways and Ramps

     The Technical Working Party notes the dangers presented
by stairways    and ramps,  particularly those used   by the
public in large numbers, and recommends extensive redrafting
of the Green    Guide to present   more sharply   the hazards
involved.    It recognises   that the standards of safety
required for stairways and ramps which form part of the
access between enclosures and an exit and those which exist
as gangways within enclosures differ and recommends that the
differences be explained in more detail.

     Similarly,    the  Working   Party  believes  that  the
channelling of flows by the provision of handrails should be
given greater emphasis.    The recommended width of channel
for both stairways and ramps should not exceed three persons
(unit widths) in       abreast, and the width of up to 1.8
metres permitted by paragraph 76 should therefore be reduced
accordingly.    Handrails should extend, by at least 300mm
beyond the top and bottom of any stairway or ramp.

     The   difference  between  handrails,  balustrades  and
barriers on or near the top and bottom of stairways and
ramps, and their appropriate strength requirements, needs to
be clarified.

     The Technical Working Party recommends the inclusion in
the Green Guide of a greater number of diagrams illustrating
the  potentially    hazardous   situations   in  relation  to
stairways  and  ramps  and of    the  principles  behind  the
provisions.
