                                                                              tiA l
                                       A
      From:          HRS 6 I MOODY                   Miss A M :Edwards   F2
                     F2 DIVISION                        Jopl
                                                     Mr Hopoey           F8
                     ®   273 2621
                     21 January 1992



      Mr Webb
      G2 Division

      ADJOURNMENT DEBATE : FRIDAS 24 JANUARY GEORGE HOWARTH MP :
      IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TAYLOR REPORT

... I attach our contribution to the briefing material for Mr Lloyd
    in relation to his debate. Although it appears that Mr Howarth
    intends to confine himself strictly to the implementation of the
^   Taylor Report, in view of Mr Howarth's previous involvement in
W   his case, I have provided speech notes and a short background
    note covering the issues of police responsibility and
  ^disciplinary proceedings of police officers, arising from the
    events at Hillsborough on 18 April 1989.




                                     MRS G I MOODY




      GIM-M811.000
  BACKGROUND NOTE

  1    On 15 April 1989, 95 fans of the Liverpool Football Club
  were crushed to death at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.
  In conducting the subsequent inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor asked
  the West Midlands Constabulary to make investigations on his
  behalf. Subsequently, further inquiries had to be made and a
  number of statements taken (many under caution) to determine
  whether criminal or disciplinary proceedings should be brought
  against a police officer, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
  Sheffield City Council'or their advisers.

  2    The Police Complaints Authority decided, when considering
  the result of these investigations, that two officers of the
  South Yorkshire Constabulary should answer to disciplinary
^charges.    The senior of these officers, Chief Superintendent
  Duckenfield subsequently resigned on grounds of ill health, and
  the PCA announced earlier this week that the remaining officer,
  Superintendent Murray, should not be required to answer charges
  in the absence of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

  3    None of these matters for Home Office Ministers but are the
  responsibility of the Police Complaints Authority, South
  Yorkshire Constabulary and the South Yorkshire Police Authority.




  GIM-M811.000
DRAFT SPEECH FOR ADJOURNMENT DEBATE - FRIDAY 24 JANUARY 1992

History


1       As Mr Howarth is aware the West Midlands Police Force
undertook        two   major       investigations   into     the events    at
Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.

                               J
2      The first of these investigations was, of course, the formal
enquiry by the Lord Justice Taylor which was commissioned by the
Home Secretary on the second day after the disaster.


h      The investigation,          which was inaugurated by the        Taylor
inquiry, involved some 440 officers from the West Midlands police
force.         They took some 3,776 statements as well as taking
advantage of video films from 3 separate sources which provided,
in all, some 71 hours of further evidence.


4      This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted,                and I
think that it is fair to say that the interim report of Lord
Justice Taylor on the              disaster gives a        veryclear pictureof
police activity on the             day.


Criminal Proceedings


5      In a second inquiry, which followed up their work for Lord
Justice Taylor, the West Midlands Police Force conducted a
further major investigation with a view to discovering whether
the disaster resulted from, or was made worse by, criminal

GIM-M811.000
  activity on the part of any individual.                 The Director of Public
  Prosecutions concluded that the results did not indicate that any
  one should be made the subject of criminal proceedings.                   Perhaps
  I could add a comment on this.              The conclusions at which the
  Director of Public Prosecutions arrived mean that, so far as
  anyone can discover - and the evidence which has been amassed has
  been considerable - this terrible disaster was not the result of
  criminal        activity.    .» The    result      is    that   neither     Chief
  Superintendent Duckenfield nor Superintendent Murray - nor, for
  that matter, any other person - has been charged with any crime.


^Disciplinary Proceedings


  6       For anyone other than a police officer that would be the end
  of the matter.        For police officers, though, there remains the
 question of whether, without having good or sufficient cause,
 they failed to fulfil all the requirements of their role as
 police officers.


  7       Another investigation of the event, of the day, therefore
  covered        complaints   which     had   been    made     regarding     police
  behaviour.       This investigation involved the taking of a further
  5,341 statements as well as the scrutiny of all the material
 which had previously been examined. It was supervised throughout
  by the Police Complaints Authority.


  8       The Police     Complaints Authority             subsequently expressed
  themselves as satisfied that it had been properly and thoroughly

  GIM-M811.000
  conducted.        The privacy of people            who complain against the
  police         is protected by the courts.               The results of this
  investigation cannot therefore be published.


  9       In order to maintain discipline within the force, the Police
  Complaints Authority and the Deputy Chief Constable are required
  to consider whether there are ways in which the officer may have
  failed in his duty.          If so, they are required to arrange for a
  formal hearing of the charges against him.


  10      This was done.       After receiving the report of the complaint
^investigation,          the   PCA    decided   that       Chief   Superintendent
  Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary
  charges.


  11      A police disciplinary hearing is held in private.                 It is
  concerned only with whether or not the officer concerned may have
  failed to conform to police discipline.               The hearing would not,
  therefore, in any way contribute to public knowledge of what
  happened on the day, nor would it do more than receive and
  consider the evidence,             which   is already known,         as to   the
  propriety of Mr Duckenfield's conduct.


  12      There     is   one   important     issue    in    relation   to   police
  discipline which is often ignored.                  There are a number of
  punishments which can be imposed for bad discipline.                   The most
  serious punishment, though, which a disciplinary tribunal can
  impose, is that of dismissal or of requirement to resign.

  GIM-M811.000
  13       This is the heaviest punishment which it is possible to
  award an officer for the very worst offence which he could have
  committed.          In other words, his conduct must have been so bad
  that it would be inappropriate for him to remain as a police
  officer.


  14       By retiring, in advance of whether or not he had been found
  guilty,        Mr    Duckenfield has,   in fact,   done   what the worst
  disciplinary judgement could have imposed upon him to do. He has
  resigned.           He is no longer a police officer.        A disciplinary
  hearing can no longer be undertaken against a person who is not
^^a police officer.


  15      I am sure that you will understand that it would not be
  proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr Duckenfield's case
  other than to say that it needs to be remembered that it is by
  no means certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found
 Mr Duckenfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred
  against him.


  16      Whilst our sympathies are all very much with those who were
  caught         up    in   this   terrible   tragedy,   the    position   of
 Mr Duckenfield needs equally careful and just handling.


  17      If Mr Duckenfield is a sick man, as seems to be the case,
  it would not have been right to refuse him retirement on medical
  grounds in order that charges could be heard against him, which
 might or might not be proved, but whose most serious result could

  GIM-M811.000
only be that he would leave the service which he was already
ready to leave voluntarily.


18       Finally, I should inform the House that on 13 January 1992
the Police Complaints Authority announced that disciplinary
proceedings against Superintendent Murray would be withdrawn.
When explaining their decision the Authority stated that the
retirement of the Chief Superintendent on medical grounds meant
that what is, in effect, a joint allegation of neglect of duty
could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more senior
officer.


19       The Government continues to deplore the terrible events at
Hillsborough but they were the product of a number of causes
coming together and little comfort is likely to be provided to
the relatives      nor   anything   learnt   for   the   future   by   the
continuation of attempts to pin the blame on one or another
person.




GIM-M811.000
