     INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH         The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
     STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Q ueen Anne s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
SL


                                           01-2732577/3602/2370
j
P




     David Evans Esq MP
     House of Commons
     LONDON
     SW1A OAA
                                           M e 7 J U " e 1989




     Dear Mr Evans
                                      ai
     Thank you for your letter of    May with which
     you enclosed various briefings. Lord Justice
     Taylor has read all of these with interest.

     There is one point on which he would be
     grateful for your assistance.  In paragraph 2
     of your briefing of 19 April you say that "3000
     fans approximately travelled to the
     Hillsborough Ground without tickets..." Lord
     Justice Taylor would be grateful to know the
     source of the specific figure of 3000.

                                     Yours sincerely



                                     t fWpW
                                    R M WHALLEY
                          ff   Secretary to the Inquiry




4
                              H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                    L O N D O N SW1A0AA
                                                                            To   W   ■ few
                                     DAVID EVANS, M.P.                               J




24th May, 1989

Mr. R.M. Whalley,
Secretary to the Inquiry,
50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
London.
SW1H 9AT


Dear Mr. Whalley,

Thank you for your letter dated 18th May.

Please find enclosed herewith various briefings which I have circulated
regularly over the past few months to colleagues. I would draw your attention
particularly to the latest dated 3rd May and would point out that although
this has been prepared it will not be circulated until the appropriate time.

Most of what I have to say is contained within the enclosed package and I hope
that the information will prove helpful to you.

Yours sincerely.




David Evans.




                   Telephone Hatfield (07072) 66261 or Hatfield (07072) 62632
IP

     fP ''
                                  H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                       LO NDO N SW1A0AA
                                         DAVID EVANS, M.P.

3rd May, 1989

Football Spectators Bill

After the Hillsborough disaster an enquiry has been set up under the Chairmanship of
Lord Justice Taylor, and the Government has agreed to incorporate any findings relevant
to the Bill during its passage through Parliament.

A^ P a r t y Football Committee

Chairman        Tom Pendry          Stalybridge & Hyde         Labour
Vice-Chairman   Joe Ashton          Bassetlaw                  Labour
Treasurer       Alan Meale          Mansfield                  Labour
Secretary ............................................................ ..

As you can see the title of the Committee represents a lie in that it is quite obviously j
a Labour Party propaganda machine used as a method of continually attacking the          /
Government.

Ten Reasons Why the Football Spectators Bill with the findings of the Enquiry
incorporated should be supporterd by all fair-minded Members of Parliament to stamp out
hooliganism and violence in and around our Football S t a d i a . _____________________

1.   Three hundred people have lost their lives at football matches since 19^5.
2.   5,000 policemen are employed every Saturday suppressing hostility at football
      Stadia.
3.   It has become custom and practice at big matches which are designated all-ticket
      by the Football Association, Football League and the police that if sufficient
      numbers arrive from the visiting Club without tickets, and press the police hard
      enough fifteen minutes before kick-off, they will be allowed into the Ground in
      that the police would prefer that course of action than to have the supporters in
      the streets representing a potential danger to those who live around the stadium.
4.   An example of point 3. above is that two weeks before the Hillsborough tragedy,
      Norwich City were playing Liverpool at Carrow Road, the game being designated as
      all-ticket. The capacity at Carrow Road is 26,812 with the official attendance for
      the game being 26,338 for which obviously all-tickets had been pre-sold. This did
      not stop some 3,000 Liverpool supporters being allowed into the Ground 20 minutes
      before kick-off, on the instructions of the police, with everyone involved then
      holding their breath hoping that no tragedy would occur. As we all know two weeks
      later at Hillsborough just such a tragedy did take place.
5.   Luton Town has a Members Only scheme with the membership list being closed at 20,000.
      During the three years of the scheme being in existence there has not been one
      arrest in or outside the Ground at League games.
6.   Cup matches at Luton Town have not been Members Only over the last two seasons
      where 25/S of the capacity has been given to opposing Clubs on an all-ticket match
      basis. However, not one incident has taken place where anyone has turned up
      without a ticket, simply because football supporters understand that when Luton
      Town say Members Only and all-ticket then everyone involved, including the Chairman
      and the Chief Constable of Police, mean what they say and therefore fans do not
      travel from wherever to Luton Town’s Ground.

                      Telephone Hatfield (07072) 66261 or Hatfield (07072) 62632
7.    The Football Spectators Bill will over a period of time separate the football fan
      from the football hooligan and although gates may drop by, say, up to 10% initially
      I am quite certain that in the fullness of time some of those who have left the
      game in droves will return.
8.    During the last 25 years, partly through violence, segregation, heavy policing,
      frogmarching fans from stations to Grounds, cages, dogs, horses and closed circuit
      television, half of those that supported the game, approximately 500,000 per
      Saturday, have stopped going, the number of professional footballers and people
      employed in the game has halved, we have not won the World Cup since 1966 and we
      are banned from Europe through hooliganism.
9.    Three years ago the Government asked football to voluntarily introduce 50%
      membership schemes. One big Club, Manchester United F.C. took it on board and
   ^^within weeks had a voluntary scheme of 40,000 members. Today half of their ground
   ^^Bis occupied by members only whereas Arsenal F.C. clearly chose to put two fingers
      up to the Government by having only a k% members scheme over that time. Manchester
      United will admit that it takes no longer to get half of its Ground filled with
      members showing their cards than it does to admit those without cards.
10. We are the Party of law and order. We have a problem. Dare I say that unless we
      take positive action to protect the 56 million people who have little or no
      interest in going to a football match there will be a further tragedy as sure as
      day follows night and we will stand accused of being faint hearted in our resolve
      when dealing with thuggery.

I enclose for your further reading should you have the time or need convincing further
two recent Press cuttings.




                                                                            <*?>'
             MLY MAIL -.FRIDAY 2 1 s t APRIL,.JUJ89



                                                                           scored
 a                HEN all is said
                                                                          own
W                 and done, we know
                  how and why 95
                  football fans died
                  on the Hillsbor­
                  ough terraces in Sheffield.
   The judicial and police inquiries will
fill in m any details, and perhaps
attrib u te partial blame to certain indi­
v id u a ls a n d o rg an isa tio n s. B u t we
air
already    know, except those who do not'
  a n t to know, th e true nature and
   ,use of the tragedy. The Liverpool
    pporters who died were crushed and
 iuffocated to death by Liverpool sup­
porters who lived.
    In the final judgment, each m an m ust
be held responsible for his own actions.
Each and every m an who arrived late,
each and every man who arrived drunk,
each and every man who became angry
an d violent outside the gates, who                        In th e arm s of th e law — one young fan is carried off
vented his fury upon the
police, who demanded to
be let in, each and every be shunned. The dead fearing, on good historical
m an       w ho sw a rm e d deserve no less.                           grounds, the fans.
through when the gates                 The police may or may             The perim eter fencing
were opened, each and not have been wrong to                           was not p u t up for fun.
every m an who rushed open those gates; the Foot­                      but because of previous
down the tunnel on to the ball Association may or hooliganism among fans.
terraces, each and every may not have been wrong                          It was not the police
m an who pressed his body to allocate tickets as it                    who were drunk, b ut the
forward and downward, did.                                             fans. It was not the FA
made his due contribution                                              which was rioting, but the
to the slaughter.
    We have all been moved .          Anger                            fans.
                                                                          It was not the fence
by "the grief of Liverpool,             It may or may not have which caused the deathly
the singing of Abide With - been            wrong to have safety crush. It was the fans.
Me, th e flo w ers an d barricades
wreaths and scarves a t men. womenagainst                     which
                                                     and children        The grief of Liverpool
Anfield and a t Hillsbor­ were squashed                 into    their  has expressed itself, and so
ough.                                death agonies.                    has   the anger. But the
    We can understand the                                              grief conceals the guilt,
reluctance of the team to create        B ut the police did not and the anger shields the
play again too soon.                          th e terrible situa­ shame.
                                     tio n , itse lf th re a te n in g
    We can understand, too. death, outside the gates.                     Liverpool m u st now
 the anger th a t desperately The football fans did that.              ask itself w hether Liver­
seeks somebody else to The FA took the decision pool football killed its
 blame. But let hypocrisy it did to avoid trouble. dead




                                             -THE TIMES SATURDAY APR FI. 79 IQSQ




                                               Norwich gates opened
                                               Norwich police opened (he           want them heading towards
                                              g ates to allow hundreds of          the city centre to cause
                                               Liverpool supporters who did        trouble."
                                              not have tickets into Carrow
                                              Road, only two weeks before            T h e capacity at Carrow
                                              the d isaster at H illsborough in    Road is 26.812 and the official
                                              which 95 people died (John           attendance for the game was
                                              Good body writes).                   26.338.
                                                  Roger Brighton, the assis­           Robert Chase, the chairman
                                              tant C h ie f C onstable, yes­       o f Norw ich City, said he would
                                              terday told the E ast Anglian        not deny that the gate had
                                              b r a n c h o f th e F o o tb a ll   been opened but could not
                                              Supporters-* Association: "It        confirm it. However, he did
                                              was a difficult decision to          say that Liverpool supporters
                                              make. T h e best place for them      had arrived before the game
                                              is in the ground as we do not        without tickets.
                              H O U SE OF C O M M O N S
                                   L O N D O N SW1A0AA
                                     DAVID EVANS, M.P.


19th April, 1989




Hillsborough - Why did it happen?

In my op in ion


Approximately twenty years ago the Football Association and the Football
League Management Committee, in other words those responsible for the welfare
of the Game, began the process of giving up their collective responsibility
by the introduction of segregation, fencing, more policing and continuing
statements that football's only responsibility was for behaviour within the
Grounds, culminating in players being transferred for millions of pounds,
ridiculously high wages and precious little in relation to those amounts being
spent on stadia. The result of this lack of leadership was droves of people
leaving the Game, approximately half (500,000 per Saturday) and a large
section of undesirable hooligans, cowards and bullies latching themselves
on to a game where the publicity, considering the small minority of people
who watch football (450,000 per Saturday out of 60 million citizens) meant
they could attract the media's attention by misbehaving. The Heysel tragedy
brought all this into perspective.

The Government, in view of the increasing violence in and around football
Grounds, called top level meetings with the Football Association and Football
League asking them to introduce a 50# voluntary membership scheme, particularly
in view of the 100# success of the Luton Town Members Only Scheme in that
there had been no arrests in or outside the Ground for years.Football once
again decided to take little or no action. This was followed by the
disgraceful scenes in Germany last summer which resulted in the Government
deciding enough was enough and the Football Spectators Bill, which in itself
is an enabling Bill, would be a way forward for football fans to be separated
from the common criminal. It was further decided that an F.M.A. would be
formed made up from football itself to introduce a scheme best suited for the
Game which would need the approval of the Secretary of State. Once again
football turned away from this suggestion, regrettably. Over the years it
had become custom and practice for all ticket games to be in the eyes of
football authorities and fans a joke in that if fans in sufficient numbers
travelled without a ticket, if sufficient pressure was put on the police and
the Ground was not full to capacity then inevitably they would be let in
because a) the Club wanted to take their money and b) the police preferred
to have them in the Ground rather than outside. The result of this practice
was that 3,000 fans approximately travelled to the Hillsborough Ground without
tickets, knowirrg' perfectly well that the allocation of tickets had been sold
well in advance of the Game. This, together with the fact that the F.A. had

                                                                                2/.

                   Telephone Hatfield (07072) 66261 or Hatfield (07072) 62632
put the wrong team at the wrong end, in my view caused the tragedy at
Hillsborough.




The Way Forward

In my opinion


The Football Spectators Bill should be introduced as soon as possible in that
the Bill is an enabling Bill and will separate the football fan from the
football hooligan.

During the next few years, when Clubs are satisfied that their problem has
disappeared in that those who have misbehaved will have lost their right to
enter Grounds for up to five years, then the process of removing fences can
begin. As an aside, I think Clubs are wrong to remove fences now in that it
is not the fences that are the problem, but that some of them seemingly do
not have sufficient exits for an emergency. The fences were erected for a
good reason and by taking them down we are increasing the likelihood of pitch
invasion and pitched battles between rival supporters which will introduce
another tragedy if we are not careful. Once the process referred to has
taken place less police would then be required, integration would begin, there
would be a gradual lessening of hostility and, more importantly, fans would
all belong to one F.M.A. and will begin to care about each other and hopefully
those thousands that have left the Game will start to return.

I do not believe that the Members Card would in any way, shape or form lead
to further congestion at turnstiles in that people would be able to have their
payment made by direct debit to Banks, building societies or whatever. There
is nothing to stop filtering half a mile from the Ground.

It is a very barren prospect for   us to say that nothing can be done. The
national game is dying and if we   in Parliament abandon what has now become
our responsibility then a public   which is demanding that something be done
to protect their civil liberties   against marauding football fans will lay
the blame at our door.
                          HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
                                L O N D O N SW1A0AA
                                 DAVID EVANS, M.P.



20th February, 1989


Letter dated 9th February, 1989 to Secretaries of Football Clubs
from Jack Dunnett headed Football Spectators B   i   l   l   _______________


By all means write to your M.P. but before putting the enclosure in your
Programme it would be a good idea if you studied what is being suggested and
made it factual rather than fanciful.

For example, paragraph three of the letter in respect of letters from Executive
Boxholders - the Government's proposals clearly set out that clubs will be
able to issue membership cards for any specific game on the day of the match
to anyone it chooses, on the clear understanding that it is the club that is
responsible for that Match Day membership card and if anybody misbehaves in
possession of such a card the club will be liable and will put under threat
its licence which is issued at the discretion of the Secretary of State.

The Government does not plan to introduce an I.D. card but a membership card.
The two are quite different. It is not at this stage a fact that fans will
have to buy their membership cards. It is indeed highly likely that the cards
will be issued free of charge. Football supporters are not the only people
in the country who are made to have membership cards since such cards are
issued by clubs in almost all other sports together with issuing
driving licences, passports,bus passes, credit cards etc.

 On Match Days there are queues to enter the ground in any event and the
 membership card will make no difference to thisprocedure. In fact the
 facility of being able to pay by direct debit as thecard is put onto the
 reader will, if anything, speed up entry into grounds. If the computer breaks
 down there will not be chaos in that each reader will have three backups.
 In any event should the system fail then people with cards will be able to
 enter with or without the computer working.

 With regard to points you might like to note:-

 *       The membership card will stop hooliganism in that the criminal will
         not take the trouble to travel to any ground without a membership card
         as has been proved at Luton Town where Away fans and hooligans stopped
         coming immediately the scheme was put into operation.

  *      The scheme will not cause serious delays at turnstiles, almost certainly
         the reverse.




                  Telephone Hatfield (07072) 66261 or Hatfield (07072) 62632
                             .2 .


The commercial benefits from the scheme will in fact bring back some
of the 20 million spectators the clubs have lost in the last twenty-five
years partially through hooliganism, and will thereby be the saviour
of the small clubs.

Millions of law abiding citizens will be given back their civil rights
in that football will over the next ten years revert to being a game
of which the nation is proud instead of ashamed. We will through
this scheme, be allowed back into Europe and consequently our national
team will do better than drawing 1-1 with Saudi Arabia.

Is the future of football supporters once again standing side by side
on terraces, or is it massive police presence, massive segregation,
massive disruption in Towns and Cities on Match Days and a generation
of young supporters growing up watching football through fencing?
                                                                                                                  CC- u




                                                 £ t ,b a i >


                     THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
              Annes. U n c s h l^ . FYfl l|G-Telephone « W ,T O M . W                  « * « • ■*»         ” ««■

                                                                                                3 Whitehall Court
                                                                                                  London SW1A 2EP

The Secretary                   w
Luton Town Football Club
Kenilwcrth Road Stadium
1 Maple Road
Luton
B e d f o r d s h i r e LU1 1DH



9 February 1989


Dear Secretary,
                                     FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

I am writing to ask you to help us with three further
initiatives in our campaign to persuade the Government to mak
changes to the Football Spectators Bill.

Letters to MPs We would like you to include in your club
programme for- each match until further notice the enclosed
article which asks supporters to w r i t e t o their local M?. You
may care to assist supporters with their letters if they
ycu.  Seme may not know who their MP is. I am enclosing with
this letter a list cf ycur local MPs and their constituencies.

Letters from Executive Boxholders Special problems will be
created by the Government's proposals for the guests of
E x e c u t i v e Bcxhclders and m a t c h sponsors. Unless t h e y are
members of the National Membership Scheme they will be
tc attend matches on a casual basis. We wou l d like you to
your bcxholders and sponsors to write to their MP and any
ot h e r political associations with Whom they have contact
drawing attention to this problem.

Postcards    In co-operation with the national Football
Supporters' organisations we have decided that we should ask
our supporters to sign and send to their local MP^a postcard
which will be distributed at grounds on the matchdays ever the
Easter Holiday period.




         Alt cotrespondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Re*i*tei4d Office as above. Registered to England 80612
    WHAT THE GOVERNMENT *S IDENTITY CARD SCHEME WILL HERN TO YOU


 The Government plans to introduce a compulsory ID card scheme for
 football supporters in England and Wales. You, the fans, will
 have to buy an ID card if you wish to attend football matches.
 You will have to fill in an application form and provide a
 photograph before you can be issued with a card. Your personal
 details will be stored on a computer and monitored. Football
 supporters will be the only people in the country who are made to
 have ID cards.

 On match days you will have to join a queue of people waiting to
 have their ID cards checked before you enter the ground.  If the
 computer breaks down there will be chaos. Even if the computers
 ere working normally there is a good chance that somebody in the
 queue in front of you will have a card that will cause you delay.


If you are opposed to this scheme, please write to your local MP
at:

          The House of Commons,   London   SW1A OAA

and ask him or her to oppose the Government's proposals.


These are some of the points that you may like to make:


     The ID card will not stop hooliganism (away from grounds).

     The scheme could cause serious delays at turnstiles.

     The bureaucracy and Cost of the scheme will deter thousands
     from going to matches and could ruin some smaller clubs.

     Millions of law-abiding citizens including pensioners and
     season ticket holders are going to be inconvenienced by a
     scheme which will not benefit them, just to deal with a
     tiny minority of hooligans.


If you are not sure about your MP's name and want to discuss it
with the Club secretary or your football supporters club, please
do so.
The postcard will summarise the main reasons for objecting to
Part 1 cf the Bill.  I should be grateful if you will make
arrangements with your local supporters' club for the
stewarding and administration of this postcard caapaign.
Ideally, the postcards should be issued to all spectators as
they enter the ground. As I have stated above, this letter is
accompanied by a list of local MEs with the constituencies
they represent. Where supporters are uncertain about the name
cf their local MP it will be desirable to make arrangements to
help them.

Please encourage all your supporters to post these cards as
scon as possible to the House cf Commons.

Petit ions   Can I ask you to co-operate with supporters
organisations to ensure that we get a maximum number of
signatures to supporters' clubs' petitions which will be
forwarded to constituency MPs.

Yours faithfully,




JACK DUNNETT
PRESIDENT
