VY/LSC
                                                                       /V .
                                                                        s ^ ^
                                                                                 ^



                               Department of Employment
                                                                        /tvcw)b\ir
                     Caxton House, Tothill Street, London SW1H 9NF
                               Telephone 071-273 5806/7                 A/V
                             Telex 915564 Fax 071-273 5821
                         Parliamentary Under Secretary of State
                                   Lord Strathclyde
                                                                       Adi/ice a.J cWk

John Patten Esq MP
                                                          Jj                  Pk**-
Minister of State
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT
                                                      R              ie^ juiy 2       <fl m




 ^-, -n/6^^.
TICKET TOUTING

Following a recent short debate in the House of Lords about
ticket touts, I have had a number of representations from
organisations within the tourism industry about the practices of
touts, particularly those operating in London.

On the 3 July I met a small delegation from the Society of West
End Theatres (SWET), who were seeking my support for licensing
of ticket agencies. They were at pains to differentiate between
the activities of the ordinary tout, and those who operate from
shop premises usually offering tickets as a side line to other
business such as bureaux de change. SWET gave details of the
dubious activities of these businesses and the harm that they did
to legitimate ticket sellers.

My line was that the individuals concerned should raise the
matter with the police. SWET responded by saying that numbers of
complainants cited lack of police action when complaints were
made. I believe many of the complaints are made to Bow Street
Police Station, as this is the nearest to many theatres in the
West End.
I agreed that I would raise the matter with you, as it is clearly
a matter for the Home Office.      I realise that this issue is
sensitive, not least in that it involves the discretion that the
police have to take action or not depending on particular
circumstances. However I would be grateful if you could let me
know what action the police have taken on complaints of this
kind, so that I can respond to the concern expressed to me by
SWET.




                        LORO STRATHCLYDE
