Will say:-



 My name is                      I live at

             am 19 years old, 1 am unemployed at the moment.

 1 have been a supporter of Liverpool F.C for many years at

 Anfield.



 My first trip away from Anfield stadium was on Saturday

 the 15th April 1989 to Hiisboro, to watch Liverpool play

 Nottingham Forest in the semi final of the F.A cup

 competition.



 I went with some friends to the match, and arrived at Sheffield

 a t about 12.00 noon, 1 went to the pub for a drink, and had

 about 2-3 pints of lager, I went to the ground with a group

 of iriends of mine, and although we seen many police officers,

 when we were walking towards the stadium. When we

 actually arrived by the gates, there was only 1 think 3 officers

 on duty at the tim e.    When 1 got near the entrances to the

 stadium, it was obvious there was a severe      crushing problem,

 there was people literaiy passing out outside the ground, and

 at th a t stage, it was my opinion that the gates to the ground

 had to be opened o r the crowd pushed back, there was no

 help from the police officers in pushing the crowd back, so

 the police officer at the gate had really no alternative but

 to open the gates, as people were obviously being crushed.

 When the gates were opened, many people fell to the ground

 in the rush to get in.
     . we got in the area behind the goal, it was really tight,

i had never experienced anything like it, it got progressively

worse, actually inside the area behind the goal, it was rediculous

I decided to get out, and I went to move away, but only my

neck moved, I then realised, 1 literaly couldn't move at all.

1 quite honestly panicked, the next thing, my watch glass burst

and ripped off, 1 wasn't actually carried by the crowd, but

was very crushed standing in the same spot, I thought my

arm s were breaking, I was th at crushed, I was totally in

panick, I just couldn't move* A man with a black leather

coat on next me,thenwrfggled himself up, he ended up with

his elbow in my neck, I was   fosing air then.   I stopped

breathing, but I managed to be able to move my neck a

couple of inches, so his elbow would be away from my windpipe,

I moved it, I think to the right, I then remembered being able

to breath again very slowly. However, I then lost my balance

and started falling forward, I pushed against the man who

was in front of me, he just collapsed and went down on the

floor, I didn't see him again, people were just trampling

everywhere.   My friend          kept saying to me

"Calm down, the police will sort it out".

Then, really the only way I can remember getting out, was

an old man in front of me who was dead, went into the air

as he had no longer any resistance, just popped out of the

crowd like a cork. There was suddenly a bit of room in front

of me, not much, but a bit,there were people dying all around

me screaming, begginjfor help etc, some people were shouting

and they were just about to die, and then you wouldn't hear

from them again. I got up, and made my way towards the

railing, to climb towards the gate over peoples heads, when

I got there, I decided to let a few less strong than me, get

on the gate before me, I helped a couple up, who were
   obviously dead, although, I didn't realise at the time, a fter

   a few had got out in front of me, I then realised I couldn't

   stay in there any longer, a fte r I had particularly a l t e r ! had

  seen 1 individual, he just hit the concrete floor, he was

  obviously dead. I jumped towards the railings, I had to stand

  on peoples arms, legs, fingers etc, 1 eventually got out onto

  the pitch.     However, and 1 am ashamed to say this, 1 did

  witness certain officers pushing people back into the crowd,

  when it was obvious what was happening, I saw a police man

  actually punching peoples hand down onto the nails around

  the perim eter fence, to stop them attem pting to get over

  onto the pitch, he was an idiot, the police didn't know what

 to do, they just panicked, I thought the police were supposed

 to deal with this type of thing, they obviously w eren't on
 this occasion.



 When 1 was onto the pitch, I knew                            my friends
 were alright, 1 realised my brother                was in the crowd

 ther, 1 then saw him in the crowd, within another section,

 a fte r I had seen him, I realised he was O.K, 1 then ran

 towards the fence to pull it down, but was stopped by 2 or

 3 police mates who wouldn't let me at it.           I was screaming

at them to get the fence down, and at that moment the fence

came down a little bit, the police, instead of helping to te a r

it down, stopped me from doing so, it was obvious the fence

had to come down to let the people out, the police just simply

just wouldn't do anything about that, I then turned away and

diverted my atten tio n to other people who were lying on the

floor, someone was shouting to roll them over onto the side,

1 did this, and the first person 1 did it to vomited,I do not

know whether he recovered or not. i then picked a man off

the floor and put him on a bill board, he was actually alive

a t that time.    1 then assisted the fi.   -a**4
        totl.es, but there was no equipmem, no oxygen,people were
       screaming ,or              „ f eqdpm m ti „„„ ^             forthcoming>


      Wh' n ** g0' 16 th' h3,f              line- « »‘« « ly had ,o scream
      « » • M c e ,o M us ^                   ,herf )ine of ^     offjcers>

               « just standing across the half way line. 70-10% o f
      * e police officers simply, were nol , Mjning >t a|j_ ^

      " e n t to a man and tried to re s u d ta te him, he actually vomited




          However, the Doctor cam . back a couple of minutes
    la te r, and said "To late h* u ^          j   ,
                              i   h e js d e a d ,le a v e h im a lo n e a n d   go
    to the next one".

    A police officer was then ev en tu al* handed a                       oxy|en

    b ottle, but he didn’t know how t0 use it, he was just pressing

     nobs everywhere, apparently i t transpired that i t was empty
   anyway, I then turned away, I jus, coultfn,t SUnd ^

         sat down, and broke down again crying, a lew minutes
          ,hen just simply ie j, the grolmd,



            e were pathetic weren't doing anything, they just

  stood there watching us, the ones who were helping, seemed

  to be madaquate at what they were doing.although at least
  they were having . g0.            fjre ^             ^    ^                ^

 a c te d ,n a swift and correct manner when they appeared on

 » . scene, and were very sympathetic,they seemed to know

 Wh8’ ,0 d° ' * *         -* ■« . ^          « r e jus, simply 8wfu„.
          he worst things that stays in my mind, was the fact

« ■ " <h.re was enough police man power to assist, as they
then had the redicubus e * h i* ,i0„ *                 some m _m

officers around th?          . .u-i
                      P    » whilst people were literaly dying
in front of them.
     1 then left the ground
                     t ound, and wen, <o a tedies hou„ aroond
   the corner, who allowed u<            ,
                       owed us to use ,be phone and gave us a
   cup of tea etc, she was treat »„
          .                 8     ,0 us’ 1 ," ‘end <° go back to
   Sheffield to thank that lady for h er assistance.


  1 WOuJd just iike to $av r *t;n u
                         y'     stJiJ have       full ticket to the
  match, and 1 am keeping it in my possesion for the time being.



 ' «">ply iust cannot stop thinking of the situation, ! just

 never imagined i would ever witness anything as horrific as

                                                    fo r tu n ite Iy a n y
 Physical injuries at alt i *
   ...                   ’         SUre the memory of that day
wjJ! stay with me for the rest n*
  .                            re5t of my        and the memory
01 police Officers
                          lf1fi aroijnd starin8 in amazement, and
lm     n0t doinS              «t all about it.
