             THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
             Room 1101
Pot UPl
vS S B B
             ^ Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
             Direct Line 0171273 4301 Fax 2007


                                                              Your reference:
Mr E Abrahamson
Edwards Frais Abrahamson Solicitors                           Our reference:
8/9 Myrtle Parade
LIVERPOOL L7 7EL                                              Date:              4 December 1997




 Thank you for your letter, which arrived by fax yesterday. I have passed a copy of your letter
 to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, and will give your letter to Mr Bone on his return. We wrote
 yesterday to Mr Tony Edwards about his request to give evidence in person to the Scrutiny.

  As regards the timetable for the Scrutiny, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith indicated at the time of
  his appointment by the Home Secretary that he expected to complete his report by the end of
  the year. His work on the Scrutiny is now well advanced. He has looked in great detail at all
  the points which have been put to him by the families of those who died and by others.
  Unless important new evidence is presented to him, he believes that he will be able to keep to
  the timetable which he outlined when he began and would like if at all possible to do so. He
  believes this to be in the best interests of all concerned.

  Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has indicated that it would be a great help if any further evidence
  which parties would like to submit could be at this office by close on Friday 5 December. I
  informed Ms Williams of this timetable by telephone yesterday.

  Your letter also requests copies of the transcripts of the evidence of Mr Bruder and of the
  public meeting on 6 October. The meeting with Mr Bruder was a private one, and I am sure
  you appreciate it would not be appropriate for us to release the transcript of this meeting
  without Mr Bruder’s prior consent. We shall be writing to Mr Bruder seeking this consent
  and, if this is forthcoming, we will forward a copy of the transcript to you. There is no such
  problem with regard to the transcript of the open meeting, and I enclose a copy with my
  letter.

   Yours sincerely




   M Ward

   g:\hillsbro\willsols.doc
             THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
             Room 1101
             50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
             Direct Line 0171 273 4301 Fax 2007


                                                              Your reference:
Mr E Abrahamson
Edwards Frais Abrahamson Solicitors                           Our reference:
8/9 Myrtle Parade
LIVERPOOL L7 7EL                                              Date:              4 December 1997




 Thank you for your letter, which arrived by fax yesterday. I have passed a copy of your letter
 to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, and will give your letter to Mr Bone on his return. We wrote
 yesterday to Mr Tony Edwards about his request to give evidence in person to the Scrutiny.

 As regards the timetable for the Scrutiny, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith indicated at the time of
 his appointment by the Home Secretary that he expected to complete his report by the end of
 the year. His work on the Scrutiny is now well advanced. He has looked in great detail at all
 the points which have been put to him by the families of those who died and by others.
 Unless important new evidence is presented to him, he believes that he will be able to keep to
 the timetable which he outlined when he began and would like if at all possible to do so. He
 believes this to be in the best interests of all concerned.

 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has indicated that it would be a great help if any further evidence
 which parties would like to submit could be at this office by close on Friday 5 December. I
 informed Ms Williams of this timetable by telephone yesterday.

  Your letter also requests copies of the transcripts of the evidence of Mr Bruder and of the
  public meeting on 6 October. The meeting with Mr Bruder was a private one, and I am sure
  you appreciate it would not be appropriate for us to release the transcript of this meeting
  without Mr Binder’s prior consent. We shall be writing to Mr Bruder seeking this consent
  and, if this is forthcoming, we will forward a copy of the transcript to you. There is no such
  problem with regard to the transcript of the open meeting, and I enclose a copy with my
  letter.

  Yours sincerely




   M Ward

   g:\hillsbro\willsols.doc
m
ligpPi
             T h e H ills b o r o u g h S c r u tin y
x P t||p '   Room 1101
             50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
             Direct Line: 0171273 4301 Fax: 2007




      FAX
     To:          M r E Abrahamson
                  Edwards Frais Abrahamson Solicitors
     From:        Mike Ward


     Date:        4 December 1997                     Time:       10:05


     Fax Ne:      0151 707 2458


     Number of pages (including this one)                          2


     Message
     Subject:      KEVIN WILLIAMS


     The attached letter will be sent by first class post today. I have not faxed the enclosure (68 pages).




     Mike Ward




                     IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                       PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 4301
                                                      edwards • frais* abrahamson
                                                      S       O        L       I      C            I      T           O      R            S
                                                                                        Elkan Abrahamson, Peter Simm, Pam ela Jain

                                                                                        Assistant Solicitors:         Susan Flynn
                                                                                                                      Abiola Adekanmi
                                                                                                                      Shireen Agnew
                                                                                        F. Inst. L Ex.:

    r                                                                    n              Legal Advisors:

                                                                                        Prisoners Rights Assistant-
                                                                                                                      Jayne Doran
                                                                                                                      Stephen Gershman
                                                                                                                      Beate Dasarathy
                                                                                                                      Clifford Spencely
                         Mr C.F. Bone,
                         Secretary to the Hillsborough Scrutiny,                        819 Myrtle Parade
                                                                                        Liverpool L7 7EL
                         Room 528,                                                      Telephone 0151-7071212
                                                                                        DX 28953
                         50 Queen Anne’s Gate,                                          Fax 0151-707 2458

                         London SW1H 9AT.                                               Please ask for          Mr Abrahamson
                                                                                        Our ref.                EAKD 06526.1.9
                                                                                         Your ref.

                                                                                        Date.


                                                      r«


                                                                                   =FICE WILL CLOSE AT 12.30 PM
                         Dear Sir,
                                                                            ON         . DECEMBER AND REOPEN
                                                                            AT 9.00AM ON . fx & L JANUARY NEXT YEAR
                   * RE KEVIN WILLIAMS


                         I have seen a copy of the transcript of the meeting with Ms. Williams, Ms. Coleman and
                         myself. You will recall that Lord Justice Stuart Smith kindly confirmed that written
                         submissions would be entertained.

                         I would like to make the following submissions:-

                         1. The Coroner’s Inquest and the cut off point.

                         Lord Justice Stuart Smith stated (page 5 line 33) that there has been some
                         misunderstanding about the cut off point; that the Coroner did not decide to adopt the cut
                         off point on the basis that everybody was dead by then but on the basis that they had
                         received their injuries by then.

                         I do not think with respect, that is a full explanation of the reasoning adopted by the
                         Coroner. I refer the Learned Judge to the transcript of the proceedings which took place
                         on the 19th November 1990. At page 17 of that transcript the Coroner stated as follows
                         (and what follows is a summary and I would of course refer the Scrutiny to the full
                         transcript): -
                         “I ticked the arrival of the first ambulance not because there is anything magical about that
                         but because when we look at the videos we can actually see that and it is a convenient
                         marker, that is all.... The medical evidence was that once.... the chest was fixed so that
                         respiration could no longer take place then irrecoverable brain damage would occur

                                     4-
                                     .


                                     1    y V 3A 1X 3N A H V flN V r " ' “' " N O i/WOO'6 J V
                                                   N3d03U (3NV a a a W 3 D 3 a         * ■ NO
                                                  I/VdOS'Zl XV 3S010 TIIM 30IJJ0 SIH1
A QU A LIT Y SE R V IC E
Approved by The Legal A id Board
                                                                                                                                              Legal Aid
between four and six minutes. That is the point”     The latest time when this permanent
fixation could have arisen would have been approximately six minutes past, which is when
is when the match stopped.... Add another six minutes to that, that is 12 minutes past and
then as I say, I went on to find a convenient marker beyond that time”.

So the reasoning of the Coroner was as follows:-

1. The injuries which would have led to irrecoverable brain damage will have taken place,
by the latest, at 3.06 p.m.

2. The irrecoverable brain damage itself would occur at the latest 6 minutes after that.
That takes the timing to 6.12 p.m.

3. 3.15 p.m. was a convenient cut off point in light of the above.

So the 3.15 p.m. cut off point is not so much when the injury occurred as when, to use his
words, “the damage was done” - namely when irrecoverable brain damage took place. It
was part of the reasoning process of the Coroner that all the people who died did so as a
result of crushing or traumatic asphyxia leading to irrecoverable brain damage between 4
and 6 minutes after the trauma fixing the chest so that respiration could no longer take
place.


However, Doctor James Burns in his report of 11th April 1994 (appendix G to the second
memorial), points out that what is important is whether the severe compression (causing
traumatic asphyxia) is sustained or intermittent. This seems a matter of common sense.
This seems also not to contradict the comment of Professor Usher (which is that
irrecoverable brain damage would occur between four and six minutes after the time when
the chest was fixed so that respiration could not longer take place. Professor Usher will
have assumed a situation whereby the chest was “fixed” whereas Doctor Bums talks of
intermittent pressure - presumably therefore not fixing the chest.

Most importantly of all, it is now accepted that Kevin had a neck injury and not a chest
injury - to the extent that Doctor Slater agreed to amend the Coroner’s certificate (see
paragraph 3 of our letter to you dated 22nd September 1997). It follows that the whole
basis of the reasoning adopted by the Coroner - namely the period of time elapsing
between a chest injury of sufficient severity to “fix” the chest so that traumatic asphyxia
followed leading to brain damage within six minutes at most - was based on a false
premise.

This is not therefore a question of comparing the evidence of one expert with that of
another - it is a question of applying cold common sense to the concession now made by
the Coroner as to the physical injury itself

2. The evidence of Tony Edwards.
I understand that the Scrutiny has now heard from Tony Edwards and I have a copy of a
letter dated 10th November 1997 from Anthony James Edwards. I have also now been
provided with a copy of a statement of the same Mr Edwards taken on the 25th October
1989 by Inspector M. Layton. This statement had not previously been made available to
us. However, the statement confirms the statement of Mr Edwards forwarded as appendix
H^of the second Memorial. Mr Edwards comments in that (hand-written) statement, dated
5 September 1995, that on an unknown date he was taken to the Ambulance
Headquarters on Moorgate Road in Rotherham (which you will note is the address given
as the place where the statement dated 25th October 1989 was taken from him) that he met
two Officers of West Midlands Police, that they did not take a signed statement from him
(which it would appear is incorrect), and most importantly that he was shown a video of
his ambulance; that they discussed various ambulances and that his ambulance was
distinctly and correctly identified.

As Mr Edwards says, this evidence was not supplied to the Coroner or to PC Bruder.

It does not appear to form part of the body file of Kevin Williams.

During the Coroner’s Inquest Inspector Roberts Sawers testified on the 4th May 1990. The
transcript of evidence which we have gives his evidence as commencing at page 5. At
page 7 Inspector Sawers is explaining that he had seen Mr Bruder the previous day and
had drawn the attention of Mr Bruder to problems in relation to the known timing of
ambulances arriving on the pitch.

You will recall that a little over five months previously, in October 1989, Inspector Layton
had seen Mr Edwards and had shown him footage of his ambulance arriving on the pitch
at 1535 that day. Mr Edwards is of the firm view that the Officer with Inspector Layton
was Inspector Sawers yet Inspector Sawers in his evidence to the Inquest talks o f the
apparent discrepancy with timing - the point being that the two ambulances which
Inspector Sawers said had arrived at the pitch arrived at about 3.15 and 3.20 p.m. whereas
the photograph showing Kevin Williams on the pitch with Mr Bruder is timed at 3.32 p.m.
The Coroner was clearly misled by Inspector Sawers - and it seems a reasonable inference
that he was deliberately misled - into believing that there were only two ambulances
involved; not three; that there was no ambulance involved at 3.32 p.m. that Mr Bruder
was therefore clearly mistaken as to the existence of the third ambulance and that this
must place a question mark over the reliability o f his testimony. This, combined with the
fact that he had by then given two different statements, lessened further the credibility o f
his testimony.

I understand that Mr Edwards has not yet been invited to give evidence to the Scrutiny
despite his request to do so and I would urge the Scrutiny to hear from him.

3. The terms of reference and the implications o f (1) and (2) above.
Turning to the terms of reference, which I note do not refer to the Inquest itself, the
Scrutiny is asked to ascertain whether evidence exists which was not available to the
inquiry or others. Clearly, this evidence was not available to the inquiry.
The Scrutiny is then asked to consider whether evidence not available to the inquiry must
justify establishment of a further public enquiry and we would submit that a public inquiry
into what appears on the face of it to have been an attempt to surpress evidence by West
Midlands Police should be established.

The terms o f reference also asked whether evidence exists which was not available to the
DPP or the Attorney General or the Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police. This would
certainly apply to the latest letter from Mr Edwards (10th November 1997) - as far as this is
concerned, the Scrutiny is asked to draw the attention of those various people to evidence
not previously considered by them which may be relevant to their respective duties.
Among the many duties o f the Director of Public Prosecutions is, I assume, the conduct of
public prosecution. There is on the face of it, as stated above, evidence of an attempt to
pervert the course of justice by one or more officers of West Midlands Police and it would
be part o f the duty o f the Director o f Public Prosecutions to look into this.

It is also a matter o f public interest that where such allegations are made on the basis of
reasonable prima facie evidence they should be investigated and I note the terms of
reference includes reference to the public interest.

In order to further expand on these submissions and perhaps make additional submissions
I would be grateful for your assistance as follows:-

1. Could you please let me know the current cut off point for making submissions - 1
understand a request has been made to extend this date but I have not been advised of the
current date.

2. Could you please consider letting us have a transcript of the evidence of Mr Bruder.
Clearly his evidence will be relevant to submissions to be made on behalf of Mrs Williams.

3. Could you please consider letting us have a transcript of the public meeting which was
held by the Scrutiny on the morning o f 6th October 1997.

Thank you for your help.

Yours sincerely,
