From: C F Bone                                             cc Mr Butler, CD
      Hillsborough Scrutiny                                   Mr Edmundson
      Room 1106, QAG                                          Ms Clifford, CD
      3 2512




8 December 1997


Mr Pugh. OPPU



HILLSBOROUGH - LETTER FROM TREVOR HICKS


I attach a letter which we got on Friday afternoon from Trevor Hicks, chairman of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group, together with a reply which I have drafted for
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s approval. I am also enclosing the letter the Judge wrote
to Mr Hicks which prompted this response, together with another letter which he has
recently sent to Mr Hicks and to which the latter has not replied.


Timetable

2.      Mr Hicks’s letter gives the impression that he expects the Hillsborough
scrutiny to carry on indefinitely with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on continuing standby
to examine new or allegedly new evidence as and when the Support Group choose to
let him see it. It also seems to assume that is the Support Group, not the Judge, who
should decide when the exercise is to come to an end.

3.      The Judge cannot operate on that basis. He has looked at all the material the
Group and others have sent him and should soon be ready to let the Home Secretary
have his report. We are of course due to see Mr Straw this Thursday to discuss,
among other things, the timing of the report. We cannot hold up the report
indefinitely and have so far seen nothing which would mean that the Judge will not be
able to deliver as he plans to by the turn of the year, or at least by mid-January.

4.      Mr Hicks represents the Judge’s letter as setting an absolute deadline for
submission of material. But we were careful not to do that. If worthwhile new
evidence comes in the Judge will look at it regardless of any delay there might then be
to his report.

5.      Mr Hicks also says that the Press Office told the ‘Liverpool Echo ' there would
be no deadline. I remember getting a call from them about this a while ago and
referring it to CD (not Sarah Clifford) with whom I discussed what should be said.


 G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\HICKS. 198
New evidence

6.     Mr Hicks complains again of late delivery of material from the South
Yorkshire archive. This time, he says that he has just had new material about his
daughter, Sarah, which was not on the ‘body file’ which the police have got about her,
and which they have sent to him.

7.      These ‘body files’ contain the evidence which the Coroner used at the Inquest
to decide who each person was and how, when and where they died. They do not
contain all the material about them which the police archive may hold, but the police
are continually responding to requests from families for information from the archive
which is not contained on the body files. The families then compare notes on this
material. It is not surprising that families get to see material about their own
particular relative which they had not previously seen.

8.      Mr Hicks seems to imply that there is something suspicious about the material
he mentions only having come to his notice recently. I do not think that is so. The
draft reply asks him some questions about it. The sooner we see it, the sooner we can
decide whether it amounts to anything.


Action

11.   I am sending this to you so that you are aware of a likely line of attack by the
Support Group in the event that the Judge reports to the Home Secretary in the next
few weeks. Any thoughts you may have on the draft reply would be welcome.

12.    I would prefer not to rise to the bait about the Press Office. But CD might
have another view on that. The Judge would like to respond by close tomorrow.




 C F BONE




  G : \ HILLSBOR\MAIN\HICKS. 198
DRAFT

Trevor Hicks
Chairman, Hillsborough Family Support Group




Thank you for your letter of 5 December.



When I began work in July, I understood that your Group had important new evidence

for me to see. You gave me your submission in September. I met you to discuss it

with your barrister, Alun Jones QC, and I have since considered it in great detail.



As you know I also visited Liverpool, where - in addition to the open session to which

all the Hillsborough families could come - 1 had private meetings with you and Mrs

Hicks and with many of the other families who were affected by the disaster. I have

also had numerous meetings here in London, some with relatives of victims and some

with police, lawyers, the Coroner and other people who were involved. These

meetings continue.



I do not need to tell you that I am looking at very serious matters. It is important that

 I should let the Home Secretary have a report within a reasonable timescale and you

 are quite right that the work cannot be an ever-moving feast.   My letter of 25




 G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\HICKS. 198
DRAFT


November nevertheless made it clear that last Friday was not an absolute ‘deadline’,

as you put it, for the submission of material to me. I said when I began the scrutiny

that I expected to report to the Home Secretary by the end of the year, and I believe

that I sljall be able to keep to that timetable. But my letter said that this could change

if further important new evidence is presented to me.




You say that you have important new -documentary evidenc^and information from the

video of the temporary mortuaryj f-wTB'of' GOurse-b©4ntereste(i'to'see4his -and I

should be grateful if you could let me know more about the nature of this evidence

and why you believe it to be important. Perhaps you could also let me know when

you received it, from whom, and when it was asked for.       If it is, as you suggest,

 under investigation or awaiting expert opinion, please let me know the nature of the

 investigation or opinion and who is carrying it out or providing it.

  !                                                                                      L
  f   K a (k         #>v. ?! H’ JC , 40
 I should also be grateful for any response you have to my letter o f 21 November.




  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




  G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\HICKS. 198
0 9 - D E C - 9 '1   l ' l : c-4   TF;E>'OR HICKS                                       E3 0 1 S 35 6 9 1 4 0 3                 F'Oc




                                                                                                               \V
                                                                                                             ♦}v*
           • . »



          W/ppo^
                                      H illsborough Family S u p p o rt G roup

       1 oi'U .lusticc Stuart-Smith
       Ihc Hillsborough Scruliny
       Room 1106
       50 Queen Anne’s Gate
       LONDON
       SWIH 9AT                                                                                 BY FA X A N D POST


        >ih December 1997



        Dear Lord Justice StuaivSmiih,

        H B with disnnv . t o I                      y™ r       o f .he 25th Novem ber ( r e i v e d 2 7 * » * * > « » » *
        Uic nm oduction of a deadline lor submissions to the S c r u U m .




         all c w a n m l " is certain!) ...» true in mine or many oilier ot the Um.ltLS                     -


         H           *                  -™ n , , c

                                                                         .i* * * - ^          * * * " for * ,w’plh tff
          utr"

           You are well aware, from .he many c o n u n u iu c a u i« iy i|P .« l >l' y f                        Y o rksh ire
           dclavs we have encountered in seeur.ng the release ol                                                  aive„ a




           ;rz:::r
           w uhin lhe deadline imposed.

            W « J.lTieull and heartbreaking process i , no, helped when you                                                    by




             suuemenls.

             The Familv Group lei alone individual families, do not have endless resources that can be
             ^ w H t ™ , U Pof concern to e n su re a speedy evalualiot, I for
             of Ihis week travelling overseas on business, hcnce the delayed i c s p o i . t                >

                                                            VICK-Cl 1A1HM\N /Sl < Kl-' VKY
PS-DEC-gn 1 1 :2 4   TREUOR HICKS                                      £ 3 0 1 5 3 5 6 S 1403




    I wish lo placc on record that the Hicks family and indeed the Hillsborough Family Support
    Group consider the imposition of a deadline only six working days from receipt of formal
    notification is unrealistic and totally unacceptable.

    Arc you aware for instance that your press office told the Liverpool licho only a couple of
    days before your letter that there was no intention to impose a deadline!!

     We note your comment regarding “important new evidence” and your timetable but 1/ we
     reserve the right to submit any matters important to us, currently under investigation,
     and/or awaiting expert opinion. The delays at the start of the process were not of our
     making and we are not prepared to be disadvantaged by them.

     [ personally will be sending documents and an extract of the hand held “temporary
     m o r tu a r y " video that Irani and T have just confirmed shows Sarah receiving attentum after
     4.1)0 pm. None of this is in the bodyfiie we received and is contrary to evidence previously
     presented and I wish to register this before the deadline.

     I repeat that wc consider the scrutiny is now proceeding with indecent haste and that such
     haste is not our wish, nor is it in our best interests. We will continue to press Jack Straw
     on these matters and reserve the right to place the whole matter m the publ.e domain.

     Yours sincerely,




     Trevor Hicks
     Chairman

      (and bereaved lather.)
               THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
               Room 1106
               50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
               Direct Line 01712732512 Fax 2007


  Trevor Hicks
                                                                  Your reference:

                                                                  O w reference:

                                                                  Date:        *2-S ' November 1997



         •S^Za.1             H r< T » j


                             th e tim e ta b te fo r m y   °f ■       re ia tin g to ^



  , ^ e,n 'he ^ 0me Secretary appointed me to carry out this task I said that I expected to be able
   o let him have my report by the end of this year. As I am sure you know, my work on the
 ^ T              advan“ d- 1 have looked “ sre* detail at all the points which have been put
  0 me by the Support Group and others. Unless important new evidence is presented to me
 1believe that I shall be able to keep to the timetable which I outlined when I began and I
 would like if at all possible to do so. I think this would be in the best interests of all
 concerned.


 The Home Secretary has written to me about the letter which you sent him on 9 November
 and I have explained the position to him.                                               ^ ovem oer,

 It would be a great help to me if any further evidence which parties would like to
 *    ”-       b' a* " f       »y close on Friday 5 December.' , a ^ t o g S im ila r
 » Z m l ^ Haran,0n^ “ f*Ms Adlington, to Professor Scraton, and to the police and others
 whom I have approached in the course o f my scrutiny.




LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




G \HILLSBOR\MAIN\HFSG. 166
             THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
             Room 1106
             50 Queen'Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
             Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007


 Trevor Hicks                                 ,                Your reference;

                                                               Our reference:

                                                               Date:              November 1997




% 3)jecx/Aa<HiJ-o
 I have interviewed Mr Paul Taylor about the contents of his statement dated 23 September
 1997, a copy of which was supplied to me by Miss Adlington. I attach one in case you do not
 have it conveniently to hand.

 2.     Mr Taylor gave evidence at the Inquest about your daughter Victoria. He said (day 32
 page 74) that he had given her the kiss of life. His exact words at the inquest were “I tried to
 blow into her mouth, and then someone said ‘Leave her, she’s dead’.” He did not say who that
 person was and he had not at that stage told the Court that the girl he was trying to help was
 Victoria.

 3.     These facts were brought out by Mr Fraser (pages 78 & 79 of the transcript) but neither
 he nor any other lawyer asked Mr Taylor the identity of the person who told him Victoria was
 dead or what, if anything, this person had done. Did you tell Mr Fraser that Mr Taylor had told
 you the person was a policeman and that he had taken Victoria’s pulse with gloves on? If you
 did, do you know why Mr Fraser did not ask about this? If you did not, can you tell me why
 not?

 4.     There is one further point on which I would like your assistance. At our meeting in
 Liverpool on 7 October 1997 you told me you were bothered about the evidence of PC
 Marshall. Specifically, you said you did not believe he had done all the things he said he had,
 and you had no recollection of his being in the ambulance. The gist of Marshall’s evidence was
 summarised at the mini-inquest (24 April 1990, page 9).

 5.     My understanding from the Coroner is that draft summaries were circulated to the
 families before the mini-inquests, so that any errors or corrections could be made. Did you raise
 your doubts about PC Marshall’s role with the Coroner? If not, it would help if you could say
 why that was. I should perhaps mention that PC Marshall says that there were two police
 officers in the ambulance. The other was PC McGuiness, but PC Marshall did not know his
 name then. Mr Edwards, the ambulance attendant, also says that there were two police officers

  G \HILLSBOR\MAIN\HICKS. 162
     in the am bulance.


    6-     There was no reference to Mr Paul Tavlor’s eviH^n™           • ••
    you knew that Mr Taylor had apparently been i n v n ^      v-    .Imm' inquest- BXthis time
    the Coroner?                                          Wlt^1Victona. Did you raise this with


    comments on theL asV oon'i p o^ fb k 6Se       ^    y° U' But 1 WOuld be 81316611 for your

          H   0 \xaO sy (




    ORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




                               I




G \HILLS30R\MAIN\HICKS 162
