                                   cc   Miss Edwards' (LAB)
                                        Mr Addison
                                        Mr Bolton
                                        Mr Faulkner
                                        Miss Edwards F2
                                        Miss Goose
                                        Mr Grant
                                        Mrs Lee
                                        Mr Crawley (SHHD)
                                        Mr McCullund (NIO)




Mr Goddard




TAYLOR REPORT

I am sorry to be late responding to your note of the 26 June;
C4 would wish to be present at the briefing meeting with Lord
Ferrers on 10 July.

2.   We have the following comments on the offences and
penalties section of your draft submission, circulated on the
22 June:

     (a) Ticket Touting; The pressure to make ticket touting
     generally unlawful is increasing (you may have read
     references to .allegations of Mafia infiltration at
     Wimbledon!); any Government announcement on ticket
     touting at football grounds will further reinforce this
     demand. Our present stance is based on the intrinsic
     differences between football (with its potential for
     violence and need for segregation) and other activities.
     However we have also maintained that there are measures
     promoters can take the (Ryder Cup Scheme) which can
     adequately address the problem. There may well therefore
     be some voices asking why the police and not the clubs
     should assume the burden of ticketing security.

     (b) Missile throwing: It will be necessary to exclude
     innocuous missile throwing (para 13 of the draft
     submission) since the football itself is frequently
     thrown from the crowd back onto the pitch in the course
     of the game.  I think a missile is anything thrown (ie
     including fruit whether soft or hard).

    (c) Obscene and racial chanting: The enforcement
    difficulties will be immense, but a rejection of Taylor's
    recommendations will send undesirable signals of what the
    Government considers the priorities.

    (d) Encroachment on the pitch: We presume that the main
    mischief arising from pitch encroachment is the inter-
       mingling of rival fans this permits thus defeating
       segregation. This seems an important practical point but
       we fully agree with Miss Edward's concern that ACPOs
       curious rejection of the "reasonable excuse" must be
       resisted.




                                    A COGBILL
                                    4 July 1990


C4 Division




d392
                                                          ^e~^y° *n>cf
                                              cc   Miss Edwards (LAB)
                                  '   1            Mr Addison
                                                   Mr Bolton
                                                   Mr Faulkner
                                                   Miss Edwards       P2
                                                                  i

                                                   Miss Goose
                                                   Mr Grant


                                          4        Mrs Lee
                                                   Mr Crawley (SHHD)
                                                   Mr McCullund (NIO)


Mr Goddard


TAYLOR REPORT
     Savr~-j 4> W
I am responding          l5^1al-et?!Ey=:^^=3E£^r±d1 to your note of
    /\
    26 June; C4 would wish to be present at the briefing
meeting with Lord Ferrers on 10 July.


2.    We have the following comments on the offences and
penalties section of your draft submission circulated on the
                                                    S
22 June:


       (a)    Ticket Touting:   The pressure to make ticket touting
      generally unlawful is increasing (you may have read
      references to allegations of Mafia infiltration at
      Wimbledon!); any Government announcement on ticket
      touting at football grounds will further reinforce this
      demand.       Our present stance is based on the intrinsic
      differences between football (with its potential for
      violence and need for segregation) and other activities.
      However^ we have also m^iritained that there are measures
      ope-
         n -bo promoters ^ cTpursue (the Ryder Cup Scheme) which
      can adequately address the problem.            There may w e l ^ b e
      some voices asking why the police and not the clubs
      should assume the burden of picketing security.


       (b)    Missile throwing:       It will be vfer^necessary to
      exclude innocuous missile throwing (para 13 of the draft
       submission) since the football itself is frequently
       thrown from the crowd back onto the pitch in the course



       (c)   Obscene and racial chanting:     The enforcement
       difficulties will be immense, but a rejection of Taylor's
       recommendations will send undesirable signals after what
       the Government considers the priorities.


       (d)   Encroachment on the pitch:    We presume that the main
       mischief arising from pitch encroachment is the inter­
       mingling of rival fans aacAteu-pei*mrbe' thus defeating
       segregation.      This seems an important practical point but
                      '"''-irk.                          (
       we fully -share Miss Edward s concern that ACPOs curious
       rejection of the "reasonable excuse" sfttKrtd--naii_bfi /*»




                                        A COGBILL
                                         4 July 1990



C4 Division




d392
