 *76 ?,      Mr fates fZfsy r flfc csberyuL K g ? / f Mr Croddard KSH-O, M s ^'taMey K66Z
    £Slj> ’<\ , /TV / Y l c y J J K ^ X & Z X < y o       /? 5 9 -6 ,   /7>r H cJ j l f K t ^ /
-t- 1C/I           Votes and Proceedings: 17th October 1989                                  873

228 Water,—(1) Security Measures (National Rivers Authority) Direction 1989, and
           (2) Security Measures (Water and Sewe age Undertakers) Direction 1989,
       dated 10th October 1989 [by Act] [Mr Sec -etary Patten].
                                                                                            1 9 OCT   loiss
229 Water,—Reports and Accounts of—
         (1) Anglian Water Authority,
           (2) Northumbrian Water Authority,
           (3) North West Water Authority,
           (4) Severn Trent Water Authority,
           (5) South West Water Authority,
           (6) Southern Water Authority,
           (7) Thames Water Authority,
           (8) Welsh Water Authority,
           (9) Wessex Water Authority, and
         (10) Yorkshire Water Authority
       for 1988-89 [by Act] [Mr Secretary Patten

                                       APPENDIX II
                              Reports from Select Committees
   Employment,—Minutes of Evidence taken before the Employment Committee on 17th
      October; to be printed [No. 577-i] [Mr Ron Leighton].




                                    MEMORANDUM
                                 Tuesday 17th October 1989
   Business Committee,—In pursuance of Standing Order No. 80 (Business Committee), Mr
       Speaker nominated Mr Stanley Orme to be a member of the Business Comnuttee in
       respect of the Football Spectators Bill [Lords] in place of Mr Denis Howell.
                                                                                   2841
           NOTICES OF AMENDMENTS
                                    given on
              Wednesday 18th October 1989

                CONSIDERATION OF BILL

      FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL [LORDS], AS AMENDED

   RESOLUTION OF BUSINESS COMMITTEE [18th OCTOBER]
   That—
   (1) The order in which proceedings on Consideration are taken shall be amendments
to Clauses 1 to 7, Schedule 1, Clause 8, Schedule 2, Clauses 9 to 13, New Clauses
relating to Part I o f the Bill, New Schedules relating to Part I o f the Bill, amendments
to Clauses 14 o f 22, New Clauses relating to Part II o f the BUI, New Schedules relating
to Part II o f die Bill, remaining New Clauses, amendments to Clauses 23 to 26 and
remaining New Schedules.
   (2) On the allotted day which under the Order [17th July] is to be given to the
proceedings on Consideration and Third Reading, die proceedings on Consideration
shall be allotted in the manner shown in the Table set out below and, subject to the
provisions o f that Order, each part o f those proceedings shall be brought to a conclusion
at die time specified in die second column o f that Table.

                                    TABLE,

                                                                   Time for
                      Proceedings                                 conclusion
                                                               o f proceedings
Amendments up to the end of Clause 13, New
Clauses relating to Part I of the Bill, and new
Schedules relating to Part I of the Bill                           9 p.m.
Remaining proceedings on Consideration                            10 p.m.
No. 155             WEDNESDAY 18TH OCTOBER 1989                                               875

                VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS
               OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS

                          The House met at half-past Two o’clock.
PRAYERS.
  1 Accounts and Papers,—Several Papers were pres< nted or laid upon the Table, some ordered
       to be printed (see Appendix I).
 2 Football Spectators Bill [Lords] (Business Committee),—The Chairman of Ways and Means
       reported from the Business Committee, That it had come to a Resolution in respect of
       the Football Spectators Bill [Lords], which it had directed him to report to the House:
         T h a t-
          (1) the order in which proceedings on consideration are taken shall be Amendments
       relating to Clauses Nos. 1 to 7, Schedule No. 1, Clause No. 8, Schedule No. 2 and Clauses
       Nos. 9 to 13; new Clauses relating to Part I of the Bill; new Schedules relating to Part I of
       the Bill; Amendments relating to Clauses Nos. 14 to 22; new Clauses relating to Part II of
       the Bill; new Schedules relating to Part II of the Bill; remaining new Clauses;
       Amendments relating to Clauses Nos. 23 to 26; and remaining new Schedules; and
          (2) on the allotted day which under the Order [17th July] is to be given to the
       proceedings on consideration and Third Reading, the proceedings on consideration shall
       be allotted in the manner shown in the Table set out below and, subject to the provisions
       of that Order, each part of those proceedings shall be brought to a conclusion at the time
       specified in the second column of that Table.

                                            TABLE
                              Proceedings                                  Time for conclusion
                                                                             of proceedings
        Amendments up to the end of Clause No. 13, new
          Clauses relating to Part I of the Bill and new
          Schedules relating to Part I of the Bill                               9.00 p.m.
        Remaining proceedings on consideration                                  10.00 p.m.
          Report to lie upon the Table.
 3 Selection,—Sir Marcus Fox reported from the Coknmittee of Selection (see Appendix II).
                                                  om other Select Committees and ordered
 4 Select Committees,—Several Reports were made ft<
       to be printed; and Minutes of Evidence wen reported and ordered to be printed (see
       Appendix III).
 5 Message from the Lords,—A Message was brought from the Lords as follows
         Employment (Age Limits) Bill [Lords],—T\ e Lords have passed a Bill, intituled, An
      Act to prohibit the use of age limits in job ap]^ointments, training schemes, promotion,
      retirement and advertising of jobs; to make otl er provision relating to employment, and
      for connected purposes; to which the Lords de sire the concurrence of this House.
 6 Reform of the House of Lords Bill,—Mr Graham J\]lien, presented a Bill to abolish the present
       composition of the House of Lords and to pirbvide for a new membership based solely
       on an equal directly elected representation And the same was read the first time; and
       ordered to be read a second time on Friday l 01 :h November and to be printed [Bill 204].
 7 Registered Homes (Rights to Residence),—Ordem I, That leave be given to bring in a Bill to
       provide for the residential security of persons living in voluntary, private residential or
       nursing homes and for connected purposes: And that Mr David Hinchliffe, Mr Tom
