                       ASSOCIATION OF CHIEF POLICE OFFICERS (SCOTLAND)


    General Purposes Standing Committee                                           POLICE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                km **,
                                                                                  WEMYSS R OAD
    Secretary:    W. Wilson, Esq., Q.P.M.,                                        D Y S A R T K Y I 2Y A
                                                       fl        L a1
                  Deputy Chief Constable                                          K IR K C A L D Y
                  Fife Constabulary ,
                                                                                  Telephone 0592 52611
                                                                                  Fax. 0592 51650


    Your Ref:
                                                IV js'Cu-
    Our Ref:     A C P O ( S ) /G P /F .6            i_j                          15th December,      1989.
                                                     r(.

                                                 ^     P V .II                          Itu * Luxv -.
    R.M. Whalley, Esq.,
    Secretary,
    Inquiry into The Hillsborough


•   Stadium Disaster,
    50 Queen Anne's Gate,
    LONDON, SW1A 9AR.


    Dear Sir,

                                       Safety at Sports Grounds Act.       1915
                                               Safety Certificates

        I refer to the meeting of 27th October, 1989, between representatives of the
    Association of Chief Police Officers (Scotland) and Lord Justice Taylor, at which
    the above topic was discussed.

        During discussions Lord Justice Taylor requested that copies of Safety
    Certificates issued by Regions in Scotland be forwarded to him.

        I would now wish to inform you that this request was intimated to all members
    of the ACPO(S) General Purposes Standing Committee and I am advised that a copy
    of Strathclyde Regional Council Safety Certificate has already been forwarded to
    Lord Justice Taylor following his visit to Strathclyde Region.  In addition,
    Highlands and Islands Regional Council are at present appraising a draft of their
    proposed Safety Certificate which is hoped will be issued in the near future.

        Safety Certificates for all other Scottish Regions are forwarded herewith for
    the information and attention of Lord Justice Taylor.

        I trust this is of assistance to you.


                                               Yours faithfully,




                                                  AU        >KJ i/ J l ^
                                             Deputy Chief Constable

    Ends.
DUMFRIES AMD GALLOWAY REGIONAL COUNCIL

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

General Safety Certificate


Whereas the Council has received an application dated 26th
September 1986 from the Queen of the South Footbal^ Club,
Palmerston  Park,  Terregles  Street,  Dumfries,  for a General
Safety Certificate under the Act in respect of Palmerston Park,-
Dumfries, being a stadium designated by the Secretary of State
for Scotland by means of an Order under Section 1 of the Act;

And whereas the Council     has determined the said Queen of the
South Football Club to be a qualified person in terms of Section
3(1) of the Act and has carried out the consultations required
by Section 3(3) of the Act;

Now, therefore, the Council, in terms of Section 3(2) of the
Act, hereby grants and issues this General Safety Certificate to
the said Queen of the South Football Club in respect of the said
stadium and that on the conditions set out in Parts 1-4 of the
Schedule hereto which shall form part of the said Certificate,
being the terms and conditions which the Council considers
necessary or expedient     to secure reasonable safety at the
stadium when it is in use for the specified activities.

The Certificate shall come into force one calendar month after
the date of issue hereof and the conditions of the Certificate
shall be complied with from such effective date or from     such
other date or dates as are specified in the several Parts of the
Schedule hereto.


                       Dated this



                       Director of Administration and Law
                       for and on behalf of the Council.
SCHEDULE

PART 1

INTERPRETATION


The Certificate, including this Schedule, shall be interpreted
according to the definitions contained in the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975, as read with the supplementary definitions
contained in this Part of the Schedule.              ^

"the Act"                   means the Safety of Sports Grounds
                            Act 1975.

"authorised person"         means   a  person    authorised   in
                            accordance with Section 11 of the
                            Act    and    includes   a    person
                            authorised by the Firemaster.

"the building authority"    means  the Dumfries and Galloway
                            Regional Council, being the local
                            authority for the purposes of the
                            Building (Scotland) Act 1959 and
                            relative   regulations  thereunder
                            within the    Region in which the
                            stadium is situated.

"the Chief Constable"       means the Chief Constable of the
                            Dumfries and Galloway Police or
                            his authorised representative.

"the Council"               means    Dumfries   and    Galloway
                            Regional Council, being the local
                            authority for the purposes of the
                            Act   within    the  Dumfries   and
                            Galloway Region.

"covered enclosure"         means  an  area   of  terrace over
                            which there is erected a structure
                            to    protect    spectators   from
                            inclement weather conditions.

"the Firemaster"            means   the    Firemaster   of   the
                            Dumfries and Galloway Fire Brigade
                            or his authorised representative.

"gangway"                   means a channel   for the passage of
                            spectators.

"the Guide"                 means  the   "Guide  to   Safety  at
                            Sports   Grounds",   1986   edition,
                            published by the Home Office and
                            the Scottish Office.
"the Holder"                 means the applicant for and the
                             person to whom this Certificate is
                             issued, being a qualified person
                             for the purpose of the Act.

"the plan"                   means the drawing of the stadium
                             attached to this Certificate    in
                             terms of Section 2(4) of the Act
                             and    docquetted   as    relative
                             thereto.                ^

"the specified activities"   means  the   activities   listed   in
                             Part 2 of the Schedule.

"the stadium"                means the sports stadium referred
                             to in the application for this
                             Certificate.

"stairway"                   shall have the meaning assigned to
                             it   in   the   Building Standards
                             (Scotland)   Regulations in  force
                             from time to time.

"the Stand"                  means the building   or area within
                             the   stadium  in    which   seating
                             accommodation   is    provided   for
                             spectators.

"terrace"                    means an area of steps providing
                             standing    accommodation    for
                             spectators.
PART 2
THE SPECIFIED ACTIVITIES


The activities covered by this Certificate (i.e. the specified
activities) shall comprise the following activities to be held
at Palmerston    Park, Dumfries,  and  to which spectators are
admitted, namely:-

(1)   Football matches                                     t^r-

      but   shall not include practice or training sessions for
      those activities to which not more than 500 non-paying
      spectators are admitted.

      Subject, however, to the terms and conditions of the
      Certificate and to any general statutory requirements, the
      stadium may also be used for the following purposes
      ancillary to the specified activities, namely:-

      (a)   the playing of music or singing;

      (b)     the provision of news   or   comment   relative     to the
            specified activities;

      (c)     the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities and
            the sale of programmes, news sheets and souvenirs;

      (d)   the sale and consumption of refreshments;

      (e)   public collections of any nature;

      (f)   any other use ancillary to the specified activities
            which has received not less than fourteen days prior
            approval by the Council.
PART 3
CONDITIONS IMPOSED IN TERMS OF SECTIONS 2(2) AND 2(3) OF THE ACT


1.   Attendance Limits

     The number of spectators which may be admitted to the
     stadium on any one occasion for the purposes of a specified
     activity should not exceed in each area as designated on
     the accompanying plan:-                           ^

     Grandstand                1,400

     Covered enclosure A       3,100

     Terracing B                 810

     Covered enclosure C       1,080

     Terracing D                 680

     Terracing E               2,760

     Terracing F                 520

     Terracing G               1,130

     Terracing H                 520

     TOTAL                    12,000

     The Holder shall keep records showing the number of persons
     admitted to the stadium on each occasion.       Such records
     shall be kept at the stadium and shall be made available
     for examination on request by an authorised person.


2.   Metering of Admissions

     The Holder shall be required to provide and maintain at
     every turnstile or entrance gate to the stadium a metering
     system to the satisfaction of the Chief Constable acting on
     behalf of the Council, to indicate and record all spectator
     admissions to the stadium with a view to ensuring that the
     number of spectators admitted to the stadium does not
     exceed the number specified in Condition 1 of this Part of
     the Schedule.

     If, in order to comply with this Condition, it is necessary
     to   execute  any  additional   works  and/or  provide  any
     additional equipment, such execution and/or provision shall
     be completed not later than 1st August 1987.
Location of Turnstiles or Entrance Gates

Turnstiles or entrance gates for spectators located as per
the accompanying plan, along with the accesses therefrom to
the several parts of the stadium, shall at all times be
maintained in a proper state of repair and kept free from
obstructions of any kind:-

                    Reference No.
Part of Stadium        on plan         Providing Access from

South East                1-8          Terregles Street

South West                9-12         Terregles Street

North East               13 - 17       Portland Drive

West                      18,19        Car Park

Grandstand                1 - 4        Car Park


Location of Exit Gates

Exit gates for spectators shall be located and, along with
the accesses thereto from the several parts of the stadium,
shall be maintained in safe and proper working condition at
the undernoted points and kept free from obstructions at
all times:-

                                                  Minimum width
                                     Ref. N o .      of exit
Part of Stadium   Exit to            on plan         (metres)

South East        Terregles Street         A           4.55

South West        Terregles Street         B           4.58

Grandstand        Car Park              C              2.14

Grandstand        Car Park                 D           2.14

West              Car Park              E              2.55

West              Car Park              F              3.94
                                                   (not in use)

North West        Portland Drive        G              4.57


Crush Barriers and Handrails

Crush   barriers and   handrails shall   be  provided  and
maintained in a good state of repair at all times at not
less a number of points than are indicated on the approved
plans.
They shall be kept free of all sharp projections or edges
and,  when   tested,  shall  be  required   to  satisfy  the
appropriate loading test specified in Annex C to the Guide.

The Holder shall arrange and carry out a programme for the
testing and inspection     ofcrush barriers and   handrails
within the stadium on the basis that every crush barrier
and every handrail shall be:-

(a)   inspected once per annum; and                     _

(b)   tested to the standards of Annex C      to   the Guide at
      least once in a period of ten years.

Not less than ten per cent of the       total number ofsuch
barriers and handrails shall be tested      in any one year.
All testing and inspection carried out      in terms of this
Condition shall be so carried out by an independent firm to
be approved by the Council.   A copy of each testing and/or
inspection certificate shall be submitted to the Council as
soon as it is issued by the firm concerned.

Without prejudice to the foregoing      requirement for the
carrying out of a regular programme for the testing and
inspection of crush barriers and handrails, the Council may
require any particular barrier or handrail to be separately
tested and/or inspected    at any time if it has reasonable
cause to suspect that it may not be capable of satisfying
the appropriate loading test specified in Annex C to the
Guide.

The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of
being represented at any testing and/or inspection of cruct
barriers and/or handrails it it so wishes.

Any crush barrier or handrail which fails to meet the
prescribed  test   shall    be  replaced  or   strengthened  as
necessary within six weeks of the date of the appropriate
testing certificate.      Crush barriers and handrails which
are strengthened shall be re-tested       on completion of the
strengthening   work   to    ensure  that   they   satisfy  the
requirements of Annex C to the Guide.     Any crush barrier or
handrail which, having failed the prescribed test, has to
be replaced shall be immediately removed.


Keeping of Records

In addition to the records required to be kept in terms of
Condition 1 of this Part of the Schedule, the Holder shall
be required to prepare and maintain the following records
which shall be made available to an authorised person on
request:-
(a)   a record of any accident or incident which causes
      injury  (but excluding    a playing   field  or  track
      injury) and which is brought to his notice as having
      occurred within the stadium while it was being used
      for   a  specified  activity  -  this   record  to  be
      separately and securely stored apart from the other
      records noted hereafter;

(b)   a record of every test made of crush barriers and/or
       handrails within the stadium, in terms of Condition 5
       of this Part of the Schedule;               ^

(c)   a   record  ofevery  test    made  of   an electrical
       installation within the stadium, as provided for in
      Condition 10 of Part 4 of the Schedule;

(d)   a record of     the dates of maintenance carried out
      within the stadium, as required by Condition 6 of
       Part 4 of the Schedule, also indicating the nature of
      any defects found affecting the safety of spectators
      while   within  the   stadium and the dates   of   the
      subsequent action to remedy such defects;

(e)   a record of the date of every exercise held in terms
      of Conditions 14 and 25 of Part 4 of the Schedule to
      test  emergency procedures,  including fire routine
      procedures;

(f)   a record of the date of every test made of the fire
      alarm system,   the emergency lighting system,    the
      public address system and the fire fighting equipment
      within the stadium, as provided for in Condition 27
      of Part 4 of the Schedule;

(g)   a record of the name of the person nominated, in
      terms of Condition 2 of Part 4 of the Schedule, on
      each occasion when the stadium is in use for a
      specified activity.

The records required to be kept in terms of this Condition
and Condition 1 of this Part of the Schedule may be so kept
in a single log book or separate log books, as may be most
convenient to the Holder.
PART 4
OTHER CONDITIONS IMPOSED IN TERMS OF SECTION 2(1) OF THE ACT


1.   General

     The Holder shall

     (a)   comply, asfrom the    appropriate date in each case,
           with the   conditions set    out in    the Schedul^'at       a
           times when the stadium is in use for a specified
           activity;

     (b)   subject to Condition 2 of this Part of the Schedule,
           retain control over all operations in the stadium at
           all times when the stadium is in use for a specified
           activity;

     (c)   arrange, as and when      required by the Conditions of
           this Certificate, for the testing of crush barriers
           and handrails    and   of   the   following   systems  and
           procedures, namely,      (i)   fire   alarm system,   (ii)
           emergency lighting   system,    (iii)    public   address
           system, (iv) fire fighting equipment,       and (v)   fire
           routine procedures;

     (d)   otherwise     take   such steps  as   are  reasonably
           practicable to observe the spirit and intentions of
           the recommendations contained in the Guide in so far
           as  the said recommendations    are not substituted,
           amended, modified, extended, otherwise altered by all
           or   any   of    the   specific Conditions   of   this
           Certificate.


2.   Nomination of Responsible Person

     On each occasion when the stadium is used for a specified
     activity, the Holder shall nominate a responsible person to
     take charge of the stadium on his behalf and to be present
     therein  during  the whole   period   of such  use.     Such
     nominated person shall not be engaged on any duties which
     will prevent him from exercising general supervision of the
     stadium on behalf of the Holder during such use.    The name
     of the person so nominated shall be made known to any
     authorised officer who may be present and have occasion to
     request  it and shall be recorded as provided for         in
     Condition 6 of Part 3 of the Schedule.
Dates   for   Provision   of   New   Equipment   and   Execution   of
Works

Where, under any Condition of this Part of the Schedule,
the Holder is required either to provide new equipment of
any kind or to execute works within the stadium, such
provision or execution shall be completed not later than
1st August 1987 unless the context of any particular
condition specifically stipulates otherwise in which case
such other stipulated date shall be applicable.

Alterations and Additions to Stadium

Alterations and/or additions to the stadium or to any of
the installations or facilities therein, whether permanent
or temporary, shall not be made except with the prior
consent of the Council.      Notice in writing shall be given
by the Holder to the Council of any such alterations or
additions proposed to be made and such notice shall be
accompanied by full details and, as and when necessary and
appropriate, by drawings and calculations.        The work shall
not be started until the approval of the Council has been
obtained.      Such   consent   shall  be   additional   to  any
planning, building control or other consent required by the
Holder.     Alterations and/or additions       approved by the
Council in terms of this Condition shall be required to
meet the relative recommendations contained in the Guide
unless   the    Council   is   satisfied   that    it  would  be
impracticable    or   otherwise   unreasonable   to   insist  on
compliance in full with these recommendations.


Manning of Entrance Gates

Turnstiles   or    entrance gates   shall   be   manned  and
operational for such a period prior to the commencement of
a specified activity as will permit the admission of
spectators  to   all parts of the     stadium   in an evenly
distributed and controlled manner.    The Holder shall agree
with the Chief Constable before the use of the stadium for
a specified activity, how many and which turnstiles or
entrance gates   are to be allocated solely for the use of
juveniles and/or old age    pensioners and/or special groups
and the time at which they will be opened.     Such agreement
may, at the discretion of the Chief Constable, either apply
to all uses of the stadium for a specified activity or to
any one or more such uses.


Regular Inspections of Stadium and Clearing of Litter

During the period between successive uses of the stadium
for a specified activity, the Holder shall arrange for an
inspection to be made on his behclf of the whole facilities
of the stadium with a view to any defect or missing
equipment being ascertained and immediately repaired or
replaced and any other damage whatsoever being made good.
All litter and debris accumulated as a result of the
immediately preceding use of the stadium shall be removed
to safe storage before the stadium's further use for a
specified activity.


Maintenance - General

All parts of the stadium shall be maintained in a good
state of repair to the satisfaction of the Counc^Jr.    The
Holder shall carry out, without delay, such works of repair
and maintenance within the stadium as may be required from
time to time by the Council.

All drainage systems within those areas in the stadium
which are accessible to spectators shall be maintained in a
safe and efficient condition at all times.


Maintenance of Surfaces

The  surfaces  of every part     of  all  paths,  stairways,
gangways, terraces, accesses and exits within the stadium
over which spectators may have reasonable cause to pass
shall be maintained     in good state of  repair, free from
ruts, potholes, depressions or other defects.

Precautions to be taken because of inclement weather

Where, because of inclement weather giving possible rise to
dangerous conditions under foot, e.g.     snow or   ice, any
surface within the stadium over which a spectator may have
reasonable   cause  to   pass  may   present   a  hazard  to
spectators, such surfaces shall be cleared of such hazard
before spectators are admitted to the stadium.

Annual inspection of electrical installations

The Holder shall have an inspection made annually of the
whole electrical installation within the stadium and shall
submit a copy of the relative Inspection Certificate to the
Council immediately it is issued by the person or firm
concerned.   Such Inspection Certificate shall be in the
form prescribed in Section E of the Regulations for the
Electrical Equipment of Buildings      as published by the
Institution of Electrical Engineers and shall be signed by
a Corporate member      of  the said  Institution  or  by  a
Contractor currently   enrolled with the National Inspection
Council for Electrical Installation Contracting or by a
qualified representative of an electricity supply authority
or by a surveyor of an Engineering Insurance Company.
Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for        the
inspection of the whole electrical installations within   the
stadium, the Council may require any particular part of   the
installations to be separately tested at any time if it   has
reasonable cause to suspect that it may be defective       in
some way.

The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of
being represented at any inspection of the electrical
installations or part thereof if it so wishes.
                                                  „4f
Any electrical installation or part thereof which fails to
pass the appropriate test shall be repaired or replaced
within   one  month   of  the   issue  of   the appropriate
Certificate.   Any electrical installation or part thereof
which has to be repaired or replaced shall be re-tested on
completion of such repairs or replacement so as to comply
with the above mentioned Regulations.

Arrangements for Attendance of Police Officers

The Holder shall arrange, at his own expense, for the
attendance of an adequate number of police officers while
the stadium is in use for a specified activity to ensure
the lawful and orderly behaviour of spectators. The number
of police officers to be in attendance within the stadium
during any such use shall be determined by the Chief
Constable.


Methods of Admission and Segregation of Supporters

The Holder shall discuss and agree with the Chief Constable
prior to the use of the stadium for a specified activitys-

(a)   the methods of admission to be employed in connection
      with such specified activity (in particular, whether
      admission shall be by ticket only); and

(b)   the special arrangements, if any, to be made for the
      segregation of home and visiting supporters.

Without prejudice   to the   foregoing provisions of this
Condition, it shall be at the discretion of the Chief
Constable to indicate to the Holder that the agreement
reached in terms of the said provisions can also apply to
all or any future uses of the stadium for a specified
activity without further discussion between them.
13.   General Stewarding Arrangements (including training)

      While the stadium is in use for a specified activity, the
      Holder shall ensure the attendance within the stadium of
      such  number   of  stewards   as  is  necessary   to ensure
      compliance with the Conditions of this Certificate.

      All stewards shall be properly trained and fit to carry out
      their duties.    The arrangement and training of stewards
      shall follow the recommendations of Chapter 13 and Annex B
      to the Guide.    Exercises for stewards and other p^tfsons
      employed within the stadium shall be carried out not less
      than  once   in  each  playing  season  to  test  emergency
      procedures.

      All stewards should be readily identifiable by the wearing
      of distinctive clothing and have individual identifying
      number.

      Instructions in writing to stewards, as detailed in Annex B
      of the Guide, shall be submitted for approval by the Chief
      Constable on behalf of the Council as soon as possible and
      not later than 1st August 1987.


14.   Exit Gates and Segregation Gates - Attendance by Stewards

      All exit gates and segregated gates shall be attended by
      stewards throughout the entire period when spectators may
      be  in the stadium in connection with       its use for a
      specified activity and    it shall be the duty of such
      stewards  to open the exit gates      in the event of an
      emergency and in any event not less than fifteen minutes
      before the anticipated end of the specified activity or at
      any other time on the request of a police officer.      When
      opened for any reason, all exit gates shall be secured in
      the fully open position and kept free of all obstructions.


15.   Provision of First-aid Facilities

      The Holder shall provide and maintain within the stadium a
      suitably equipped first-aid room and/or first-aid points to
      the  satisfaction  of the Council and shall ensure the
      attendance of a sufficient     number of properly trained
      first-aid personnel on each'occasion when the stadium is in
      use for a specified activity.


16.   Public Address System

      The Holder shall maintain for his own use and for the use
      of the police and emergency services, as and when required
      while the stadium is in use for a specified activity, a
      public   address  system  capable  of  being  heard  under
      reasonable conditions by all spectators of normal hearing
      in any part of the stadium to which spectators have a right
      of access.   Such public address system shall be operated
      and controlled from a position to be approved by the Chief
      Constable on behalf of the Council and shall be provided
      with an emergency power supply so that it is capable of
      being operated at all times.

      The wiring for the public address system shall         be either
      M.I.C.C. cable or P.V.C. cable in conduit and the       emergency
      source of power supply shall be provided from           batteries
      kept at full capacity by trickle charging from         the grains
      supply.


17.   Toilet Facilities

      The   Holder  shall    ensure   the   provision    and   adequate
      maintenance   to   the    satisfaction    of   the   Council    of
      sufficient   toilet   facilities,    both    male   and   female,
      accessible from all parts of the stadium.


18.   Sale of Tickets, Programmes and Refreshments - General

      In allocating premises or facilities      for the sale of
      tickets, programmes or refreshments, the Holder shall take
      all necessary steps to ensure that such allocation does not
      obstruct entrance or exit routes in any way.

      The Holder shall ensure that all such premises, appliances
      and equipment associated with the sale of refreshments are
      maintained in a safe and proper working condition at all
      times.

      All containers in which liquid refreshments are sold or
      distributed to spectators while the stadium is in use for a
      specified activity shall be made of soft plastic or other
      soft material.    This requirement shall not apply to any
      part of the stadium to which access is given only on the
      invitation of the Holder.


19.   Facilities for Authorised Persons

      The Holder   shall  make available  adequate viewing  and
      inspection  facilities to authorised persons  immediately
      before, during or after a specified activity or at any
      other reasonable time when considered necessary by the
      Council.
Accommodation and Facilities for Dumfries and Galloway
Police
As soon as possible, and not later than 1st august 1987,
the Holder shall provide and thereafter M i n t a i n , at his
own expense, suitable accommodation and facilities for the
use of the police officers on duty in connection with the
use of the stadium for a specified activity.

The accommodation provided shall be        adequate    to   meet the
requirements of the Chief Constable.


Grandstand — Means of Escape
(a)   allseating within the Stand         shall   be   maintained
       securely fixed in position.

(b)   Alldoors leading onto exit   routes shall be made half-
       hour fire resisting, close fitting and self closing,
       and shall be so maintained thereafter.

(c)   All   final exit doors from the Stand shall open out
       and be fitted with panic bolts.     Where panic b°l1:
       are already fitted, these shall be repaired where
       necessary and thereafter all panic bolts shall be
       maintained in efficient working order.

The words "POSH BAR TO OPEN" shall be printed in 100mm high
white block capital lettering on the inside of all doors
fitted with panic bolts,     this  lettering to be placed
immediately above the bar.

 If the Holder wishes to use slip bolts, cl\ain®
 padlocks to afford additional security over and above that
 nrovided bv panic bolts, no exception will be taken to this
 Drovided any slip bolts, chains and/or padlocks are removed
 from the exit doors before the admission of= - P ^ t o r - “ d
 are placed on a numbered master board in a cenfcral position
 ?o be approved by the Firemaster.  No such slip bolt, chain
 or padlock shall be replaced until all spectators have
 the Stand.

 Fire Alarm System

 While   the  Council   regards   it f ,a % J ^ ^ ^ r ^ s t e m
 electrically-operated, manually-activated                    _    198O
 romolvina with British Standard 5839 :           Part 1 .
 should be installed, the Council           *cc® ^ ' m aS8 ^
 with this provision, a two" sta 9 e .type alarm system
 break glass points and incorporating                                in
 address system.   The break glass points shall be .       l oca*®   .
 the grandstand seating' area (2), m        e c               shall be
 the ground floor (1).    An automatic smoke detector sha11 be
 installed in each section of the void below the seating at
 the front of the grandstand.
An indicator panel shall be provided within the control
room and shall be capable of showing clearly the area from
which the alarm has been given.

The Holder shall not be required to provide a fire alarm
audible warning system other than within the general area
of the offices, dressing rooms, gymnasium, working areas
such as the switch room/drying room and shop.

Power for the fire alarm system shall be provided from
batteries kept at full capacity by trickle charging ^-#rom
the mains supply and wiring shall be either M.I.C.C. cable
or P.V.C. cable in conduit.


Emergency Lighting and Notices

(a)   Emergency lighting shall be provided in each of the
      exits from the grandstand, to the satisfaction of the
      Firemaster.

(b)   A sign bearing the word "EXIT" in     block capital
       letters at least 125mm high, shall be provided at
       each of the exits.     The signs shall be of the
       illuminated type,  complying with British Standard
       5266 Part 1 :     1975, unless they are adequately
       illuminated by the general and emergency lighting
       system.

(c)   All fire resisting doors,      which are required to be
       self-closing, shall have a    notice fixed to both faces
       of the door bearing the       words "FIRE   DOOR - KEEP
       SHUT", or words to the like    effect.

(d)   Final exit doors from the Stand shall be clearly and
      permanently marked on the outside face of the door
      with the words "EXIT - KEEP CLEAR" in block capital
      lettering not less than 125mm high.     On any occasion
      when   a  large  number   of   foreign   spectators  are
      expected within the   stadium,    the holder   shall
      consider  the   necessity for      the     provision  of
      additional exit notices in the appropriate language.

(e)   Within the seated area of the grandstand, signs shall
      be prominently displayed requesting that spectators
      refrain from smoking.

(f)   Adequate  lighting   shall be  provided    in  the car
      parking area at the rear of the grandstand where
      visibility is poor during the hours of darkness.

(g)   Adequate  lighting   shall be  provided   within the
      covered enclosure designated "A" on the accompanying
      plan to assist in identifying trouble-makers and to
      assist spectators in the event of an emergency.
24.   Fire Fighting Equipment
      Portable fire fighting appliances of types to be approved
      by the Firemaster shall be located and maintained at such
      points throughout the Stand as may likewise be approved by
      him prior to 1st August 1987.

      Without prejudice to the foregoing general requirement, a
      fire blanket shall be provided and located within every
      snack-bar and kitchen area.                          s'


25.   Fire Routine Procedures

      The Holder shall     take the necessary steps to instruct all
      staff, including    stewards, likely to be working within the
      stadium while it   is in use for a specified activity, of the
      procedures to be   adopted, as undernoted, in the event of an
      outbreak of fire   being discovered, namelys-

      (a)   The Fire Brigade to be summoned;

      (b)   A responsible person or persons    to proceed to the
             scene of the fire and to find out if it has been
             extinguished or is under control; and

      (c)   Where the fire (i) is affecting the Stand seating or
             any exit therefrom,    or (ii) is located elsewhere
             within the Stand and is not under control, to take
             immediate steps to arrange the evacuation of the
             Stand by using the public address system.

      A record of the training and instruction given shall be
      entered  in   the  log  book  and  shall   include date of
      instruction or exercise, duration, name of person giving
      the instruction, name of persons receiving the instruction
      and the nature of the instruction or exercise.

      The full details of fire routine procedures shall be agreed
      with the Firemaster    not  later  than   1st August  1987.
      Exercises to test fire routine procedures shall be carried
      out not less than once each playing season and may be so
      carried out in conjunction with the exercises referred to
      in Condition 13 of this Part of the Schedule.


26.   Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gas

      If it is necessary to store or use liquefied petroleum gas
      within the stadium, the Holder shall take the necessary
      steps to observe any guidance given by the Firemaster as to
      the precautions to be taken -in so doing.
27.   Testing of Systems
      The following arrangements shall be made by the Holder      for
      the testing of the undernoted systems

      (a)   Fire Alarm - Prior to any event, the manual fire
            alarm systems shall be tested in accordance with the
            procedures set out in British Standard 5839 Part 1 :
            1980;

      (b)   Emergency Lighting - the emergency l i g h t i n g system
            shall be tested in accordance with the procedures
            outlined in British Standard 5266: Part 1; 1975;

      (c)   Public Address System - the public address system
            shall be tested at the same time as the fire alarm
             system and   shall be checked   to  ensure  that  it
            operates correctly from both the normal and secondary
            power sources;

      (d)   Fire   Fighting   Equipment - the    fire   fighting
            equipment shall be checked and tested by a competent
             firm of fire engineers at regular periods but not
            less often than once per annum.


28.   Notices

      The Holder   shall  ensure   that  notices are prominently
      displayed at all entrances intimating that admission will
      be refused to any spectator carrying:-

      (a)   any  glass,   metal,  earthenware  or   other  similar
            container designed for the carriage of liquid;

      (b)   a   container  of    any   description   which   contains
            alcoholic liquor;   and

      (c)   any article which is a firework or a flare.

      The notices should also clearly indicate that any spectator
      subsequently   found   within   the   ground  carrying   such
      containers    will be     immediately   ejected    therefrom.
      Sufficient stewards will require to be employed at the
      entrances to the ground to ensure that these restrictions
      are implemented.    The Holder will provide receptacles at
      entrances for the disposal of cans, bottles and containers,
      etc., and timeously remove these receptacles before the
      termination of the event.
29.   Specific Repairs, Alterations and Maintenance to be carried
      out

      The following items shall be completed as soon as possible
      and in any event by not later than 1st August 1987:-

      (1)   The section of the perimeter fence adjacent to   the
            Portland Drive turnstiles should be strengthened and
            temporarily shored.                              ^

      (2)   Thedamaged crush    barrier   on   the   north   terracing
            should be repaired.

      (3)   The doorway on the wall at the northern end of the
            grandstand leading to Exit E should be enlarged in
            width to not less than 2.5 metres.

      (4)   Theceilings of the two      small rooms within   the
            grandstand  accommodation  containing  water heaters
            should be lined with plasterboard and plaster or two
            layers 12mm plasterboard to produce a half-hour fire
            resistance.


30.   Access for Emergency Vehicles

      The car park at the rear of the grandstand shall be placed
      under the control of a steward who shall be responsible for
      ensuring that:-

      (a)   No vehicles are permitted  to park within 15 metres of
             the grandstand to allow room for spectators entering
             and leaving the stadium and to allow access for
             emergency vehicles.

      (b)   an adequate access route    for    emergency vehicles    is
            available through the car park.


31.   Positioning of Television Cameras, Etc.

      Where any event is to be televised, cameras and portable
      equipment shall be restricted to positions to be approved
      in advance by the Chief Constable and shall not be allowed
      to cause any obstruction to the police or the emergency
      services in carrying out their duties.


32.   Vehicles Within the Stadium

      No vehicles shall be permitted access to any part of the
      stadium while it is in use for a specified activity, except
      invalid carriages approved by the Senior Police Officer on
      duty.
Review and Amendment to Certificate

If at any time it appears appropriate for them to do so,
the Council may review or amend the terms and conditions of
any part of the Certificate or any of the requirements
contained therein.

In the event of a contravention of the terms and conditions
of the Certificate, the Council may suspend or cancel the
Certificate.
                             THE FIFE REGIONAL COUNCIL

                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT,         1975

 DUNFERMLINE ATHLETIC FOOTBALL CLUB - EAST END PARK, DUNFERMLINE

                            GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


We,     THE     FIFE REGIONAL COUNCIL,         CONSIDERING that we received an

Application        dated 13th August,          1986 from     Dunfermline          Athletic

Football        Club Limited for a General Safety Certificate under the

Safety of Sports Grounds Act,              1975 in respect of East End               Park,

Dunfermline,       a Stadium designated by the Safety of Sports Grounds

(Designation)           (Scotland)    Order,    19       as a Stadium requiring            a

Safety        Certificate under       said Act,       FURTHER CONSIDERING that          we

have determined that the said Dunfermline Athletic Football                           Club

Limited        (hereinafter referred to as "the Holder")                 is a qualified

person within the meaning of Section 3(1) of said Act; THEREFORE,

we do hereby issue to the Holder this General Safety                        Certificate

in    respect of the said Stadium,              the extent of which is shown on

Plan 1        annexed and signed as relative hereto with details of the

Stand     therein being shown seperately on Plans                  . . . . also    annexed

and     signed     as     relative    hereto    and      that on     the    terms    and

conditions       contained      in    the Schedule annexed         and     signed       as

relative       hereto which,         together with said Plans shall form part

of the Certificate hereby issued; DECLARING that this Certificate

shall    come      into    operation as at        the     ........ day     of     August,

Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Nine.



                                               Director of Corporate Services,
                                               Fife Regional Council.

                                                        August,    1989.
                           SCHEDULE


SPECIFIED ACTIVITIES FOR WHICH CERTIFICATE ISSUED

This Certificate is issued in respect of the use of East End
Park, Dunfermline (hereinafter referred to as "the Stadium")
for football matches    (hereinafter referred   to as   "the
specified activities") on every occasion when these are held
and spectators   are admitted to the Stadium or any part
thereof;   provided however that the terms and conditions of
this Certificate   shall not apply in respect of the use of
the Stadium for practice or training sessions for   football
matches or other sporting events to which not more than five
hundred non-paying spectators are admitted.

Subject to the terms and conditions of this Certificate and
any variation or amendment     thereto and  to any general
statutory requirements, the Stadium may also be used for the
following purposes ancillary to the specified activities,
n a me ly:-

(a)     the playing of music or singing;
(b)     the provision of news or comment relative to the
        specified activities;
(c)    the sale of tickets for forthcoming football matches,
        the sale of programmes, news sheets and souvenirs and
        the hire of cushions;
(d)    the sale and consumption of refreshments;
(e)    public collections of any nature;
(f)    any other activity or purpose ancillary to the
        specified activities which has been approved by the
        Council in writing at least fourteen days in advance
        of the proposed date on which such other activity or
        purpose is intended.

MAXIMUM NUMBERS OF SPECTATORS TO BE ADMITTED

The maximum number of spectators to be admitted to the
Stadium shall be 23,090.

The maximum number of spectators to be admitted        to the
different  parts of the Stadium shall be as follows,    all as
shown on Plan 1

1.    Main Stand (all seating),                          3,000

2.    West Terrace   (all standing),

      Section A                          209
              B                        1,440
                  r
                                - 2 -


                  C                      1 ,731
                  D                      1 ,389
                  E                       672                          5,441

     3.   North Terrace (all standing),

          Section F                      1 ,374
                  G1                        685
                  G2                        870
                  H                         778
                  J                         778
                  K                      1 ,555
                  L                         41 4                   6,454

          East Terrace (all standing),

           Section Y1                    1 ,072
                   Y2                    1 ,818
                   Y3                    1,667
                   Y4                    1 ,716
                   Y5                       536                    6,809

          South East Enclosure (all seating

          Section X1                         63
                  X2                        174
                  X3                        174
                  X4                        174                         585

     6.   South West Enclosure (all standing),

          Section U                         246
                  V                         493
                  W                           62                     801
                                                                  23,090


3.   ATTENDANCE RECORDS

     The Club shall keep written records of the total number of
     spectators   who are present    on every occasion when a
     specified activity is held at     the  Stadium to include,
     separately,  the numbers of spectators admitted to the above
     mentioned different parts of the Stadium;   and such records
     shall be made available for examination by the Council    if
     requested.

4.   ENTRANCES TO STADIUM

     Spectators   shall   be   required by the     Club   to   enter     the
     Stadium/
Stadium only by means of the turnstiles numbering     28 in
total (or by so many of them as may reasonably be require to
be  in use at any specified activity)      situated  at the
locations marked T1 to T28 inclusive on Plan 1

All turnstiles when in use shall be manned for such a period
prior  to the commencement of a specified activity and
operated   in such a way so as to control the admission by
spectators   to the Stadium in an orderly and well regulated
manner.

All turnstiles shall be regularly inspected by the Club and
maintained  in a safe and proper state of repair and in good
working order and kept free from obstructions of any kind at
all times.

FINAL EXITS FROM THE STADIUM

Spectators  shall be required       by the Club    to    leave     the
Stadium only by means o f :-

(a) The main exit gates numbering 12 in total and   situated
    at the locations marked G1 to G1 2 inclusive on Plan 1 :-

     Each gate shall be:-

     (i)    fitted   with hinged doors     capable       of   opening
             outwards through 180 degrees;

     (ii)   kept   closed   before   and   during   specified
            activities with the hinged doors padlocked unless
            or until opened in accordance with the provisions
            of sub-paragraphs (iii) or (iv) hereof

     (iii) manned by at least one Steward who      should be
           provided with a key to unlock       the   exit he
           controls during the whole time when the    Stadium
           is in use for a specified activity and secured in
           a fully open position in the event         of   an
           emergency occurring,  before, during or after any
           specified activity, or at any time the request of
           a Police or Fire Officer;

     (iv)   secured in a fully open position at least fifteen
            minutes before the end of any specified activity
            and only to remain closed or to be closed at any
            time thereafter at the request of a Police or
            Fire Officer;

     (v)    maintained   at   the   same width    as    measured    at
            present/
                     r


                                  -   4 -




                    present;

             (vi)   regularly inspected by the Club and maintained in
                    a safe and proper state of repair and    in good
                    working order and kept free from obtructions   of
                    any kind at all times; and

             (vii) provided with locks,     all such locks to be on   a
                   master suite

      (b)     The exits from the Stand numbering ...     in total and
            situated at the locations marked G13 to G . . inclusive on
            Plan 1




6.   ACCESS FROM ENTRANCES AND TO EXITS

     The means of access leading directly from the turnstiles and
     leading directly   to all final exits   shall be regularly
     inspected by the Club and the surfaces    thereof  shall be
     maintained  in a safe and proper state of repair and when
     necessary re-laid and shall be kept free from obstructions
     of any kind at all times.

7.   DIVISION OF SPECTATOR ACCOMMODATION

     (a)    The Club shall ensure that      spectators within   the
            following parts of the Stadium shall be prevented  from
            gaining access to any other part of the Stadium at any
            time when    the Stadium is in use    for a specified
            activity    except  in the event of      an   emergency
            occurring:-

            Main Stand
            South East Enclosure
            South West Enclosure
            East Terrace
            West Terrace, to include Sections F, G 1 , G2, H of North
            Terrace/
       Terrace
       Section J,K,L, of North Terrace


(b)   To provide   for the segregation of spectators  on the
      terracings  the Club shall maintain    the segregation
      fence on the North Terrace situated at     the location
      marked "Segregation Fence" on Plan 1

(c)   All structures,   including fences, barriers,  gates or
      railings dividing or sub-dividing the different parts
      of the Stadium shall be of a strength no less than that
      recommended   in the Green Guide for handrails dividing
      stairways into channels; and they shall be tested along
      with and in like manner as handrails (See Clause 9).

       The provisions of Clause 9 as regards notification of
       the date of the annual       inspection  and test,   the
       provision   for emergency tests,  reports on the  tests,
       repair,   replacement and removal all in relation to
       handrails and also the provisions of Clause       10 as
       regards   records of tests on handrails     shall apply
       equally   in relation to said structures    and  fences,
       barriers, gates and railings.


CRUSH BARRIERS, BARRIER RAILS AND HANDRAILS

(a)     General

        The type, strength, height, length and spacing of all
        crush barriers and handrails, including barrier rails,
        shall be in accordance with the recommendations
        contained in the Green Guide.

(b)     Crush Barriers

       Crush barriers throughout the Stadium numbering ..    in
       total shall be maintained at the existing locations   as
       marked N1 to N . . inclusive on Plan ...


(c)     Barrier Rails

      Barriers  Rails throughout the Stadium numbering  ..   in
      total  shall be maintained at the existing locations   as
      marked BR1 to B R . . inclusive on Plan ...

      Barrier Rails shall have an equivalent strength to that
      of handrails  at right angles or parallel      to   the
      direction/
       direction of   flow (as the case may be) referred to in
       paragraph  .. of the Green Guide;    and they shall be
       tested  along with and in like manner as handrails  (See
       Clause 9).

(d)      Handrails

        Handrails throughout the Stadium numbering ..  in total
        shall be maintained at the existing locations as marked
        H1 to H . . inclusive on Plan ..

INSPECTIONS AND TESTING OF CRUSH BARRIERS, HANDRAILS ETC.

In this   Clause and in Clause 10,     all references to     crush
barriers shall include:-

(a)     the crush barriers referred to in Clause 8(b), and

(b)     all references to handrails, inclusive of:-

         (i)    the structures   dividing or sub-dividing       the
               different parts   of the Stadium referred to     in
               Clause 7(c);

        (ii)   the barrier rails referred to in Clause 8(c) and

        (iii) the handrails referred to in Clause 8(d).

Inspections

All  crush     barriers and all handrails shall be maintained in
a safe and     proper state of repair at all times and shall be
inspected      at least once a year by an independent   firm of
Structural     Engineers appointed by the Club.

Testing

Twenty five per cent of all crush barriers and twenty   five
per cent of all handrails shall be tested in every year by
recognised  Testing Specialists appointed by the Club all in
accordance with the requirements of Appendix C of the Green
Guide and so as to ensure that every crush barrier and every
handrail shall be tested at least once in any period of four
years.

The next date for the testing of twenty five per cent of the
crush barriers and handrails shall be during the first week
after the official close of the ...........   playing season
and thereafter annually during the same week.

The/
                  r


                                -   7   -




      The Club shall notify     the Council in writing    at   least
      twenty-eight days   in advance thereof of (i)  the proposed
      dates of the annual inspection and annual testing,   (i i ) the
      precise location of all crush barriers and handrails to be
      tested and   (iii)  the name of the firm of        Structural
      Engineers and Testing Specialists to be engaged    for these
      purp o se s.

      If the Council has reasonable cause to believe     that any
      crush barrier or handrail might not be capable of satisfying
      the requirements   of a test under Appendix C of  the Green
      Guide,  the Council may require the Club,  on giving them at
      least fourteen days prior written notice,   to include such
      crush barrier or handrail within the scope of any annual
      test.   If the Council consider that the testing of such
      crush barrier or handrail should be carried out as a matter
      of urgency,   independently of any annual   test,  they may
      require the Club,  on giving them at least seven days prior
      written notice,   to arrange for such a test to be   carried
      out.

      The Club shall afford the Council the opportunity of being
      represented at any annual    inspection,   annual  test or
      emergency test and shall arrange for a Report thereof to be
      issued to themselves and simultaneously to the Council by
      the Structural Engineers and Testing Specialists as soon as
      possible.

      Any crush barrier or handrail which is stated in any Report
      or Certificate   from the Structural Engineers or Testing
      Specialists to be in need of maintenance or repair following
      the inspection thereof or which fails to meet the prescribed
      test   shall be repaired,     strengthened or replaced as
      necessary within   six weeks of the date of such Report or
      Certificate and within    a further two weeks     shall   be
      reinspected or retested in accordance with the requirements
      of Appendix C of the Green Guide.

      Any crush barrier or handrail which requires to be replaced
      shall   be removed by    the Club immediately upon their
      receiving the Structural Engineers' or Testing Specialists'
      Report of such defect.


10.   RECORDS OF INSPECTIONS AND TESTS ON CRUSH BARRIERS,
      HANDRAILS ETC.

      The Club shall keep written records of:-

      (a)   The date of all annual inspections,   tests and
            emergency/
                    r


                                 -   8   -




              emergency tests.

       (b)    The Reports and Certificates issued by the Structural
              Engineers and the Testing Specialists following
              thereon.

       (c)    The precise location of all crush barriers and
              handrails with reference to every test and emergency
              test.

       (d)    The precise location of all crush barriers and
              handrails which are repaired, strengthened or replaced
              at any time and the date when such repair,
              strengthening or replacement was carried out.

11 .   SEATING ACCOMMODATION IN STAND

       (a)   All  seats within the main Stand and the       South East
             Enclosure   shall be maintained securely       fixed   in
             position at all times.

       (b)    All gaps or spaces directly under the main Stand
             seating  shall be kept free of all debris,  litter and
             combustible materials,  and shall be completely cleared
             of such after each specified activity.

12.    ACCESS FROM MAIN STAND SEATING TO EXITS

       All      stairways,   gangways and other exit routes within the
       main       Stand   (as shown on Plan...)     shall be   properly
       maintained       in a safe condition with non-slip and even
       surfaces and kept free from obstructions of any kind at all
       t i m e s.


13.    ACCESS FROM TERRACINGS TO EXITS

       All gangways   and other exit routes within  the Terracings
       (including   the   South East Enclosure and South       West
       Enclosure) shall be properly maintained in a safe condition
       and kept free from obstructions of any kind at all times.

14.    TELEVISION CAMERAS

       The  siting of   television cameras and  relative  equipment
       shall be restricted to positions to be approved by the Chief
       Constable  and the Director of Engineering   in advance of
       their being set up or altered.

       Cameras and equipment shall be located so as not to cause
       any/
                  t




                               -   9   -




      any obstruction to the police or emergency services
      (including stewards) in the carrying out of their functions
      and duties.

15.   MAINTENANCE OF FLOODLIGHTING PYLONS

      The   Floodlighting Pylons within the     Stadium  shall be
      regularly  inspected by the Club so as to ensure  that they
      are at all times maintained without any risk to the safety
      of  the spectators or others underneath or in the vicinity
      thereof.

      The Club shall arrange that the pylons    are  inspected at
      least once every year by an independent firm of Structural
      Engineers  appointed by the Club at the same time that the
      crush barriers and handrails are so inspected in accordance
      with Clause 9.

      The provisions of Clause 9 as regards notification of the
      date of the annual     inspection,   reports  following the
      inspection, repair, replacement and removal, all in relation
      to crush barriers and handrails and also the provision of
      Clause   10 as regards    records of inspections   on crush
      barriers   and handrails shall apply equally in relation  to
      the floodlighting pylons.

      Reference is made to the document issued by the Directorate
      of Telecommunications, St. Andrew's House,  Edinburgh, dated
      November,  1977 and entitled "Masts and Towers provided by
      Local   Authorities   for Police and Fire    Services radio
      schemes".   It is recommended that the provisions   of that
      document relating   to inspections and examiniations of the
      masts and towers referred to therein should be followed,  so
      far as applicable,     by the firm of Structural   Engineers
      carrying out   the annual inspection of the  flood  lighting
      pylons within the stadium and brought to their notice     in
      advance thereof by the Club.


16.   MAINTENANCE OF STADIUM GENERALLY

      (a)   General

            In addition to the specific requirements of this
            Clause and of any other provision contained in this
            Certificate, it shall be the responsibility of the
            Club to inspect and to maintain in a good and safe
            state of repair at all times, the whole and every part
            of the Stadium including all structures (to include
            those not subject to any specific inspections or
            tests),/
tests), all fittings and fixtures, all installations
and facilities, all fire safety and other equipment,
all turnstiles, all fences, gates and doors, all
stairways and other exit routes, all gangways and
seating and generally every other item which might
have any bearing whatsoever upon the safety of the
Stadium.

The Club shall carry out, without delay, such works of
repair and maintenance within the Stadium as may be
required from time to time.

In particular but without prejudice to the foregoing

  (i)    Assessment of Structures

         not later than 30th September,   1989, the Club
         shall arrange for an inspection to be carried
         out by an    independent  firm of Structural
         Engineers of the whole structure and fabric of
         the Stand,   all other structures providing
         spectator accommodation and the Floodlighting
         Pylons together with all installations in or
         upon the aforementioned structures and shall
         obtain and exhibit to the Council not later
         than 31st December,    1989 a report by the
         Structural Engineers of the inspection with an
         assessment and certification as to the safety
         of   the   aforementioned   structures     with
         particular reference to the strength of load-
         bearing   elements   and   the    design    and
         construction of the structures in relation to
         the safe performance of    the    function for
         which they are intended in the context of the
         continuing safety of spectators.

  (ii)   Remedial Works

         Not  later than        1989,  the Club shall
         arrange  for the following works to be carried
         out in accordance with a programme of remedial
         works and detailed specifications previously
         submitted to and approved by the Director of
         Engineering:-

         East Terrace

         (a)   At the north end of    the East Terrace
               adjacent  to the perimeter fence there is
               a small   shed with   a concrete    roof.
               Measures/
    t




                   -   11   -




               Measures   should be   taken to prevent
               spectators from standing on this roof.

         (b)   On the terracing,  some of the steel pins
               retaining the concrete planks, which form
               the steps, are loose and others are proud
               of the top of the planks.    These should
               be   secured and made     flush with  the
               concrete planks.

        North Terrace

        The corridor at the rear of the segregation
        fence has barbed wire fixed at head height.
        This should be made safe.

        Boundary Fences

        The corrugated steel pale boundary     fencing
        approximately 2.7 m.     high  is extensively
        corroded at the east end of the north boundary
        and at the south end of the west boundary  and
        should be made good.

         West Terrace

         Measures should be taken to prevent spectators
         from gaining access to the roof covering from
         the rear of the terracing.    Signs should be
         erected indicating that the roof is fragile.

         South East Turnstile Area

         The   brickwork   security wall    round   the
         electricity sub-station is not high enough  to
         prevent access by spectators from within   the
         stadium and measures should be taken to ensure
         that spectators cannot gain access to the sub­
         station.

(iii) General Inspection between matches

        During the period between successive uses of
        the Stadium for specified activities, the Club
        shall arrange for a general visual inspection
        to be made of the whole Stadium for any sign of
        damage to any part therof which might create a
        potential danger to spectators.   Particular
        attention should be paid to the condition of
        the Terracings including the Stand and
        Enclosures/
         t




                          -   12   -




             Enclosures, stairways and exit routes.   Crush
             barriers, handrails and barrier rails should be
             examined   for deformation or any other overt
             signs    of weakness.

  (iv)       Surfaces

             The surfaces of every part of all pathways,
             stairways, gangways, terracings, accesses and
             exits within the Stadium over which spectators
             may have reasonable cause to pass shall be
             maintained at all times in a good state of
             repair free from ruts, potholes, depressions or
             other defects and obstructions of any kind.

 (v)         Structures

             All steel work and fabric (including the
             floodlighting pylons) shall be treated as
             when required to prevent deterioration to
             structural strength and condition all in
             accordance with the recommendations given in
             the relevant B.S. specification and codes of
             practice.

  (vi)       Detailed Annual Inspection

              At   least once every year,    the Club shall
              arrange   for a detailed inspection to be made
              of the whole Stadium, including all structural
              items   in every part of the Stadium and    the
              fabric   thereof,  all fixtures and   fittings,
              installations, facilities and equipment so as
              to ensure    that any defect,  missing item or
              inadequacy is forthwith repaired or   replaced;
              that   any other damage is made good and that
              the Club is complying with the whole terms and
              conditions of this Safety Ceritificate and the
              recommendations contained in the Green Guide.

  (vii       Inspection by Regional Council Representatives

             On a regular basis representatives from Police,
             Fire and Engineering Departments,   Fife Region,
             will  by arrangements with the Club   carry out
             detailed  inspections of the whole Stadium.

(viii) Records of defects and repairs
             The Club shall keep written records of the date
             when/
                     f


                                    -   13   -




                         when any defect, missing item or inadequacy is
                         discovered during any detailed or general
                         inspection of the Stadium and the date and
                         nature of the remedial action subsequently
                         taken or work carried out.

              (ix)       Removal of Litter

                         All litter and debris accumulated as a result
                         of any preceding specified activity shall be
                         removed to safe storage before the Stadium's
                         further use.

17.   ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO STADIUM

      Alterations and/or additions (whether permanent or
      temporary) to any part of the Stadium (including all
      structural items in every part of the Stadium and the fabric
      thereof, all fixtures and fittings, installations,
      facilities and equipment and the placement of television
      cameras and relative equipment) shall not be carried out
      except with the prior consent of the Council.

      Such consent shall be additional to any planning, building
      control or other consent required by the Club.

      Notice in writing shall be given by the Club to the Council
      (addressed   to the Director of Corporate Services)  of any
      proposed alterations or additions and such notice shall be
      accompanied by full details and,   as and when necessary or
      appropriate,   by drawings, calculations and specifications.
      The work shall not be started until the approval in writing
      of the Council has been obtained.

      Alterations  and/or additions approved by   the Council   in
      terms   hereof shall be required     to meet any relevant
      recommendations contained in the Green Guide unless      the
      Council  are satisfied that it would be    impracticable or
      otherwise unreasonable to insist on compliance in full with
      the recommendation.

18.   RAIN,   SNOW AND ICE CLEARANCE

      When any part of the Stadium to which spectators have access
      and  in particular any part of the surfaces of the pathways,
      stairways,   gangways,  terracings, accesses and exits within
      the Stadium over which spectators may have reasonable cause
      to pass,   has been affected by rainwater,  flooding, snow or
      ice which    is still lying on the affected areas on the day
      immediately   prior to the day on which the Stadium is to be
      in/
                    t




                                   -   14   -




        in use for a specified activity,   the Club shall  take all
        necessary measures   to ensure that,  so far as reasonably
        practicable,   the   affected areas are    cleared of    all
        accumulations  of water,  snow and ice prior to the time of
        admission of spectators to the Stadium;  and it shall be the
        responsibility of   the Club to satisfy themselves prior to
        the admission of spectators to the Stadium that the Stadium
        and every part thereof as aforesaid to which spectators have
        access has been cleared of accumulations of water,  snow and
        ice  to the extent that the affected areas are as    far as
        reasonably practicable free from hazards and otherwise safe
        for all manner of spectators while entering,       remaining
        within and leaving the Stadium.

       REARRANGEMENT OF FIXTURES

       Where because of weather conditions or for any other reason
       it has become necessary to rearrange a fixture,     the Chief
       Constable will not provide for the attendance       of Police
       Officers at the    rearranged fixture unless  he   shall have
       received   sufficient prior notice of     the date of      the
       rearranged  fixture and irrespective of whether the new date
       was   determined by   the Club or The     Scottish    Football
       Association or The    Scottish Football League or any other
       Football Body or Association.

       In the event    that the Chief Constable   does not receive
       sufficient notice   of any rearranged fixture and is thereby
       unable to arrange for the attendance of an adequate number of
       Police Officers thereat, the fixture shall not p r o c e e d .

       The Club shall bring these provisions to the notice of the
       respective Secretaries of The Scottish Football Association,
       The Scottish Football League and any other Body  responsible
       for the rearrangement of fixtures.

20 .    NOMINATION OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON

       On every occasion when a specified activity is to be held at
       the Stadium the Holder shall nominate a responsible person to
       take charge of the Stadium on the Club's behalf and to be
       continually present therein from at least sixty minutes prior
       to until at    least  fifteen minutes after    the  specified
       activity.

       Such nominated person shall not be engaged on any duties
       which will prevent him from exercising general supervision of
       the Stadium on behalf of the Club during the whole of said
       period.

       The/
                     t




                                 -   15   -




       The Club shall keep a written record of the person nominated
       in accordance with this Clause at every specified activity
       and this information shall be made available for examination
       by the Council if requested.

21 .    ARRANGEMENTS FOR ATTENDANCE OF POLICE OFFICERS

       The   Club shall     arrange at   their own expense  for the
       attendance of an adequate number of Police Officers while the
       Stadium   is in use for a specified activity so as to ensure
       the    lawful   and orderly behaviour and     the safety   of
       spectators.

22 . POLICE ACCOMMODATION

       The Club   shall provide and maintain within the Stadium   at
       their own expense accommodation and facilities suitable   for
       the  use    of police officers    and   adequate  for   their
       requirements in policing the Stadium.

23.    ARRANGEMENTS TO BE MADE OR CONFIRMED BETWEEN THE CLUB AND
       THE CHIEF CONSTABLE BEFORE EVERY SPECIFIED ACTIVITY

       The Club shall, prior to every specified activity, agree new
       arrangements or confirm existing arrangements with the Chief
       Constable in connection with the following matters

        (a)   the number of police officers required by the Club for
               the specified activity in accordance with Clause 21.

        (b)   the   arrangements   for admission of spectators at  the
               specified   activity,    and  in  particular,   whether
               admission  should be by ticket only;   (See also Clause
               25(a))

        (c)   the arrangements for the segregation of home and
              visiting supporters at the specified activity;

        (d)   the  name of the person nominated in   accordance   with
              Clause 20 hereof;

        (e)   the  precise number and location of the turnstiles  to
              be  in use   for the admission of  spectators  to the
              specified activity and which turnstiles are     to be
              allocated for use by juveniles, old age pensioners and
              any other special groups.

              It shall be the responsibility-of the Club to ensure
              that all persons (including stewards) connected with
              the Club who have any responsibilities in terms of
              this/
                    f



                                   -   16   -




            this Safety Certificate shall be fully advised of            the
            arrangements so made or confirmed.

24.   STEWARDS AND CLUB STAFF

      The    Club shall be responsible for the recruitment      of
      stewards   to undertake certain functions    and duties   in
      connection with the safety of spectators within the Stadium.

      All  stewards so recruited shall be physically and mentally
      fit,  of good physique and capable of carrying out     their
      functions  and duties at all times.    Stewards shall not be
      under 17 and shall preferably not be over 60 years of age.

      The    Club shall be responsible   for the   instruction and
      training of stewards and all other staff employed by the
      Club in the performance of their functions and duties,   the
      allocation of    specific functions and duties   to specific
      stewards,   the conduct of stewards and staff within     the
      Stadium    and   the due and proper      implementation  and
      performance by the stewards and staff of their functions and
      duties   including such   functions and duties    as may be
      recommended by    the Chief Constable   and Firemaster    as
      hereinafter mentioned.

      Not later than                 1989,  the Club shall prepare
      and  issue to all stewards and staff a booklet containing a
      list of the locations within the Stadium where stewards are
      to be positioned together with the functions and duties   to
      be carried out by stewards and staff

      (a)     in terms of this Certificate and also;

      (b)     in relation to:-

              (i)   the    control   and direction of     spectators
                     entering, using and leaving the Stadium;

             (ii)   patrolling   the Stadium  to  ascertain   any
                     potential or actual fire or other hazard or
                     emergency;

            (iii)       dealing with any potential or actual fire or
                        other hazard or emergency to include raising
                        the   fire alarm,   summoning the Fire Brigade,
                        evacuating   spectators and extinguishing any
                        fire;   and also:-

      (c)      as otherwise      determined     by the Club   in   the best
             interest/
             r


                        -   17   -




       interests of spectator safety.

The functions and duties of stewards and staff as laid down
by  the Club and any amendments,  additions or variations by
the Club thereto shall be notified to the Chief Constable
and the Firemaster.

The Chief Constable or the Firemaster shall be entitled at
any  time to make recommendations to the Club in connection
with any functions or duties to be carried out by   stewards
and staff or    for the amendment or variation of their
existing functions or duties.       In so far as any    such
recommendations are accepted by the Club they shall either
be  included in a revised booklet which shall be issued by
the Club   to all stewards and staff or shall,     with  the
approval of the Chief Constable and the Firemaster,       be
issued by the Club, and in name of the Club, to all stewards
and  staff as a separate document or supplement in the form
in which   the recommendations were submitted by  the Chief
Constable and/or the Firemaster.

The Club shall, however,  accept and issue as aforesaid any
recommendations by the Chief Constable or the Firemaster in
connection with any function or duty to be carried out by
stewards or staff which    is or may hereafter become     a
function or duty   to be so carried out in terms of    this
C ertificate.

On every occasion when a specified activity is held at    the
Stadium   the   Club  shall ensure   that  there  shall    be
continually present within the Stadium from at least sixty
minutes prior to and until at least fifteen minutes     after
the  specified activity a sufficient number of stewards   and
staff as are necessary      to ensure compliance with     the
provisions and conditions of this Certificate and the proper
implementation and performance by the stewards and staff of
their functions and duties.

All  stewards must at all times be readily   identifiable   by
dress (e.g. white coat, fluorescent jacket).

The   Club  shall also ensure that all    stewards,   and in
particular those with functions or duties in connection with
the   manning of gates and the control    and direction   of
spectators   along exit routes generally,   shall have ready
access at all times to loud hailer equipment.

In addition to any other arrangements made by the Club    for
the   instruction and training of stewards and staff   in the
performance of their functions and duties,     the Club shall
arrange/
                  t




                              -   18   -




      arrange on not less that two occasions during each playing
      season  for all stewards and staff to attend the Stadium for
      a detailed review and explanation of     the functions and
      duties of stewards and staff and      the carrying out of
      practical exercises   in connection   therewith.    Any new
      steward starting shall be made fully aware of the functions
      and duties required of him.    The Club shall keep a written
      record of    the dates when such review and exercises were
      carried out.

      Where the public- are admitted to the Stadium for the sale of
      tickets only,    the Club shall ensure that there shall be
      continually present within the area where tickets are sold
      sufficient numbers of stewards and staff to ensure that   the
      sale of tickets is carried out in an orderly manner and with
      due regard to the safety of the number of persons present on
      such occasions.

25.   ALL TICKET MATCHES
      (a)    The decision as to whether admission to any specified
             activity should be by ticket only shall rest with the
             Club;  but before reaching such a decision the Club
             shall consult the Chief Constable     to obtain his
             views.

      (b)    Where admission    to any specified activity    is by
             ticket    only   the Club shall ensure      that    the
             arrangements for the sale of tickets are publicised
             as   far in advance of the day of       the specified
             activity as possible.     Tickets shall not be sold at
             or   in the vicinity of the Stadium after 12 noon on
             the day of any specified activity which is to be held
             in the afternoon of that day;     and likewise,   shall
             not be sold as aforesaid after 5.00 p.m.    where   the
             specified activity is to be held in the evening.

26.   FIRST-AID ROOM AND PERSONNEL

      The Club   shall provide and maintain within the Stadium a
      suitably equipped first-aid room and first-aid points to the
      satisfaction of the Council and shall ensure the attendance
      of a minimum of ..... trained first-aiders.

27.   TOILET FACILITIES

      The Club shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of
      the Council   sufficient  toilet facilities both male and
      female in all parts of the Stadium.

28.   PARKING OF VEHICLES INSIDE THE STADIUM/
                  r


                                 -   19   -




28.   PARKING OF VEHICLES INSIDE THE STADIUM

      Apart from emergency vehicles (i.e. police, fire, ambulance,
      etc.)  no other vehicles shall be parked in any part of the
      Stadium while it is in use for a specified activity except
      with  the prior agreement of the Chief Constable.    Without
      prejudice to that requirement,  however, the Chief Constable
      may agree with the Club that a specific area or areas within
      the Stadium shall be allocated on a regular basis   for the
      parking of disabled persons'     vehicles  and of vehicles
      carrying television equipment.

29.   DRINKING VESSELS

      All containers in which liquid refreshment is sold or
      distributed to spectators shall be made of soft plastic or
      other soft material.

30.   FIRE WARNING SYSTEM IN STAND

      A manually operated electrical fire warning system complying
      with B.S.  Code of Practice B.S. 5839 Part 1 : 1980 shall be
      installed and maintained within the Stand.

      The Club   shall not be required to provide   a fire alarm
      audible warning system other than within the general area of
      the offices, dressing rooms, club rooms and working areas of
      the Stand,   with an additional visual warning device in the
      spectator part of the Stand as the Firemaster shall specify.

      The existing system is specified in Appendix 1 annexed and
      signed as relative to this Certificate and indicated on Plan


31.   EMERGENCY LIGHTING SYSTEM IN STAND

      An emergency   lighting  system in accordance with British
      Standard Code of Practice B.S.  5266 shall be installed and
      maintained within the Stand.

      Emergency  lighting is required not only on complete  failure
      of the normal lighting but also on localised failure if such
      a failure would present a hazard and must        fulfil  the
      following functions

      (a)   To  indicate     clearly      and    unambiguously      the    escape
            routes.

      (b)   To provide     illumination         along exit routes     to    allow
            for/
                      r


                                  -   20   -




                for safe movement toward and through the exits provided.

          (c)   To ensure   that the fire alarm call points     and
                firefighting equipment provided along escape routes
                can be readily located.

          The Club shall be required to provide such other emergency
          lighting within the Stand as the Firemaster shall specify.

          The existing system is specified in Appendix 2 annexed and
          signed as relative to this Certificate and indicated on Plan




•   32
          PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM

          The Club shall maintain for its own use and for the use of
          the emergency services at all times a public address system
          capable of being heard in any part of the Stadium to which
          spectators have access.

    33.   FIRE FIGHTING AND FIRST-AID EQUIPMENT

          Portable and other fire fighting equipment and first-aid
          equipment, all in such numbers and of such types as shall be
          specified by the Firemaster from time to time shall be
          located and maintained at such points throughout the Stand
          and elsewhere within the Stadium as also specified by the
          Firemaster, the location of such as are presently required
          in or under the Stand being shown on Plan .......

    34.   TESTING OF ELECTRICAL AND FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT

          (a)   Annual and Emergency Tests of Electrical System
                Generally

                The Club shall arrange to have    an  inspection/test
                carried out annually of the whole electrical  systems
                including all   installations and wiring within    the
                Stadium and shall submit a copy of the relative
                certificate  to the Council immediately it is issued
                by the person or firm concerned.     The  first such
                inspection/test shall be carried out not later than
                                     1989, and annually thereafter.

                Such certificate shall be in the form prescribed  in
                Section E of the Regulations    for the Electrical
                Equipment   of  Buildings   as published    by   the
                Institution of Electrical Engineers   and shall be
                signed by a corporate member of the said Institution
                or/
                   r


                               -   21   -




              or by a Contractor currently enrolled with the
              National     Inspection   Council   for    Electrical
              Installation     Contracting   or  by   a   Qualified
              Representative of an Electricity Supply Authority or
              by a Surveyor of an Engineering Insurance Company.

              Without prejudice to the foregoing requirements   for
              the inspection/testing of the whole electrical system
              and installations within the Stadium, the Council may
              require   any particular part of the system        or
              installations or wiring to be separately tested at
              any time if it has reasonable cause to suspect that
              it may be defective in some way on giving the Club at
              least seven days prior written notice requiring them
              to arrange for such a test to be carried out.

              The Club shall notify the Council in writing of the
              date of each annual inspection/test at least twenty-
              eight days in advance thereof and the name of    the
              person or firm carrying out the inspection/test.

              The Club shall afford the Council the opportunity of
              being    represented    at    any  annual  or    other
              inspection/testing   of    the electrical system    or
              installations or any part thereof.

              Any part of the electrical system which fails to pass
              the appropriate test following any annual or other
              inspection/test shall be repaired or replaced and re ­
              tested   on   the completion of such repairs       or
              replacement so as to comply with the above mentioned
              Regulations,  such repairs or replacement    and r e ­
              testing all to be carried out as soon as possible and
              in any event prior to the date of the next specified
              activity to be held at the Stadium.

(b)   Specific Tests of Particular Items

      (i)    Fire Warning System in Stand (Clause 30)

             The Club shall arrange for the system to be tested in
             accordance with the procedure set out      in British
             Standard Code of Practice B.S. 5839 Part 1 : 1980.

      (ii)   Emergency Lighting System in Stand (Clause 31)

             The Club shall arrange for the system to    be   tested
             monthly by simulating a power failure.

      (iii) Public Address System (Clause 32)/
                   r


                                 -   22   -




      (i i i ) Public Address System (Clause 32)

             The Club   shall arrange for this system to be tested
             simultanously with the fire alarm system to ensure its
             proper operation from the normal power source.

      (iv)   Fire Fighting Equipment (Clause 33)

             The Club shall arrange for all firefighting equipment
             to be tested in accordance with the procedures set out
             in British Standard Code of Practice B.S. 5306 Part 11
             : 1980.

      Copies of any reports or certificates issued following any
      inspection/test of   the above items (i) to (iv)  shall be
      submitted  to the Council immediately upon being issued to
      the Club by the person or firm concerned.

      Without prejudice to the foregoing      requirements for     the
      inspection/testing of     the above items (i)     to   (iv)  the
      Council may require any of the said items to be       separately
      tested at     any time if it has reasonable cause    to suspect
      that   it may be defective in some way,  on giving the Club at
      least seven days prior written notice requiring         them  to
      arrange for such a test to be carried out.

      The Club shall notify the Council in writing of the date of
      any inspection/test to be carried out in accordance w i t h ‘the
      requirements  of this clause and the name of the person or
      firm carrying out the inspection/test.

      The Club shall afford the Council the opportunity of         being
      represented at any inspection/test.

      If,   following any      inspection/test,     any  repair to    or
      replacement of any        of the above     items (i)  to (iv)   is
      required,   the  item    shall be repaired or replaced and     re ­
      inspected/ re-tested      on completion of  such a repair       or
      replacement,     such    repair    or    replacement   and     re­
      inspection/re-testing      all to be carried out as       soon as
      possible   and  in any   event prior to the date of      the next
      specified activity to    be held at the Stadium.


35.   RECORDS OF TESTS ON ELECTRICAL AND FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS AND
      EQUIPMENT

      The Club shall keep written records of:-

      (a)    The date of all annual and       other   inspections/tests
             carried/
                              -   23   -




             carried out in accordance with Clause 34 (a) and    of
             all   specific   and other tests carried out        in
             accordance with Clause 34(b).

      (b)    All reports and certificates issued following
             thereon.

      (c)    A complete list of all items tested on any particular
             date with a description of the location thereof.

      (d)    Complete lists of all items (a) which passed and (b)
             which failed any test on any particular date with a
             description of the location thereof.

      (e)    The date when any item which failed a test was
             repaired, renewed or replaced with particulars of the
             works of repair, renewal or replacement and the date
             of any reinspection/re-testing and the report or
             certificate issued following thereon.

36.   QUALIFIED ELECTRICIAN

      The Club shall ensure that on every occasion when a
      specified activity is held at the Stadium there shall be
      present within the Stadium from at least fifteen minutes
      prior to until at least fifteen minutes after the specified
      activity at least one qualified electrician who shall be
      conversant with the whole electrical systems and
      installations within the Stadium and sufficiently equipped
      to rectify any defect, failure or any other fault which
      might foreseeably occur.

      It shall be the responsibility of the person nominated    in
      terms of Clause 20 to know the whereabouts of said qualified
      electrician   or electricians   at all   times during    the
      aforementioned period and to advise any Police or Fire
      Officer thereof if requested.

37.   FIRE DOORS IN STAND ACCOMMODATION

      Fire   Doors  within the Stand accommodation shall         be
      maintained at the existing locations as indicated on      the
      Plan ....

      Said Fire Doors shall

      (a)   be maintained close fitting and self closing and

      (b)   have a fire resistance of not less than half an hour
            for stability and integrity when tested under    the
            conditions/
                     r


                               -   24   -




            conditions of B.S. 476 Part 8 : 1972 and

      (c)   be clearly and permanently marked on both faces with
             the words "FIRE DOOR - KEEP SHUT" in accordance with
             B.S. 5499 Part 1 : 1984 and

      (d)   be regularly inspected by the Club and maintained in a
             safe and proper state of repair and in good working
             order,  and kept free form obstructions of any kind at
             all times.


38.   EXIT SIGNS (All to comply with B.S.5499 Part 1: 1984)

      (a)   On the Main Exit Gates

            The  .......   main exit gates specified in Clause ....
            shall be clearly and permanently marked on the outside
            face   (onto the street) with the words    "EXIT - KEEP
            CLEAR"   written in block capitals each measuring at
            least 125 mm in height.

      (b)   Along Exit Routes in Stand

            Signs   bearing the word "EXIT"     of such   type and
            specifications   as the Firemaster may stipulate and
            clearly denoting the direction of route to be taken by
            spectators   towards  the final exits from the Stand
            shall be provided and maintained by the Club at such
            locations   along the exit routes and stairways within
            the   Stand as the Firemaster shall     specify,  those
            presently existing being shown (by the appropraite
            symbol) on Plan ....

            Such signs   shall be adequately illuminated      by   the
            general and emergency lighting systems.

      (c)   For Foreign Visitors

            On any occasion when a visiting team to the Stadium is
            from a country where English       is not   the spoken
            language of the country,    the Club shall consult  the
            Firemaster   at least one week prior to the   specified
            activity   as to any need for providing internationally
            accepted directional graphics where signs have been
            provided   in accordance with sub paragraph     (b)  or
            elsewhere and/or the need to provide and issue special
            instructions to Stewards.


39.   Switch Room/
                    r


                              -   25   -




39.   Switch Room

      Where an electrical switch room is provided under the Stand,
      the switch room shall not be used for any purpose other than
      a switch room and shall be kept tidy and clear of extraneous
      materials at all times.

40.   STORAGE OF DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES

      If it is necessary to store or use liquified petroleum gas
      or any other dangerous substance within  the Stadium,  the
      Club shall   take all necessary precautions  for the safe
      storage thereof.

41.   SUMMARY OF WRITTEN RECORDS TO BE KEPT




42.   SUMMARY OF TESTS/INSPECTIONS TO BE CARRIED OUT
                  r


                              -   26   -




43.   THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE AND THE GREEN GUIDE

      This Safety Certificate should be read in conjunction with
      the whole provisions of The Safety of Sports Grounds Act,
      1975.

      It may be amended or replaced by the Council in accordance
      with said Act if that is deemed appropriate.

      The Green Guide is a voluntary Code and has no legal force
      except   in so far as its recommendations and provisions have
      been   included within the terms and     conditions of this
      Certificate.    The Club are however, strongly recommended by
      the Council to be mindful at all times of the provisions and
      recommendations of the Green Guide and to observe the spirit
      and intentions thereof.

44.   INTERPRETATION
                           Appendix 1
The means with which the Stand is provided for giving to persons
warning in case of fire,   is described below and the number and
location of points    from which a warning can be initiated,
together with the number and location of warning devices     are
shown on Plan ... which forms part of this Certificate.

The fire alarm system consists of an electrically operated system
with alarm call points of the "BREAK GLASS" type,   together with
sirens and a visual warning incorporated into the system.     The
system is so arranged that the warning signal is clearly audible
throughout  the whole of the ground and first floor(s)    of  the
Stand above the normal noise level upon actuation of any single
call point incorporated into the system.  A visual warning signal
is provided in the spectator part of the Stand.

The warning signal can only be cancelled by a      master    switch
accessible to an authorised member of the staff.

The  power  for the system is by • secondary batteries,   trickle
charged  from the normal main supply.   The batteries are capable
of maintaining   the system in full operation for 48 hours    and
thereafter  to operate the alarm continuously for a period not
less that 30 minutes after the actuation of any call point.

The charger is capable,   whilst continuing to supply the standing
load,  of   automatically re-charging the battery sufficiently
within 8 hours for it to supply a maximum alarm load for at least
30 minutes.

The wiring for the system is of Pirelli FP 200 throughout.
                          Appendix 2

The number and location of emergency lighting points is shown   on
Plan .... which forms part of this Certificate.


System                            Non-maintained self contained
                                  battery operated units.

Duration                           At least 1 hour on full load.

Recharge Period                    14 hours to provide a   minimum
                                   of 1 hour standby.

Wiring                             Pirelli FP 200

Operation                          The   system will     come into
                                   operation     immediately     on
                                   failure    of     the     normal
                                   lighting.

Level of Iliumination             Sufficient   to ensure ready
                                   perception   throughout  the
                                   escape routes which are not
                                   lit by normal lighting.
                            CENTRAL   REGIONAL   COUNCIL


                         Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

                            General Safety Certificate


Whereas the Council have received an application dated 8th July, 1986 from
Falkirk Football and Athletic Club Limited, Brockville Park, Falkirk for a
General Safety Certificate under the Act in respect of Brockville Park,
Falkirk, being a stadium designated by the Secretary of State for Scotland by
means of an Order under Section 1 of the Act;


And whereas the Council have determined the said Falkirk Football and Athletic
  ub Limited to be a qualified person in terms of Section 3(1) of the Act and

f ve carried out the consultations required by Section 3(3) of the Act;


Now therefore, the Council in terms of Section 3(2)(a) of the Act, hereby
grant and issue this General Safety Certificate to the said Falkirk Football
and Athletic Club Limited in respect of the said stadium and that on the
conditions set out in Parts 2, 3 and 4 of the Schedule hereto which shall form
part of the said Certificate, being the terms and conditions which the Council
consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stadium
when it is in use for the specified activities.


This Certificate shall come into force one calendar month after the date of
issue hereof and the conditions of the Certificate shall be complied with from
such effective date or from such other date or dates as are specified in the
several Parts of the Schedule hereto.



DATED THIS   SIXTEENTH       DAY OF JANUARY, NINETEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SEVEN.




                 Director of Administration and Legal Services
                          for and on behalf of the Council
                                           - 2 -




                                         SCHEDULE


                                          PART 1


                                   Interpretation


                This    Certificate,     including the Schedule hereof,                     shall be
                interpreted according to the definitions contained                           in the
                Safety     of   Sports     Grounds     Act     1975,     as     read     with     the
                supplementary     definitions        contained      in      this   Part      of   the
                Schedule.
%
’the Act”                          - means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.


'authorised person"                -      means a     person       authorised      in accordance
                                         with Section 11 of the Act.


"the building authority"           - means Falkirk District Council, being the
                                         local authorityfor the purposes                    of the
                                         Building       (Scotland)       Acts      and       relative
                                         regulations thereunder within the District
                                          in which the stadium is situated.


"the Chief Constable*               -     means the Chief           Constable of the Central
                                          Scotland       Police        or      his        authorised
                                          representative.


"the Council"                       - means Central Regional Council, being the
                                          local authority for the purposes of the Act
                                          within Central Region.


’covered terrace"                   -     means an area of terrace over                 which there
                                          is       erected     a    structure          to     protect
                                          spectators         from           inclement         weather
                                          conditions.
                                   -3-



"the Firemaster ’            -   means the Firemaster of the Central Region
                                 Fire    , Brigade      or           his     authorised
                                 representative.


"gangway"                    -   means a     channel      for        the   passage     of
                                 spectators.


"the Guide"                  -   means the     "Guide     to      Safety    at     Sports
                                 Grounds - Football" as first published in
                                 1976 and as may be re-published from time
                                 to time by the Home Office and the Scottish
                                 Home and Health Department.


"the Holder"                 -   means the applicant for and the person to
                                 whom this     Certificate      is    issued,    being a
                                 qualified person for          the    purposes    of the
                                 Act.


"the plans"                  -   means the     drawings      of      the   stadium Nos.
                                 F81/01/C, F81/02/A and F81/02 attached to
                                 this Certificate in terms of Section 2(4)
                                 of the Act and docketed as relative thereto.


"the specified activities"   -   means the activities listed in Part 2 of
                                 the Schedule.


"the stadium"                -   means the sports stadium referred to in the
                                 application      for     this        Certificate     and
                                 delineated on the plans.


"stairway"                   -   shall have the meaning assigned                to it in
                                 the       Building       Standards             (Scotland)
                                 Regulations in force from time to time.


"Stand"                      -   means a building or area within the stadium
                                  in which seating accommodation is provided
                                  for spectators.


"terrace"                    - means an area of steps providing standing
                                  accommodation for spectators.
                                            -4-


                                           PART 2


                                The Specified Activities


  The activities covered by this Certificate (i.e. the specified activities)
  shall    comprise   the   following activities        to be held at Brockville    Park,
  Falkirk, and to which spectators are admitted, namely football matches, but
  shall not include practice or training sessions for these activities to which
  not more than 500 non-paying spectators are admitted. „


  Subject, however, to the terms and conditions of the Certificate and to any
^^eneral statutory requirements, the stadium may also be used for the following
  purposes ancillary to the specified activities, namelys—


          (a) the playing of music or singing;


          (b) the provision    of   news   or   comment    relative   to   the specified
              activities;


          (c) the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities and the sale                  of
               programmes, news sheets and souvenirs;


          (d) the sale and consumption of refreshments;


          (e) public collections of any nature;


          (f) any other use ancillary to          the   specified activities     which has
               received not less than fourteen days* prior approval by the Council.
                                        ''.


                                                                                               '                                                        ,



                                                                                                                                            '


mu    1


                                                                                            PART 3

                                                                                                              .


               ■ Conditions Imposed in terms of Section 2(2) and 2(3) of the Act


     1.    Attendance Limits:


           The roanr-fmum number of spectators which may be admitted to the stadium on
           any               one occasion for the purposes of a                                             specified      activity - shall not
           exceed 18,000 allocated as follows:




           STAND                                                                        not exceeding


               STAND ENCLOSURE                                                          not exceeding             1400                h   700)
                                                                                                                                 (South   700)


               SOOTH TERRACE/SODTH                                                      not exceeding             7089           (Terrace       5839)
               COVERED TERRACE                                                                                                   (Covered
                .                                                                                                                 Terrace       1250)


               NORTH TERRACE/NORTH                                                      not exceeding             6850           (Terrace       4400)
                                                                                                                                 (Covered       id?
                                                                                                                                  Terrace       2450)
                                                                                                                                                                '




                                                                                                                                                                :
                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                              admitted
               The Holder shall keep records showing the number of spectators j
                                                     nn aar-h npraslmi for the mirnoses of a specified .


                                               parts ot the staaium on such occasion.                                    Such records shall

               kept                 at         the   stadium and                          shallL be made ^available
                                                                                                           - r i avi 0     for    examination
                                                                                                                                  ‘                 on
               request by an authorised person.


      2.   «
               Metering of Admissions:
               MM—       —
                           Admissions
                             " I .........11           1   ' '' .......... . ...... .

                     '



                                                                                                                   or                           to the ^
                                                                                                              ion of the Chief            Constable

               acting on behalf of the Cox                                                         , to indicate and record all spectator
               admissions to the stadium with a view to ensuring that the number of
                spectators admitted to each separate part of the stadium does not exceed
                                                —6 -



         the number specified in Condition 1 of this Part of the Schedule.                      Such
         metering system and the means of communicating the information derived
         therefrom to a central point within the Stand shall be of such kind as
         will    ensure   that   appropriate     representatives     of     the    Holder     and   an
         appropriate officer of Central Scotland Police can readily ascertain the
         number of spectators admitted through each turnstile or entrance gate
         and,   if necessary,     give      instructions    immediately     to close any such
         turnstiles or entrance gate.


    3.   Location of turnstiles or entrance gates:


         Turnstiles or entrance gates for spectators shall be located and, along
         with the accesses therefrom to the several parts of the stadium, shall at
         all times be maintained in a proper state of repair at the undernoted
         points and kept free from obstructions of any kind:

                                                                                  No. of turnstiles
                                  Reference No.         Providing                 or entrance gates
         Part of Stadium          on plan               access from               at the location

                                  Turnstile No.


         SOUTH TERRACE             1-12                    Hope Street                   12


<        SOUTH TERRACE            13                       Cooperage Lane                   1


         SOUTH STAND              16                       Cooperage Lane                   1
         ENCLOSURE


         STAND                    14, 15,     17 - 20      Cooperage Lane                   7
                                  and 22


         NORTH STAND              21                       Cooperage Lane                   1
         ENCLOSURE


         NORTH TERRACE            23   - 26                James Street                     4


          NORTH TERRACE           27   - 29                Watson Street                    3
                                       -7 -



     All turnstiles or entrance gates shall be numbered both inside and
     outside to correspond with the appropriate entry in the above table.


     No individual turnstile or entrance gate for spectators shall be less
     than 380 mm wide.




4»   Location of exit gates:


     Exit gates for spectators shall be located and, along with the accesses
     thereto from the several parts of the stadium, shall be maintained in
     safe and proper working condition at the undernoted points and kept free
     from obstructions at all times:                                *


     Part of                    Reference No.        Minimum width of exit
     Stadium                    on plan              gates (millimetres)


     SOUTH TERRACE                       1                   2600
                                         2                   2800
                                         3                   2600
                                         4                   2300
                                         5                   2400


     STAND/ENCLOSURE                     6                   2350
                                          7                  2350
                                         8                   2350
                                         9                   1100
                                        10                   2350
                                        11                   2350
                                        12                    900
                                        13                    900
                                        14                    900
                                        15                    900
                                        16                    900
                                        17                    900
                                        18                    900
Part of                    Reference No.          Minimum width of exit
Stadium                    on plan                gates (millimetres)


NORTH TERRACE                   19                        4130
                                 20                       2950


NORTH/SOUTH TERRACE              21                       2420



Access gates of not less than 900 mm to be kept available at all times,
held in position with one slip bolt as indicated in Nos. 22 to 28 on the
attached plan.


Crush barriers and handrails:


Crush barriers and handrails shall be provided and maintained in a good
state of repair at all times at not less a number of points as are
located and indicated on the plan.    Although they are not shown on the
plan, the foregoing provision relative to crush barriers and handrails
shall include those handrails on stairways within the Stand.       All crush
barriers ^nd handrails shall be kept free of all sharp projections or
edges and," when tested, shall be required to satisfy the appropriate
loading test specified in Annex C to the Guide.


The Holder shall arrange and carry out a programme for the testing and
inspection of crush barriers and handrails within the stadium on          the
basis that every crush barrier and every handrail shall be


(a) inspected once per annum, and
(b) tested to the standards of Annex C to the Guide at least once in a
    period of ten years.


Not less than ten per cent of the total number of such barriers and
handrails shall be tested in any one year.      Alltesting and    inspection
carried out in terms of this condition shall be so carried out by an
independent firm to be approved by the     Council.   A copy of each testing
and/or Inspection Certificate shall be     submitted to the Council as soon
as it is issued by the firm concerned.
                                    -9 -



Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for the carrying out of a
regular programme for the testing and inspection of crush barriers and
handrails, the Council may require any particular barrier or handrail to
be separately tested and/or inspected at any time if it has reasonable
cause to suspect that it may not be capable of satisfying the appropriate
loading test specified in Annex C to the Guide.


The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented
at any testing and/or inspection of crush barriers and/or handrails if it
so wishes.

Any crush barrier or handrail which fails to meet the prescribed test
shall be replaced or strengthened as necessary within six weeks of the
date    of   the   appropriate   testing      certificate.   Crush       barriers   and
handrails which are strengthened shall be retested on completion of the
strengthening work      to ensure    that they satisfy the       requirements        of
Annex C to the Guide.

Any crush barrier or handrail which, having failed the prescribed test,
has to be replaced, shall be immediately removed.                    ^


Keeping of records:

 In addition to the records required to be kept in terms of Condition 1 of
 this Part of the Schedule, the Holder shall be required to prepare and
 maintain the following records which shall be made available to an
 authorised person on request:-


 (a) a    record   of any accident         or incident which causes injury          (but
       excluding a playing field or track injury) and which is brought to
       his notice as having occurred within the stadium while it was being
       used for a specified activity;


 (b) a record of every test made of crush barriers and/or handrails within
       the stadium in terms of Condition 5 of this Part of the Schedule;
(c) a record of every test made of an electrical installation within the
   stadium as provided for in Condition 10 of Part 4 of the Schedule;


(d) a record of the dates of maintenance inspections carried out within
   the stadium, as required by Condition 6 of Part 4 of the Schedule,
   also indicating the nature of any defects found affecting the safety
   of   spectators   while   within   the   stadium   and   the   dates   of   the
    subsequent action taken to remedy such defects;


(e) a record of the date of every exercise held in terms of Conditions 14
    and 29 of Part 4 of the Schedule to test emergency procedures,
    including fire routine procedures;


(f) a record of the date of every test made of the fire alarm system, the
    emergency lighting system, the public address system and the fire
    fighting equipment within the stadium as provided for in Condition 31
    of Part 4 of the Schedule;


(g) a record of the name of the person nominated, in terms of Condition 2
    of Part 4 of the Schedule, on each occasion when the stadium is in
    use for a specified activity.


The records required to be kept in terms of this Condition and Condition
1 of this part of the Schedule may be so kept in a single log book or
separate log books as may be most convenient to the Holder.
   Other Conditions Imposed In terms of Section 2(1) of the Act


General:


The Holder shall:


(a) comply with the conditions set out in the Schedule at all times when
    the stadium is in use for a specified activity;


(b) subject to Condition 2 of this Part of the Schedule, retain control
    over all operations in the stadium at all times when the stadium is
    in use for a specified activity;


(c) arrange, as and when required by the Conditions of this Certificate
    for the testing of crush barriers and handrails and of the following
    systems    and      procedures,     namely   —   (i)   fire    alarm      system,   (ii)
    emergency lighting system,           (iii) public address system,            (iv) fire
    fighting equipment, and (v) fire routine procedures;


(d) otherwise take such steps as are reasonably practicable to observe
    the spirit and intentions of the recommendations contained in the
    Guide     insofar    as   the     said   recommendations      are   not    substituted,
    amended, modified, extended or otherwise altered by all or any of the
       specific Conditions of this Certificate.


Nomination of responsible person:


On each occasion when the stadium is used for a specified activity, the
Holder shall nominate a responsible person to t a k e charge of the stadium
on his behalf and to be present therein during the whole period of such
use.     Such nominated person shall not be engaged on any duties which will
prevent him from exercising general supervision of the stadium on behalf
of the Holder during such use.           The name of the person so nominated shall
be made known to any authorised person who may be present and have
occasion to request it and shall be recorded as provided for in Condition
 6 of Part 3 of the Schedule.
,   1
                                                          -1 2 -



        3. Dates for provision of new equipment and execution of works:


              Where, under any Condition of this Part                      ofthe Schedule, the Holder                  Is
              required either to provide new equipment                     ofany kind         orto execute works
              within the stadium, such provision or execution shall be completed not
              later than six months from the date of the Certificate unless the context
              of any particular condition specifically stipulates otherwise In which
              case such other stipulated date shall be applicable.


        4.    Alterations and additions to stadium:


              Alterations         and/or    additions        to     the     stadium       or     to      any    of     the
              Installations        or   facilities    therein,           whether     permanent          or   temporary,
              shall not be made except with the prior consent of the Council.                                    Notice
              In writing shall be given by the Holder to the Council of any                                          such
              alterations or additions proposed to be made and such notice shall be
              accompanied by full details and, as and when necessary or appropriate, by
              drawings      and    calculations.      The work            shall    not    be    started until          the
              approval      of    the   Council     has     been        obtained.        Such    consent       shall    be
              additional to any planning, building control or other consent required by
              the Holder.          Alterations and/or          additions       approved         by     the   Council    In
              terms    of    this       Condition    shall         be     required       to     meet     the   relative
              recommendations contained In the Guide unless the Council are satisfied
               that It would be Impracticable or otherwise unreasonable to Insist on
               compliance In full with these recommendations.


         5.   Manning of entrance gates:


               Turnstiles or entrance gates shall be manned and operational for such a
               period prior to the commencement of a specified activity as will permit
               the admission of spectators to all parts of the stadium In an evenly
               distributed and controlled manner.                  The Holder shall agree with the Chief
               Constable before the use of the stadium for a specified activity, how
               many turnstiles or entrance gates are to be allocated solely for the use
               of   juveniles      and/or    old    age     pensioners       and/or       special        groups.       Such
               agreement may, at the discretion of the Chief Constable, either apply to
               all uses of the stadium for a specified activity or to any one or more

               such uses.
Regular Inspections of stadium and clearing of litter:


During the period between successive uses of the stadium for a specified
activity, the Holder shall arrange for an Inspection to be made on his
behalf of the whole facilities of the stadium with a view to any defect
or    missing   equipment    being    ascertained   and     Immediately   repaired   or
replaced and any other damage whatsoever being made good.              All litter and
debris accumulated as a result of the Immediately preceding use of the
stadium shall be removed to safe storage before the stadium's further use
for a specified activity.


Maintenance - General:


at   1 parts of the stadium shall be maintained In a good state of repair to
the    satisfaction of the      Council.    The Holder shall        carry out without
delay such works of repair and maintenance within the stadium as may be
required from time to time by the Council.


In particular, all steel work and fabric shall be treated as and when
required to prevent deterioration to structural strength and condition,
all In accordance with the recommendations given In the relevant British
Standard Specification or Code of Practice.


A11     drainage   systems   within    those   areas   In    the   stadium   which   are
accessible      to spectators   shall be maintained In a safe and efficient
condition at all times.


Maintenance of surfaces:


The surfaces or every part of all paths, stairways, gangways, terraces,
accesses and       exits within the stadium over which             spectators may have
reasonable cause to pass shall be maintained In a good state of repair
free from ruts, potholes, depressions or other defects.
                                                -14-


    9.   Precautions to be taken because of Inclement weather:


         Where, because of Inclement weather giving possible rise to dangerous
         conditions under foot, e.g. snow or Ice, any surfaces within the stadium
         over which a spectator may have reasonable cause to pass may present a
         hazard to spectators, such surface shall be cleared of such hazard before
         spectators are admitted to the stadium.


10.      Annual   Inspection of      electrical Installations:


^        The Holder shallhave an Inspection made annually                of the whole electrical
         Installations within the stadium and shall submit a copy of the relative
         Inspection Certificate to the Council Immediately It Is Issued by the
         person or firm concerned.           Such Inspection Certificate shall be In the
         form prescribed In Part 6 — 15th Edition —                      l.E.E. Regulations     for
         Electrical Installations, as published by the Institution of Electrical
         Engineers     and   shall    be    signed   by   a   corporate    member    of   the   said
          Institution or. by a contractor currently enrolled with the National
         Inspection     Council      for   Electrical     Installation    Contracting     or by    a
         qualified representative of an Electricity Supply Authority or by a
         Surveyor of an Engineering Insurance Company.


         Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for the Inspection of the
         whole    electrical      Installations      within   the   stadium,   the    Council    may
         require any particular part of the Installations to be separately tested
         at any time If It           has reasonable cause tosuspect            that   It may      be
         defective In some way.


         The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented
         at any Inspection of the electrical Installations or part thereof If It
          so wishes.


          Any   electrical Installation or part thereof which falls to pass the
          appropriate test shall be repaired or replaced within one month of the
          Issue of the appropriate Certificate.               Any electrical Installation or
          part thereof which has to be repaired or replaced shall be re-tested on
          completion of such repairs or replacement so as to comply with the
          abovementioned Regulations.
11.   Parking of vehicles within the stadium:


      No vehicles other than emergency vehicles (I.e. police, fire, ambulance
      etc.) shall be parked In any part of the stadium while It Is In use for a
      specified    activity    unless   with    the     prior    agreement      of   the Chief
      Constable.    Without prejudice, however, to this requirement, the Chief
      Constable may agree with the Holder the allocation of a specific area or
      areas within the stadium for the parking of disabled persons vehicles
      while the stadium Is In use for a specified activity.


12. Arrangements for attendance of Police Officers:


      The Holder shall arrange at his o y m expense for the attendance of an
      adequate number of Police Officers while the stadium Is in use for a
      specified     activity   to   ensure     the    lawful    and   orderly    behaviour   of
      spectators.    The number of Police Officers to be In attendance within the
      stadium during any such use shall be decided by the Chief Constable.


13. Methods of admission and segregation of supporters:


      The Holder shall discuss and agree with the Chief Constable prior to the
      use of the stadium for a specified activity:


      (a) the methods of admission to be employed In connection with such
          specified activity (In particular, whether admission shall be by
          ticket only); and
      (b) the special arrangements, If any, to be made for the segregation of
          home and visiting supporters.


      Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Condition, It shall
      be at the discretion of the Chief Constable to Indicate to the Holder
       that the agreement reached In terms of the said provisions can also apply
       to all or any future uses of the stadium for a specified activity without
       further discussion between them.
                                            -16-


14.   Stewardlng arrangements - General:


      While the stadium is in use for a specified activity, the Holder shall
      ensure the attendance within the stadium of such number of stewards as
      are    necessary   to    ensure     compliance      with    the    Conditions       of   this
      Certificate and such stewards shall be:


      (a) fit and capable to carry out their duties;
      (b) properly trained and instructed;
      (c) readily identifiable by dress (e.g. white coat? fluorescent jacket
.         etc.); and
      (d) provided by the Holder with written instructions, to be approved by
            the Council, as to their general duties in order to fulfil the
            following functions:


              (i) the manning of exit gates;
             (ii) the control and direction of spectators entering, using or
                  leaving the stadium; and
            (iii) patrolling the stadium and dealing with any emergency including
                  raising     the   alarm   of   fire     and    the    use   of   fire    fighting
                  equipment.


      Stewards on duty in implementation of this Condition and, in particular,
      stewards on duty at exit gates and on the access routes thereto shall
      have ready access to loud halier equipment to enable them to make quick
      contact with spectators, if and when required.


      Where the public is admitted to the stadium for the sale of tickets only
      and for no other activity, it shall be a sufficient discharge of the
      requirements of this Condition if the Holder ensures the attendance of
      sufficient stewards to ensure the orderly behaviour of the public during
      the period of sale.


      All stewards and other persons employed in the stadium during its use for
      a     specified    activity       shall    be     fully    instructed        as     to   their
      responsibilities in the event of an emergency and exercises for stewards
      and other persons employed within the stadium shall be carried out not
      less    than   twice    each playing       season    to    test    emergency      procedures,
       preferably at the start of the season.
                                                     -1 7 -



          15.    Exit gates - Attendance by stewards:


                 All exit gates shall bp'attended by stewards throughout the entire period
-W               w]jen spectators may/ o & In the stadium In connection with ijrs use for a
                 specified activity and it shall/be the duty j6t such stewards to open the
                 exit gates in y£he event of y&a. emergency tfnd in any ev^nt not less than
V                fifteen mimftes before the anticipated/^nd of the specified activity or
                 at any otter time on t n e request of/a Police Officer.           When opened for
                 any reason, all exiy gates        shallsecured iiy'the fully open position
                 and/kept free of ail obstructions.

     m
     ^16.        Positioning of television cameras etc.:


                 Any television cameras and portable equipment shall be restricted to
                 positions to be approved in advance by the Chief Constable on behalf of
                 the Council and shall not         be allowed to cause    any obstruction to the
                 Police or emergency services in the carrying out of their duties.


         * 17.    Provision of first-aid room etc.:


                 The   Holder   shall   maintain    within    the   stadium   a   suitably   equipped
                 first-aid or ambulance room and/or first-aid points to the satisfaction
                 of the Council and shall ensure the attendance of a sufficient number of
                 properly trained first-aid personnel on each occasion when the stadium is
                 in use for a specified activity.


                 The attendance of first-aid personnel shall not be considered to be
                 necessary when the public is admitted to the stadium for the sale of
                 tickets only and for no other activity.


          18. Public Address System:


                 The Holder shall maintain for his own use and for the use of the Police
                 and emergency services, as and when required while the stadium is in use
                  for a specified activity, a public address system capable of being heard
                  under reasonable conditions by all spectators of normal hearing in any
                  part of the stadium to which spectators have a right of access.                Such
                                     -18-


      public address system shall be operated and controlled from a position to
      be approved by the Chief Constable on behalf of the Council and shall be
      provided with an emergency power supply so that it is capable of being
      operated at all times.


      The wiring of the public address system shall be either M.I.C.C. cable or
      P.V.C. cable in conduit and the emergency source of power supply shall be
      provided from batteries kept at full capacity by trickle charging from
      the mains supply.


19.   Toilet facilities:


      The Holder shall ensure the provision and adequate maintenance to the
      satisfaction of the Council of sufficient toilet facilities, both male
      and female.


20.   Sale of tickets, programmes and refreshments - General:


      In allocating premises or facilities for the sale of tickets, programmes
      or refreshments, the Holder shall take all necessary steps to ensure that
      such allocation does not obstruct entrance or exit routes in any way.


21.   Provision of refreshments:


      The Holder shall ensure that all premises,      appliances and equipment
      associated with the sale of refreshments are maintained in a safe and
      properly working condition at all times.


      All containers in which liquid refreshments are sold or distributed to
      spectators while the stadium is in use for a specified activity shall be
      made of soft plastic or other soft material.   This requirement shall not
      apply to any part of the stadium to which access is given only on the
      invitation of the Holder.
                                          -19-


22.   Facilities for authorised persons:


      The    Holder   shall   make   available     adequate   viewing   and   inspection
      facilities to authorised persons immediately before, during or after a
      specified activity      or at any    other    reasonable   time when considered
      necessary by the Council.


23.   Accommodation and facilities for Central Scotland Police:


      The Holder shall maintain at his own expense the following accommodation
      and facilities for the use of the Police Officers on duty in connection
      with the use of the stadium for a specified activity.


      (a) Accommodation


            There shall be provided and maintained in such location within the
            stand or elsewhere within the stadium as may be approved by the Chief
            Constable, the following units of accommodation, namely:


             (i) a general office accommodation for a staff of 2/3 persons,
                 detention accommodation and toilet facilities;,
            (ii) a close circuit television control room.


      (b) Facilities


              (i) heating shall be available within the accommodation referred to
                  at (a) above;
            .(ii) basic furnishings;
            (iii) a telephone communications system shall be available to connect
                  the Police accommodation with the following points, namely:


                  1. The public address system;
                   2. C.C.T.V. room.


24.   Stand:


      Fire precautions - General:


      1. All doors through which a person may have to pass should not be so
            locked or fastened that they cannot be easily and immediately opened
            when leaving the premises.
                                          -2 0 -



      2. No combustible materials such as petrol or fertilisers should be
           stored in or under the seating a?ea.


      3. The ceiling of the boiler house should be upgraded to afford a minimum
           fire resistance of one hour and the existing door should be modified
           to afford a minimum fire resistance of one half hour and made self
           closing.


      4. Smoking should be prohibited within the Stand and all reasonable means
           should be used to achieve this, including "No Smoking" signs and
           instruction to the stewards.


25.   Fire Alarm System:

      It    is desirable   that a   fire warning   system complying with British
      Standard 5839: Part 1: 1980. be provided throughout the Stand area,
      however,    as this has several impractical applications,    the following
      system would be acceptable.


      A fire warning system complying with British Standard 5839: Part 1: 1980,
      to be provided throughout the non public areas of the underside of the
      Stand incorporating heat detectors and break glass actuation points, the
      positions of which to be to the satisfaction of the Firemaster.        The
      warning of fire should not be directly transmitted to the general public,
      but to the position of control for the public address system, which must
      be manned at all times spectators are on the premises.


      The Holder shall not be required to provide a fire alarm audible warning
       system other than within the general area of the offices and dressing
      rooms, but, without prejudice to the foregoing generality, fire alarm
       call points of the "break-glass pressure release" type linked to suitable
       sounding devices shall be located in the positions indicated on the plan.
      Power for the fire alarm system shall be provided from batteries kept at
      full capacity by trickle charging from the mains supply and wiring shall
      be either M.I.C.S. cable or P.V.C.       cable in conduit.    Alternatively,
      power may be provided by a generator.


26.   General Emergency Lighting Systems:


      The general lighting system shall be maintained in a safe and efficient
      working order to ensure that spectators may enter, make use of, or leave
      the stadium safely.

I
      An emergency lighting system should be provided in all parts of the stand
      and be maintained to ensure the safe ingress and egress of spectators.
      In particular, the system should serve all entrance and exit stairways,
      gangways and all other routes spectators may have to traverse.


      The emergency lighting system should comply with British Standard 5266:
      Part 1: 1975, and give an illumination ofnot less than         .4 lux.   The
      whole of the system       should come into operation in the    event of the
      failure of the mains supply or any local circuit, and should be capable
      of providing the necessary illumination for not less than two hours.


27.   Provision of emergency signs and notices:


      (a) A sign bearing the word "EXIT" in green block capital lettering at
            least 100 mm high on a white background shall be provided throughout
            the Stand area to provide clear guidance along all exit routes.    Such
            signs shall be of the illuminated type complying with      the British
            Standard 5266: Part 1: 1975 unless they are adequately illuminated by
            the general and emergency lighting sytem.


      (b)   AT 1   fire resisting doors which arerequired to be close-fitting and
            self-closing shall have a notice fixed to both faces       of the door
            bearing the words "Fire Door — Keep Shut" or words to the like effect.
      (c) All final exit doors from the stadium, including the Stand, shall be
            clearly and permanently marked .on the outside of the doors by the
            words "EXIT - KEEP CLEAR” in red block capital lettering not less
            than 125 mm in height on a white background.


28.   Fire Fighting Equipment:


      Portable    fire       fighting       appliances    of    types    to    be     approved      by   the
      Firemaster shall be located and maintained at such points throughout the
      Stand as may          likewise       be approved    by him.       Without     prejudice       to    the
      foregoing general requirement,                a fire blanket      of the non—asbestos              type
      shall be located within every snack bar or kitchen area.


29.   Fire Routine Procedures:


      The    Holder     shall       take    the    necessary    steps    to    instruct       all    staff,
      including stewards, likely to be working within the stadium while it is
      in use for a specified                activity,    of    the   procedures     to be adopted          as
      undernoted in the event of an outbreak of fire being discovered, namely:


      (a) The Fire Brigade to be summoned;
      (b) A responsible person or persons to proceed to the scene of the fire
            to find out if it has been extinguished or is under control;
      (c) Where       the    fire    (i.)    is   affecting    the    Stand    seating       or   any    exit
            therefrom, or (ii) is located elsewhere within the Stand and is not
            under control, to take immediate steps to arrange the evacuation of
            the Stand by using the public address system.


30.   Storage of liquefied petroleum gas:


      If it is necessary to store or use liquefied petroleum gas within                                   the
      stadium,    the       Holder     shall      take   the   necessary      steps     to    observe     any
      guidance given by the Firemaster as to the precautions to be taken in so
      doing.
                                                  -2 3 -



31.   Testing of Systems:

                                                           \
       The following arrangements shall be made by the Holder for the testing of
       the undernoted systems:


       (a) Fire Alarm - both the manual and automatic fire alarm systems shall
            be   tested    in   accordance     with        the     procedures     outlined    in   British
            Standard Code of Practice CP 5839: Part 1: 1980;


       (b) Emergency Lighting - the emergency lighting system shall be tested in
^           accordance with         the   procedures           outlined    in British   Standard     5266:
*           Part 1: 1975;


       (c) Public Address System - the public address system shall be tested at
            the same time as the fire alarm system and shall be checked to ensure
            that it operates correctly from both the normal and secondary sources;


      (d) Fire    Fighting      Equipment     -    the         fire    fighting   equipment    shall    be
            checked and tested by a competent firm of fire engineers at regular
            periods but not less often than once per annum.


32.   Notices;


      The Holder shall ensure that notices are prominently displayed at all
      entrances    intimating       that admission             will   be   refused   to any    spectator
      carrying:


      (a) any glass, metal, earthenware or other similar container designed for
            the carriage of liquid; and


      (b) a container of any description which contains alcoholic liquor.


      The notices should also clearly Indicate that any spectator subsequently
      found within the ground carrying such containers will be dealt with under
      the   Criminal      Justice    (Scotland)      Act         1980.     Sufficient   stewards     will
      require    to be employed at the entrances                      to the ground to ensure that
      these restrictions are Implemented.                  The Holder will provide receptacles
      at entrances for the disposal of cans, bottles and containers etc., and
      timeously remove these receptacles before the tesalnatlon of the event.
33.     Sale of Tickets:


        Where It has been decided that admission to a match will be by ticket
        only, arrangements for the sale of tickets should be publicised as far in
        advance of the day of the match as possible.   Tickets will not be sold at
        or in the vicinity of the stadium on the day of the match.


34.     Rearrangement of Fixtures:


        Where, because of weather conditions, or for any other reason it has
        become necessary to rearrange a fixture at short notice, the Police will
        be consulted before the date of the fixture has been finally decided and
        the fixture will not proceed unless adequate Police coverage can be
        provided.




6396A
                               CENTRAL   REGIONAL   COUNCIL


                            Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

                         Amendment to General Safety Certificate


Whereas the Council received an application dated 8th July, 1986 from Falkirk
Football and Athletic Club Limited, Brockville Park,            Falkirk for a General
Safety Certificate under the Act in respect of Brockville Park, Falkirk, being
a stadium designated by the Secretary of State for Scotland by means of an
Order under Section 1 of the Act;


And whereas the Council have determined the said Falkirk Football and Athletic
Club    Limited to    be a qualified person in terms of Section 3(1) of       the Actand
have    carried out the consultations required by Section 3(3) of the Act;


And whereas the Council now make it necessary for certain of the provisions
and conditions included in the General Safety Certificate of that date to be
amended;


Now,    therefore, the     Council, in terms of Section 4(l)(a) of the Act, hereby
issue this Amendment to the General Safety Certificate to the said Falkirk
Football and Athletic Club Limited in respect of the aforesaid stadium.


This    Amendment shall     come into force one calendar month after     the date   of
issue hereof.


Dated this Eighteenth day of January, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-eight.




                     Director of Administration and Legal Services
                           For and on behalf of the Council




8972A
             Amendment to the General Safety Certificate Issued to
           Falkirk Football and Athletic Club Limited In Respect of
               Brockvllle Park. Falkirk dated 16th January, 1987



                                         PART 4

      Other Conditions Imposed In terms of Section 2(1) of the Act

15.   Exit Gates
      Unless secured in an open position, all exit gates shall be attended by
      stewards   throughout    the entire   period when     spectators may   be in      the
      stadium in connection with its use for a specified activity, and shall be
      capable    of   being   opened   immediately   from   inside   by   anyone   in    an
      emergency.      It shall be the duty of the stewards to open the exit pates
      not less than fifteen minutes before the anticipated end of the specified
      activity or at any other time at the request of a Police Officer.                 When
      opened, for any reason, all exit gates shall be secured in the fully open
      position and kept free from all obstructions.




 8972A
                                GBAMPIAH REGIONAL COTTSCIL

                              Safety of Sport8 Grounds Act 197?

                                Generml Safety Certificate


Whereas the Council-havv received an application dated 16th December 1976 frwt
the Aberdeen Football Club Halted, Pittodrie Stadium, Aberdeen, A332 1QH for a
General Safety Certificate under the Act In respect of Pittodrie Stadium,
Aberdeen, being a stadium designated by the Secretary of State for Scotland by
means of an Order under Section 1 of the Act;
And whereas the Council have determined the said Aberdeen Football Club Limited
to be a qualified person In terns of Section 3(1) of the Act and have carried oat
the consultations required by Section 3(3) of the Act;
How, therefore, the Council, in terms of Section 3 (2)(a) of the Act, hereby grant
and issue this Cenaral Safety Certificate to the said Aberdeen Football Club
Limited in respeot of the said stadium and that on the conditions set out in parts
2, 3 aod I* of the Schedule hereto which shall form part of the said Certificate,
being the terms and conditions which the Council consider necessary or expedient
to secure reasonable safety at the stadium when it is in use for the specified
activities.
This Certificate shall come into force on 318* May 1978     the conditions of the
Certificate shall be complied with from such effective date or from such other date
or dates as are speolfied In the several Parts of the Schedule hereto.




                 Bated this


                                              vj. h i u L i s A *
                     Director of Lav and Administration
                     for and on behalf of the Council
                                         SCHEDOU
                                          PAM 1
                                      Interpretation

This Certificate, including the Schedule hereof, shall be interpreted according to
the definitions contained in the Safety of Sports Grounds Jct, 1975» m read vith
the supplementary definitions oontalned in this Part of the Schedule.
■the lot"                             Beans   the Safety of Sports Grounds lot 1975
"authorised person”                   aeans a person authorised in accordance vlth Section 11
                                      of the let and shall include the Firemaster or his
                                      authorised representative and the Director of Roads or
                                      his authorised representative
"the building authority*              aeans the City of Aberdeen Distriot Council, being the
                                      local authority for the purposes of the Building
                                      (Scotland) lot, 1959 «nd relative Regulations thereunder
                                      within the Distriot in whioh the stadium is situated
"the Chief Constable”                 seans the Chief Constable of the Graapian Polloe or
                                      his authorised representative
■the Council”                         aeans Graapian Regional Counoil, being the local
                                      authority for the purposes of the lot within the
                                      Graapian Region
"the Firemaster"                      neans the Flreaaster of the Grampian Fire Brigade or
                                      his authorised representative
"gangway*                             aeans a channel for the passage of spectators
"the Guide”                           means the "Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds - Football”
                                      as first published in 1976 and as oay be re-published
                                      or amended from time to time by the Horns Office and the
                                      Scottish Home and Health Department
"the Holder"                          aeans the applicant for and the person to whoa this
                                      Certificate is issued, being a qualified person for the
                                      purposes of the lot
"the plan”                            means the drawings of the stadium attached to this
                                      Certificate in terms of Section 2(1;) of the lot and
                                      docketed as relative thereto
"the specified activities"            aeans the activities listed in part 2 of the Schedule
"the stadium”                         Beans the sports stadium referred to in the application
                                      for this Certificate and delineated in red on the plan
"the stairway*                        shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Building
                                      Standards (Scotland) Regulations in force from tiae to
                                      time
"the M&in Stand”                      Beans the building or area within the stadiua marked X
                                      on the plan in whioh seating accommodation is provided
                                      for spectators
"the Wing Stand"                      means the building or area within the stadiua marked ^
                                      on the plan, in whioh seating accommodation is provided
                                      for spectators
"the Beach End Seating"               aeans the building or area within the stadlua marked
                                      on the plan, in whioh seating accommodation is provided
                                      for spectators
"the Paddock End Seating”             means the,building or area within the stadiua marked
                                      on the plan, in whioh seating accommodation is provided
                                      for spectators
"Seated Terracing"                    aeans the area within the stadiua marked 2L     on the plan
                                      within which seating accommodation without cover is
                                      provided for spectators
                                      2.


                                   PART 2

                          The Specified Activities

The activities covered by this Certificate (i.e. the specified activities)
oomprise the following activities to he held at Pittodrie Stadiua, Aberdeen, and
to which spectators are admitted, uuselyt-
      Pootball Matches
      Gatherings to celebrate the winning of vxj honours by the Holder's PootbalX Team
The specified activities shall not include practice or training sessions for football
Batches to which not non than $00 non-paying spectators are admitted*
Subject, however, to the terms and conditions of the Certificate aid to any general
statutory requirements, the stadium may &1bo be used, for the following purposes
ancillary to the specified activities, naaely:-
(a)      the playing of auaio or singing
(b)      the provision of news or comment relative to the speolfled activities
(o)      the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities and the sale of prograames,
        nevssheets and souvenirs
(d)     the sale and consumption of refreshments
(e)     publio collections of any nature
(f)     any other use ancillary to the specified activities which has received not
        less than fourteen days' prior approval by the Counoil.




                                  PART 3/
                                                       3
               Condition* imposed la term of Section 2( 9) «nd          ?(■*) of the Act

    1.    Attendance Lialts
    The M-Haim maber of spectators which asy be adaitted to the Stadiua on any one
    occuloa for the purposes of a specified activity shall not exceed          followsi-

    Main Stand                                 sot exceeding 5

    Wing Stand                                 not exceeding     U69                             I   f h r 4 U 4 iZ &

    Beach End Seating                          not exceeding       0                             [ r*\£ A \o tA » {& 4




                                           n*
                                           1
                                           I
    Paddock End Seating                                        3,750
    Seated Terracing                           not exceeding

    Should the blocked-op exit froa the Beach End be reopened and an exit be provided to
    the street, both to the satisfaction of the Council, the capacity of the Beach Sod
    shall b« recalculated.
    The capacity of the Beach Sad seating shall be increased to U,9U0 when the reconstruction
    of the stairway specified in Condition 25(a) of part U of the Schedule has been coapleted
    to the satisfaction of the Council.

    The capacity of the Seated Terracing shall be recalculated when the conetraction of the
    benched seating     been coapleted to the satisfaction of the Council.

    The total capacity of the Stadiua nhall be altered to confora with the aboveaentioned
    alterations in the capacity of the Beach End seating and the Seated Terracing.

    The Holder     i keep records showing the soBber of spectators adaitted to the Stadiua
    on each occasion for the purposes of a specified activity and the number of spectators
    adaitted to each of the above-aentioned separate parts of the Stadiua on such occasions.
    Such records       be kept at the Stadiua and shall be aade available for examination oa
    request by an authorised person.

    2.    Metering of Adaiaslons
    The Holder "hati be required to provide and maintain at every turnstile or entrance gate
    to the Stadium a aetering system to the satisfaction df the Chief Constable acting oa
    behalf of the Council, to indicate and record all spectator adaiBBions to the Stadiua with
    a riev to ensuring that the number of spectators adaitted to each separate part of the
    Stadiua does sot exceed the nuaber specified in Condition 1 of this part of the Schedule.

    3.    Location of Turnstiles or Entrance Cates

    Turnstiles or entrance gates for spectators shall, along with the accesses therefrom to
    the several parts of the stadiua, at all times be maintained in a proper state of repair
    at the undemoted points and kept free froa obstruction of any kind.
                                                                                             ttaaber of
                                                                                           turnstiles or
                                   Beference Number               Providing                entrance gates
    Part of Stadium                    on Plan                   access froa               at the location

    Main Stand                        30-39                    Pittodrie Street                 10
y   Wing Stand                        1*0 & 1*1                Pittodrie Street                 2
    Beach 2nd Seating                 50-56                    Golf Bead                         7
    Paddock End Seating               17   -    22             Mazkland Hoad East                6
    Seated Terracing                   1-16                    Kerklaad Road East               16
    Seated Terracing                  57-60                    Golf Road                         k
    The said turnstiles or entrance gates shall be numbered to correspond with the appropriate
    entry In the above table.
    Ho individual turnstile or entrance gate for spectators shall be less than 1*25 «■* wide.

    u./
 k.   lo c a tio n Of R rit Ratw

 Exit Gates for spectators shall be looated andt, along with the accesses thereto
 from the nvenl parts of the stadiua, shall be Maintained in safe        proper
 working condition at the undernoted points and kept free from obstructions at all
 tiaas.
                                    Reformce Letter                      vtdth of
 fart of Stadltua                       on Plan                 Exit Gates (Metres)
Seated Terracing                       Exit A                          3.1*2
Seated Terraoing                       Exit B                          U.69
Seated Terracing                       Exit L                          1».52
 Paddock                               Exit C                          3.80
Paddock                                Exit D                          3.80
Main Stand                             Exit G                           .
                                                                       2 1(0
Main Stand                             Exit H                          2.97
Ving Stand                             Exit I                          3.90
Beach End                              Exit J                          3.39
Beach End                              Exit Z                          3.U0
 The above exit gates shall be lettered to correspond with the plan.
 5« Balustrades. Lateral Barriers      land-mila
 Balustrades, Lateral barriers and handrails shall be provided     maintained in a good
 state of repair at all times at not less a cumber of points than axe located and
 indicated in green cn the plan. They shall be kept free of all sharp projections or
 edgea and, when tested, shall be required to satisfy the appropriate loading test
 specified In Appendix C to the Guide.
The Holder shall arrange and carry oat a programs for the testing      Inspection of
balustrades, lateral barriers and handrails within the stadium on the basis that every
balustrade, barrier and          nh»il he
(a) Inspected once per annum, and
(b) tested to the standards of Appendix C to the Guide.at least once In a period of
    ten years
Mot less than 1096 of the total number of such balustrades, barriers Mr,<^ handrails shall
be tested In any one year, ill testing and Inspection carried out in tern of this
Condition shall be so carried out by an independent firm to be approved in advance by the
Counoil. A copy of each testing and/or inspection certificate         be submitted to the
Council as soon as it is issued by the fin concerned.
Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for the carrying out of a regular programme
for the testing and inspection of balustrades, barrier* and handrails, the Council may
require any particular balustrade, barrier or handrail to be separately tested and/or
inspected at any time if it has reasonable cause to suspect that it may sot be capable of
satisfying the appropriate loading test specified In Appendix C to the Guide.
The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented at any testing
and/or inspection of balustrades barriers and/or handrails.
Any balustrade barrier or handrail which falls to meet the prescribed test       be replaced
or strengthened as necessary within six weeks of the date of the appropriate test. Balustrades
barriers and handrails which are strengthened shall be retested on completion of the
strengthening work to ensure that they satisfy the requirements of Appendix C to the Guide.
Any balustrade barrier or handrail which, having failed the prescribed test, has to be
replaced shall be immediately removed. Where such failure constitutes an Immediate hazard
the Holder shall, if required by the Council, replace or strengthen the balustrade barrier or
handrail/
hand-rail im m ediately, o r close down the appropriate sectio n .
In eases of urgency aay approvals required by this condition nay be given by the
Chief Executive or an official designated by hla.

6 . Keeping of Recorda

la addition to the records required to be kept In terns of Condition 1 of this part
of the Schedule, the holder shall be required to prepare and naintain the following
records which «h«.n be Bade available to an       authorised person    onrequest*-

(a)     a record of any accident or incident which causes injury (but excludingaplaying
      field or track injury) and which is brought to his notice as having occurred within
      the stadiua while it was being used for a specified activity.

(b) a record of every test aade of balustrades, lateral barriers and/or handrails within
    the stadiua In terns of Condition 5 of this part of the Schedule.

(c)   A record of every test made of an electrical installation within the stadiua as
      provided for In Condition 11 of Part 1*    of the Schedule.

(d)     a record of the dates of inspection of         general constructionas provided   forla
      Condition 10 of Part U of the Schedule.
                                                              •

(e) a record of the dates of maintenance inspections carried out within the stadiua,
    as required by Condition 6 of Part U of the Schedule, also indicating the nature
    of any defects found affecting the safety of spectators while within the stadiua
    and the dates of the subsequent action taken to reaedy such defects.

(f) a record of the date of every exercise held la terns of Conditions 15 and 28 of
    part U of the Schedule to test emergency procedures, including fire routine
    procedures.

(g) a record of the date of every test aade of the fire alarm system, the emergency
    lighting system, the public address system and the fire fighting equipment within
    the stadium as provided for in Condition 30 of Part U of the Schedule.

(h)   a record of the name of the person nominated, in terms of Condition 2 of Part I*
      of the Schedule, on each occasion when the stadiua la in use for a speoified
      activity.

The records required to be kept In terns of this Condition and Condition 1 of this Part
of the Schedule may be so kept in a single log book or separate log books as asy be aost
convenient to the Holder.

7. There shall be exhibited to the Council by 31 July 1978 satisfactory Certificates
•in terms of paragraph 5 part 3 (testing of balustrades, lateral barriers and handrails)
and of paragraphs 10 (inspection of general construction), 11 (inspection of electrical
installations), and 30 (testing of systems) of Part U.
                                           6



                                       PACT L

              Other Conditlons lmpoeed In teraa of Section 2(1) of tha let


1.      General

The Holder shall

(a) oomply, as froa the appropriate date in each case, with the conditions set out
    in the Schedule at all times when the stadium is in use for a specified activity;

(b)      subject to Condition 2 of this part of the Scheduls retain control over all
        operations in the stadium at all times when the stadium is in uss for a specified
        activity;

(c) arrange, as and when required by the Conditions of this Certificate for the testing
    of balustrades, lateral barriers and handrails and of the following systems and
    procedures, namely, (i) fire alarm system, (ii) emergency lighting systems, (iii)
    public address system, (ir) fire fighting equipment and (▼) fire routine procedures |

(d)      otherwise take such steps as are reasonably practicable   toobssrve the spirit and
        intentions of the recommendations contained in the Guide in so far as the said
        recommendations are not substituted, amended, modified, extended or otherwise
        altered by all or any of the specifio Conditions of this Certifioate.

(2)     Nomination of responsible person

On each occasion when the stadium is used for a specified activity, the Holder shall
nominate a responsible person to take charge of the etadium on his behalf and to be present
therein during the whole period of such use. Such nominated person shall not be engaged
on any duties which will prevent him from exercising general supervision of the stadium on
behalf of the Holder during such use. The name of the person so nominated shall be aade
known to any authorised officer who may be present and have occasion to request it and
shall be recorded as provided for in Condition 6 of Part 3 of the Schedule.

3.      Dates for provision of new equipment and execution of works

Where, under any Condition of this Part of the Schedule, the Holder is required either
to provide new equipment of any kind or to execute works within the stadium, such provision
or execution shall be completed not later than 31»* July 1978* unless the oontext of any
particular condition specifically stipulates otherwise in which case such other stipulated
date shall be applicable.

U*     Alterations and additions to stadium

Alterations and/or additions to the stadium or to any of the installations or facilities
therein, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be made except with the prior consent
of the Council. Notice in writing        be given by the Holder to the Council of any such
alterations or additions proposed to be aade and such notice shall be accompanied by full
details and, as and when necessary or appropriate, by drawings and calculations. The work
      not be started until approval of the Council has been obtained. Such consent shall
be additional to any planning, building control or other consent required by the Holder.
Alterations and/or additions approved by the Council in terms of this Condition shall be
required to meet the relative recommendations contained in the Guide unless the Council are
satisfied that it would be impracticable or otherwise unreasonable to Insist on oompliance
In full with these recommendations.

5.     Manning of entrance gates

Turnstiles or entrance gates shall be manned and operational for such a period prior to the
commencement of a specified activity as will permit the admission of spectators to all parts
of the stadium in an evenly distributed and controlled Banner.

6 . Regular inspections of stadium and clearing of litter

During the period between successive uses of the stadium for a specified activity, the
Holder ■halt arrange for an inspection to be made on his behalf of the whole facilities
of the stadium with a view to any defect or missing equipment being ascertained and
immediately repaired or replaced and any other damage whatsoever being made good. All
litter or debris accumulated as a result of the {mediately preceding use of the stadium
shall be removed to safe storage before the stadium's further use for a specified activity.

7 ./
7.    Maintenance - General

ill parts of thestadium shall be maintained In a good state of repair.

The Holder      carry oat without delay such works of repair and maintenance
within the stadium aa say be required froa time to tiae by the Counoil.

ill drainage systems within those areas in the atadiua which are accessible to
spectators      be aaintained in a safe and efficient condition at all tiaes.

ill seating within the main and wing atands should remain flatly fixed in position.

8 . Maintenance of aarfacea

The aurfacea of every part of all paths, stairways, gangways, terraces, acceaaea
and exita within the atadina and ita cartilage over which spectators may have
reasonable canae to paaa shall be maintained in a good atate of repair free froa
rata, potholea, depressions or other defeota.

9.    Precautions to be taken because of inclement weather

Where, because of inclement weather giving poaaible rise to dangerous conditions
underfoot, e.g. snow or ice, any surfaces within the atadiua over which a spectator
may have reasonable canae to paaa may preaent a hazard to apectatora, such surfaces
shall be aade safe before spectatora are adaitted to the stadium.

10.    Inspection of General Construction

Every 5 years the Holder shall have an inspection made of the stadiua by a chartered
structural or civil engineer and shall obtain and exhibit to the Council Certificate
of Safety in relation to the structure, certifying that all components and
installations, e.g. terraces, stands, stairs, barriers and pylons, have the strength
and durability, and are maintained in such condition and are arranged in such a maimer
as to perform their required functions, and that the design and construction of these
components and installations is in accordance with good engineering and building
practice and of adequate strength.

11.    Annual inspection of Electrical Installations

The Holder shall have an inspection made annually of the whole electrical installations
within the stadium and shall submit a copy of the relative Inspeotion Certificate to
the Council immediately it is issued by the person or firm concerned. Such Inspection
Certificate shall be in the fora prescribed in Section E of the Regulations for the
Electrical Equipment of Buildings as published by the Institution of Electrical
Engineers and shall be signed by a corporate member of the said Institution or by a
Contractor currently enrolled with the Rational Inspection Council for Electrical
Installation Contracting or by a qualified representative of an electricity supply
authority or by a surveyor of an Engineering Insurance Company. Without prejudice to
the foregoing requirement for the inspection of the whole electrical installations
within the stadium, the Council may require any particular part of the installations
to be separately tested at any time if it has reasonable cause to suspect that it may
be defective in some way. The Holder shall afford the Counoil the opportunity of being
represented at any inspection of the electrical installations or part thereof. Any
electrical installation or part thereof which fails to pass the appropriate test shall
be repaired or replaced within one month of the date of inspection. Any electrical
installation or part thereof which has to be repaired or replaced shall be re-tested
on oompletion of such repairs or replacement so as to comply with the above-mentioned
Regulations.

12.   Parking of Vehicles within the Stadium

Ho vehicles other than emergency vehicles (i.e. police, fire, ambulance etc.) shall be
parked in any part of the stadiua while it is in use for a specified activity unless
with the prior agreement of the Chief Constable.

13 . Arrangements for attendance of police officers

The Holder shall arrange at his own expense for the attendance of an adequate number of
police officers while the stadium is in use for a specified activity to ensure the lawful
and orderly behaviour of spectators. The number of police officers to be in attendance
within the stadium during any such use shall be agreed in advance between the Holder and
the Chief Constable.
11*. Methodg         ■ ^lon and segregation of supporters
The Solder ■Kail discuss and agree with the Chief Constable prior to the use of
the stadium for a speoified activity

(a)   the nethods of admission to be employed in connection with ruch specified
      activity (in particulart whether admission shall be by ticket only); and

(b)   the special arrangements, if any, to be Bade for the segregation of supporters
      of opposing dubs.

Vithoat prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Condition, it shall be in the
discretion of the Chief Constable to indicate to the Holder that the agreement reached
in terns of the said provisions can also apply to all or any future uses of the stadium
for a specified activity without further discussion between then.

15.   Stewardlng arrangements - General

While the stadium is in use for a specified activity, the Holder shall ensure the
attendance within the stadium of such number of stewards as are necessary to ensure
compliance with the Conditions of this Certificate and such stewards shall be

(a)   fit and capable to carry out their duties

(b)   properly trained and instructed

(o)   readily identifiable by dress (e.g. white coat, fluorescent jacket etc.) and

(d) provided by the Holder with written instructions, to be approved by the Council,
    as to their general duties in order to fulfil the following functions:-

      .(i)   the manning of exit gates

      (ii)   the control and direction of spectators entering, using or leaving the
             stadium{ and
                                                                              »

      (ill) patrolling the stadium and dealing with any emergency, Including raising
            an alarm and extinguishing any fire

Where the public is admitted to the stadium for the sale of tickets only and far so
other activity, it "hail be a sufficient discharge of the requirements of this
Condition if the Holder ensures the attendance of sufficient stewards to ensure the
orderly behaviour of the public during the period of sale.

All stewards      other persons employed in the stadium during its use for a specified
activity        be fully instructed as to their responsibilities in the event of an
emergency nnfl exercises for stewards and other persons employed within the stadium shall
be carried out not less than three times each playing season to test emergency procedures.

16.   Brit Cates - Attendance by stewards

All exit gates ahall be attended by stewards throughout the entire period when spectators
may be in the stadium in oonneotion with its use for a speoified activity aad it shall be
the duty of such stewards to open the exit gates in the event of an emergency and in any
event not less than fifteen minutes before the anticipated end of the specified activity
or at any other time on the request of a police officer.' When opened for any reason, all
exit gates shall be secured in the fully open position and kept free of all obstructions.

Sliding gates phgiT be tested once a month to ensure that they move freely.

17.   Positioning of television cameras etc.

Television cameras and portable equipment shall be restricted to positions to be approved
in advance by the Chief Constable on behalf of the Council and shall not be allowed to
cause any obstruction to the police or emergency services in the carrying out of their
duties.
                                              9.

 18.      Provision of firat-ald room etc.

The Holder shall provide and maintain within the stadiua a suitably equipped first-
aid room and /or first-aid points to the satisfaction of the Council and shall ensure
the attendance of a sufficient number of properly trained first-aid personnelon
each occasion when the stadiua is in use for a specified activity.

The attendance of first-aid personnel shall not be considered to be necessary when the
public is adaitted to the stadium for the sale of tickets only     for no other activity.

19.       Public Address Svatea

The Holder shall maintain for his own use and for the use of the police and emergency
services, as and when required while the stadiua is in use for a specified activity,
a public address system capable of being heard under reasonable conditions by all
spectators of normal hearing in any part of the stadiua to which spectators have a
right of access. Such public address system shall be provided with anemergency power
supply so that it is capable of being operated at all tiaes.

20.       Toilet facilities

The Holder shall ensure the provision and adequate maintenance to the satisfaction of
the Council of sufficient toilet facilities, both male and female, in * n parts of the
stadiua.

21.       Sale of Tickets, programmes and refreshmenta - General

In allocating premises or facilities for the sale of tickets, programmes or refreshments,
the Holder shall take all necessary steps to ensure that such allocation does not obstruct
entrance or exit routes in any way.

22.       Provision of refreshments

The Holder shall ensure that all premises, appliances and equipment associated with the
sale of refreshments are maintained in a safe and proper working condition at all times.

All containers in which liquid or other refreshments are sold or distributed to spectators
while the stadium is in use for a specified activity shall be made of soft plastio or
other soft material. This requirement shall not apply to any part of the stadium to which
access is given only on the invitation of the Holder.

2 3 . gacillties for authorised persons

The Holder shall make available adequate viewing and inspection facilities to authorised
persons immediately before, during and after a specified activity or at any other reasonable
time when considered necessary by the Council.

21*. Accomodation and facilities for Grampian Police

The Holder shall provide and thereafter maintain at his own expense the following accommodation
and facilities for the use of the police officers on duty in connection with the use of the
stadium for a specified activity*

(a)       Accommodation

          There whall be provided and maintained in such location within the Main Stand as may be .
          approved by the Chief Constable, the following units of accommodation, namely

          (i)    A general office/control room - this office to have its oVn toilet accommodation;

          (ii)   Accommodation for the mustering of police officers on duty at the activity and
                  for the detention of prisoners;

(b) Facilities

          (i)    Heating shall be available within the accommodation referred to at (a) above

          (ii)   Basic furnishings shall be provided;

          (ill) The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable on areas at either end of the
                Stand or elsewhere within the stadium to be made available for use as police
                reserve holding areas and other possible police requirements.
9<.   /
                                          10.




 25.   Specific repairs, improvements and maintenance to be carried oat

The undernoted items nast be completed not later than the 31st July, 1978 , except
for condition (a) where the reconstruction or installation whan be completed by
31et July 1979 .

BRAfTH IBP

 (a) The extreme north stairway forming the means of escape froa the Beach End seating
       and discharging to Golf Road shall be redesigned to conform to the standard set
       oat under the head "Construction of Staircases" in the Guide.

 (b)   Lateral barriers designed in accordance with the Gaide as modified by Plan C attached
       mast be erected across the head of the north     south stairway serving the Beach End.

 (0)   A handrail must be provided along the inside of the north wall of the stand to assist
       spectators in reaching the exits.

 (d)   A total exit width of 8.2 metres most be provided froa this stand. (This can be most
       satisfactorily achieved by widening the existing exit on the south fact of this stand.)

TERRACING

 (e)   Lateral barriers designed in accordance with the Guide mast be provided across the head
       of the south eastoost exit stair froa the terrace.

PADDOCK

'(f) Handrails mast be provided to sub-divide the stairway froa the North exit into three
     equal sections. The new handrail situated on the stairway serving the central exit
     oust be realigned to follow the run of the stairway.

EXIT SIGNS
 (g) The exit routes froa all parts of the stadiua must be clearly sign-posted; high level
     directional signs being provided where necessary. The exit signs need not be of the
     illuminated type provided they are adequately illuminated by the general and emergency
     lighting systems.

FIRE SEPARATION

(h) All storage spaces consaon to the underside of the stand must be protected by material
    having afire resistance of not less than one hour, or disused completely. In the
    event of this area being pat to use for any purpose the Council will require to be
    consulted and to give approval (subjeot to any conditions they tMwir fit) beforehand.

SEGREGATION 0? SPECTATORS
(1)    To prevent the migration of spectators froa one part of the stadiua to another it will
       be necessary to erect a barrier froa the south end of the Beach Bm* stand to Golf Road.

B.B.C. ROSTRUM

(j)    The B.B.C. rostrum oast be reconstructed in a more stable fora     sheeted around at
       foot in a similar manner to the lighting pylons.

FIRS WARNING SYSTEMS

(k) Whereas the offices, lounge, recreation room, changing room and showers are provided
    with an eleotrically powered fire alaza system there is no provision Bade to warn
    spectators throughout the remainder of the stadiua.

       It will be necessary, therefore, to make arrangements to utilise the stadiua public
       address system as a means of alerting staff of an outbreak of fire; this could be
       done by a predetermined oode message prior to the general alarm being broadcast.

26. The existing general and emergency lighting systems in all parts of the Stadium accessible
to spectatorsand particularly on entrance and exit stairways, gangways uri other routes "hat i
be maintained in a safe and efficient working condition, to ensure that spectators may enter,
oake use of, and leave the Stadiua safely. The vhole of the emergency lighting system nhaii
operate automatically and shall be capable of providing an adequate level of illumination for
not less than two hours.

27./
27.    Tire ?lidrt<*ff Equipment
The scale of fire-fighting equipment whioh Is provided and detailed on the plan
satisfactory. Care aast be taken however to ensure that the appliances are maintained
.rrrmall-y by a competent person.

28.    fire Rout*n« Procedure

The holder shall take the neoeasary steps to Instruct all staff, Including stewards,
likely to be working within the stadium while it ia in use for a apecifled activity,
of the procedures to be adopted as undemoted in the event of an outbreak of fire
being discovered, naaelys-

(a) The Fire Brigade to be suaaoned
(b)    A responsible person or persons to proceed to the scene of the fire to find oat
       if it     been extinguished or is under control

(o) Where the fire (i) la affeoting the Stand seating or any exit therefrom or (ii)
    ia located elsewhere within the Stand and ia not under oontrol, to take immediate
    atepa to arrange the evacuation of the Stand by using the public address systea.

The full details of fire routine procedures shall   be agreed with the
later than 30 April 1978. Exercises to teat fire    routine procedures shall be carried
out not less than three tines each playing season   and nay be ao carried out in conjunction
with the exercises referred to in Condition 15 of   this Part of the Schedule.

2 9 . Storage of Trifled Petroleum Gas

If it la necessary to store or use liquified petroleum gaa within the stadium, the holder
.h.n take the necessary atepa to observe any guidance given by the Firemaater aa to the
precautions to be taken in ao doing.

 30.    Testing of System
The following arrangements shall be made by the holder for the testing of the undernoted
systens:-

 (a) Fire Alarm                         The manually operated fixe alam systen in the Stand
                                        .h.n be teated in accordance with the procedurea aet
                                        oat in British Standard Coda of Practice CP.1019«1972.
                                        (At least once per month)

 (b) Emergency Lighting                 The energency lighting system shall be teated In
                                        accordance with the procedures outlined in British
                                        Standard Code of Practice CP.5266s Part 1* 1975
                                        (At least once per month)

 (e)    Public Addreas System           The public address systen shall be teated at the Bane
                                        tine as the fire alarn systen and shall be checked to.
                                        ensure that it operates correctly froa both the normal
                                        ■wri aeoondary power sources

 (d) Fire Fighting Equipment             The fire fighting equipment shall be checked and tested,
                                         by a oonpetent firm of fire engineers at regular periods
                                         bat not less than once per annua
                                                                                 r
                          GRAMPIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL
       rY                                              MEMORANDUM
                                                                                  C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Gordon, D i v i s i o n a l
From   D IR EC T O R O F LAW AND ADMINISTRATION                            .To    Commander B D i v i s i o n , P o l i c e Head­
                                                                                  q u a r t e r s , Bucksburn
OvrReL       PP18/1             OF/LS                                        Da,e 10 March. 1982                        Your Ref.




               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
               PITTODRIE STADIUM

               I r e f e r t o y our r e c e n t r e q u e s t f o r a n o t e o f t h e a t t e n d a n c e l i m i t s a t
               P i t t o d r i e Stadium.    Ir. a c c o r d a n c e w i t h t h e General S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e
               i s s u e d t o Aberdeen F o o t b a l l Club L i m i t e d , t h e maximum numbers a r e a s
               fcllow s:-


                       Main Stand n o t ex c e e d in g                    5,15 7

                       Wing Stand n o t e x c e e d i n g                     469

                       Beach End        not exceeding                      4,94 0

                       Paddock End n o t e x c e e d in g                  3,750

                       South T e r r a c e n o t e x c e e d in g          9,600

                                                  Total                   23,916




              Depute D i r e c t o r o f Law and Admi'rfistrati on




                                                                                                                                                 X




                                                                                                                                                      I
^   ‘   ^   I




                                       GRAMPIAN   REGIONAL    COUNCIL

                                 SAFETY   OF   SPORTS    GROUNDS    ACT,    1975

                         NOTICE OF   AMENDMENT OF       GENERAL    SAFETY   CERTIFICATE



                Notice is hereby given in terms of Section 4 (1) (a) of the Safety of Sports
                Grounds Act, 1975 to the Aberdeen Football Club Limited that the Grampian
                Regional c-ouncil have amended Condition 1 of Part 3 of the Schedule to the
                General Safety Certificate issued by the Council to the Club on 24 May, 1978
                               Pittodrie Stadium, Aberdeen, as amended by Notice of Amendment
                wf         December' 1979, by decreasing the.maximum number of spectators to
                be admitted to the stadium on any one occasion for the purpose of a specified
                activity, as defined in Part 2 of the Certificate, frcm 23,916 to 23,337 and
                altering the maximum number of persons to be admitted to the main stand, as
                defined m Part 1 of the Certificate, to 4,218 in the general seating anc! 360
                in the executive boxes.


                                                               Dated this Fourteenth day of February,
                                                              .Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Five




                                                                  Depute Director of Law and Administration
                                                                  for and on behalf of The Grampian
                                                                  Reaional Council




                                                                                              t
DRAPT




                GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


                   EASTER ROAD STADIUM




NOVEMBER 1989


WP 0060P
                        THE LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL

                      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                  As amended by the Fire Safety and Safety
                         of Places of Sport Act 1987


                         GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE



WHEREAS The Lothian Regional Council ("The Council")       in exercise of its
powers under section 4(1)(b) of the Safety of Sports       Grounds Act 1975 as
amended ("The Act") has determined to replace the General Safety Certificate
dated 18 February 1980 issued by it to Hibernian Football Club in respect of
the sports ground known as Easter Road Stadium, Edinburgh.

AND WHEREAS the Council has carried out the consultations required by
section 4(8) of the Act.

NOW THEREFORE the Council in accordance with section      4(l)(b) and (3) ofthe
Act hereby grants and issues this new General Safety      Certificate to thesaid
Hibernian Football Club in respect of the said sports ground and that on the
terms and conditions set out in Parts 1-7 both inclusive of the Schedule
hereto which shall form part of the said new Certificate being the terms and
conditions which the Council considers necessary or expedient to secure
reasonable safety at the said sports ground when it is in use for the
specified activities as defined in said Schedule.

On..........................("the effective date") the said General Safety
Certificate dated 18 February 1980 shall be revoked and this new Certificate
shall come into force in its stead and the terms and conditions attaching to
said new Certificate shall be complied with on and from the effective date or
such other date or dates as are specified in said Schedule.

This certificate is issued for the period up to the 30th June 1990.




Dated this

 (Signature).................................
            Director of Architectural Services
            for and on behalf of the Council
SCHEDULE

PART 1 - INTERPRETATION

The Certificate, including this Schedule, shall be interpreted according to
the definitions contained in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as amended
by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 as read with the
supplementary definitions contained in this Part of this Schedule.

"the Act"           means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as amended by
                    the Pire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987

'authorised         means a person authorised in accordance with Section 11 of
person"             the Act

"the building       means The City of Edinburgh District Council, being the
authority"          local authority for the purpose,of the Building (Scotland)
                    Act, 1959 and relative Regulations thereunder within the
                    City of Edinburgh District.

"the Chief          means the Chief Constable of the Lothian and Borders
Constable”          Police Porce or his authorised representative

"the Council*       means The Lothian Regional Council, being the local
                    authority for the purpose of the Act within the Lothian
                    Region.

■coveted            means an area of terrace over which there is erected a
enclosure*          structure to protect spectators from inclement weather
                    conditions.

■the Piremaster*    means the Firemaster of the Lothian and Borders Pire
                    Brigade or his authorised representative.

■gangway*           means a channel for the passage of spectators.

■the Guide*         means the 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds* as first
                    published in 1986 and as may be republished from time to
                    time by the Home Office and the Scottish Office and any
                    reference to any part or provision of the Guide shall be
                    deemed to include a reference to the equivalent part of
                    provision in any subsequent publication of the Guide.

■the Holder*        means the person to whom this Certificate is issued, being
                    a qualified person for the purposes of the Act

■the Plan*          means the drawing of the sports ground attached to this
                    Certificate in terms of Section 2(4) of the Act and
                    docketed as relative thereto

*the specified      means the activities listed in Part 2 of this Schedule
activities*

■the sports         means the sports ground known as Easter Road Stadium
ground"             Sdinburgh delineated in red on the Plan




                                       2
■stairway"    shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Building
              Standards (Scotland) Regulations in force from time to time

•the stand"   means the building or area within the sports ground in
              which seating accommodation is provided for spectators

"terrace"     means an area of steps providing standing accommodation
              for spectators.




                                  3
PART 2 - THE SPECIFIED ACTIVITIES


The activities covered by this Certificate (ie the specified activities) shall
comprise the following activities to be held at the sports ground and to which
spectators are admitted, namely:

2.1   Primary Activities

      Football matches


2.2   Activities Ancillary to the Primary Activities

      Subject, however, to the terms and conditions of the Certificate and to
      any general statutory requirements, the sports'ground may also be used
      for the following activities ancillary to the primary activities, namely:

      a)   the playing of music or singing,

      b)   the provision of news or comment relative to the primary activities,

      c)   the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities and the sale   of
           programmes, news sheets and souvenirs,

      d)   the sale and consumption of refreshments,

      e)   public collections of any nature,

      f)   any other use ancillary to the primary activities which has   received
           not less than fourteen days' prior approval by the Council

      but shall not include practice or training sessions for primary activi­
      ties to which not more than 500 non paying spectators are admitted.




                                          4
        PART 3 - CONDITIONS IMPOSED IN TERMS OP SECTIONS 2(2) AND 2(3) OP THE ACT


    3.1 Attendance Limits

        The maximum number of spectators which may be admitted to the sports
        ground on any one occasion for the purpose of a specified activity shall
        be 22,258 and, within that overall figure, the number of spectators which
        may be admitted to the various areas or parts of areas of the sports
        ground listed in Part 5 of this Schedule shall not exceed thelimits fixed
        for such areas or parts of areas in said Part 5.

        The Holder shall keep records showing the number of spectators admitted to
        the sports ground on each occasion for the purposes of a specified
        activity and the number of spectators admitted to each of the separate
        parts of the sports ground listed in Appendix 1 of this Schedule on such
        occasion. Such records shall be kept at the sports ground and shall be
_       made available for examination on request by an authorised person.


    3.2 Metering of Admission

        The Holder shall be required to provide and maintain at every turnstile or
        entrance gate to the sports ground an electronic metering system to the
        satisfaction of the Chief Constable acting on behalf of the Council, to
        indicate and record all spectator admissions to the sports ground with a
        view to ensuring that the number of spectators admitted to each separate
        part of the sports ground does not exceed the numbers specified in
        Condition 1 of this Part of this Schedule. Such metering system shall
        provide a read.out and print facility in the. police control point and
        shall be of such kind as will ensure that appropriate representatives of
        the Holder and the appropriate officer of the Lothian and Borders Police
        Force can readily ascertain the number of spectators admitted through each
        turnstile or entrance gate.


    3.3 Location of Turnstiles or Entrance Gates

        Turnstiles or entrance gates for spectators located as per a drawing
        listed in Appendix 2 of this Schedule along with the accesses therefrom to
        the several parts of the sports ground shall at all times be maintained in
        a proper state of repair and kept free from obstructions of any kind.

        The Stand turnstiles or entrance gates shall be numbered to correspond
        with the appropriate entry in Appendix 2 of this Schedule.


    3.4 Location of Exit Gates

        Exit gates for spectators located as per a drawing listed in Appendix 2 of
        this Schedule and along with the accesses thereto from the several parts
        of the sports ground shall be maintained in safe and proper working
        condition, and kept free from obstructions at all times.




                                            5
3.5 Crush Barriers and Handrails

   Crush barriers and handrails shall be provided and maintained in a good
   state of repair at all times at not less a number of points as have been
   agreed by the Council, and as shown on a drawing listed in Appendix 2 of
   this Schedule. They shall be kept free of all sharp projections or edges
   and, when tested, shall be required to satisfy the appropriate loading
   test specified in Appendix C to the Guide.

   The Holder shall arrange and carry out a programme for the testing and
   inspection of crush barriers and handrails within the sports ground on the
   basis that they are:

    a)   inspected once per annum, AND

    b)   tested to the standards of Appendix C to the Guide at least once in a
         period of four years.

    Not less than twenty five per cent of the total number of such barriers
    and handrails shall be tested in any one year. All testing and inspection
    carried out in terms of this Condition shall be so carried out by an inde­
    pendent firm to be approved by the Council. A copy of each testing and/or
    inspection certificate shall be submitted to the Council as soon as it is
    issued by the firm concerned.

    Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for the carrying out of a
    regular programme for the testing and inspection of crush barriers and
    handrails the Council may require any particular barrier or handrail to be
    separately tested and/or inspected at any time if it has reasonable cause
    to suspect that it may not be capable of satisfying the appropriate load­
    ing test specified in Appendix C to the Guide.

    The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented
    at any testing and/or inspection of crush barriers and/or handrails.

    Any crush barrier or handrail which fails to meet the prescribed test
    shall be replaced or strengthened as necessary within six weeks of the
    date of the appropriate testing certificate. Such crush barriers and
    handrails shall be retested on completion of the strengthening work or
    replacement to ensure that they satisfy the requirement of Appendix C to
    the Guide.




                                         6
3.6 Keeping of Records

   In addition to the records required to be kept in terms of Condition 1 of
   this Part of this Schedule, the Holder shall be required to prepare and
   maintain the following records which shall be made available to an
   authorised person on request:

    a)   a record of any accident or incident which causes injury (but exclud­
          ing a playing field or track injury) and which is brought to his
          notice as having occurred within the sports ground while it was being
          used for a specified activity - this record to be separately and
          securely stored apart from the other records noted hereafter,

    b)   a record of every test made of crush barriers and/or handrails within
          the sports ground in terms of Condition 5 of this Part of this
          Schedule,

    c)   a record of every test made of an electrical installation within the
          sports ground as provided for in Condition 10 of Part 4 of this
          Schedule,

    d)   a record of the dates of maintenance inspections carried out within
          the sports ground, as required by Condition 6 of Part 4 of this
          Schedule also indicating the nature of any defects found affecting
          the safety of spectators while within the sports ground and the dates
          of the subsequent action taken to remedy such defects,

    e)   a record of the date of every exercise held in terms of Conditions 14
          and 30 of Part 4 of this Schedule to test emergency procedures,
          including fire routine procedures,

    f)   a record of the date of every test made of the fire alarm system, the
          emergency lighting system, the public address system and the fire
          fighting equipment within the sports ground as provided for in
          Condition 32 of Part 4 of this Schedule.

    g)   a record of the name of the person nominated in terms of Condition 2
         of Part 4 of this Schedule, on each occasion when the sports ground
         is in use for a specified activity.

    The records required to be kept in terms of items b)-g) of this Condition
    and Condition 1 of this Part of the Schedule shall be kept in a single log
    book as defined from time to time by the Council.




                                       7
    PART 4 - OTHER CONDITIONS IMPOSED IN TERMS OP SECTION 2(1) OP THE ACT

4.1 General

    The Holder shall:

    4.1.1 comply with the conditions set out in this Schedule at all times
          when the sports ground is in use for a specified activity,

    4.1.2 subject to Condition 2 of this Part of this Schedule, retain control
          over all operations in the sports ground at all times when the
          sports ground is in use for a specified activity,

    4.1.3 arrange, as required by the Conditions of this Certificate, for the
          testing and/or inspection of the following:

          crush barriers and handrails                (Clause 3.5)
          ground condition                            (Clause 4.9)
          structural integrity of stand and covered
          enclosure                                   (Clause   4.9)
          electrical installation                     (Clause   4.10)
          emergency and fire routine procedures       (Clause   4.14 & 4.30)
          fire alarm system                           (Clause   4.32.1)
          emergency lighting system                   (Clause   4.32.2)
          public address system                       (Clause   4.32.3)
          fire fighting equipment                     (Clause   4.32.4)
          boiler and pressure vessels                 (Clause   4.32.5)

    4.1.4 otherwise, take such steps as are reasonably practicable to observe
          the spirit and intentions of the recommendations contained in the
          Guide insofar as the said recommendations are not substituted, amen1
          ded, modified, extended or otherwise altered by all or any of the
          specific Conditions of this Certificate.


4.2 Nomination of Responsible Person

    On each occasion when the sports ground is used for a specified activity,
    the Holder shall nominate a responsible person to take charge of the
    sports ground on his behalf and to be present therein during the whole
    period of such use. Such nominated person shall not be engaged on any
    duties which will prevent him from exercising general supervision of the
    sports ground on behalf of the Holder during such use. The name of the
    person so nominated shall be made known to any authorised person who may
    be present and have occasion to request it and shall be recorded as
    provided for in Condition 6 of Part 3 of this Schedule.


4.3 Dates for Provision of New Equipment and Execution of Works

    Where, under any Condition of this Certificate, the Holder is required
    either to provide new equipment of any kind or to execute works within the
    sports ground, such provision or execution shall be completed not later
    than one month after the date of the issue of the certificate unless the
    context of any particular Condition specifically stipulates otherwise in
    which case such other stipulated dates shall be applicable.


                                        8
4.4 Alterations and Additions to Sports Ground

   Alterations and/or additions to the sports ground or to any of the
   installations or facilities therein, whether permanent or temporary shall
   not be made except with the prior consent of the Council. Notice in writ­
   ing shall be given by the Holder to the Council of any such alterations or
   additions proposed to be made and such notice shall be'accompanied by full
   details and, as and when necessary or appropriate, by drawings and calcu­
   lations. The work shall not be started until the approval of the Council
   has been obtained. Such consent shall be additional to any planning,
   building control or other consent required by the Holder. Alterations
   and/or additions approved by the Council in terms of this Condition shall
   be required to meet the relative recommendations contained in the Guide
   unless the Council is satisfied that it would be impracticable or other
   wise unreasonable to insist on compliance in full with these recommenda­
   tions.


4.5 Manning of Entrance Gates

    Turnstiles or entrance gates shall be manned and operational for such a
    period prior to the commencement of a specified activity as will permit
    the admission of spectators to all parts of the sports ground in an evenly
    distributed and controlled manner as agreed with the Chief Constable. The
    Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable, before the use of the sports
    ground for a specified activity, how many and which turnstiles or entrance
    gates are to be allocated solely for the use of juveniles and/or old age
    pensioners and/or special groups and the time at which they will be
    opened. Such agreement may, at the discretion of the Chief Constable,
    either apply to all uses of the sports ground for a specified activity or
    to any one or more such uses.


4.6 Regular Inspections of Sports Ground and Clearing of Litter

    During the period between successive uses of the sports ground for a
    specified activity, the Holder shall arrange for an inspection to be made
    on his behalf of the whole facilities of the sports ground with a view to
    any defect or missing equipment being ascertained and immediately repaired
    or replaced and any other damage whatsoever being made good. All litter
    and debris accumulated as a result of the immediately preceding use of the
    sports ground shall be removed to safe storage before the sports ground's
    further use for a specified activity.


4.7 General

    All parts of the sports ground shall be maintained in a good state of
    repair to the satisfaction of the Council. The adder shall carry out
    without delay such additional works of repair and maintenance within the
    sports ground as may be required from time to time by the Council.

    All drainage systems within those areas in the sports ground which are
    accessible to spectators shall be maintained in a safe and efficient
    condition at all times.


                                       9
      The surfaces of every part of all paths, stairways, gangways, terraces,
      accesses and exits within the sports ground over which spectators may
      have reasonable cause to pass shall be maintained in a good state of
      repair, free from ruts, potholes, depressions or other defects.


4.8   Precautions to be Taken because of Inclement Heather

      Where, because of inclement weather giving possible rise to dangerous
      conditions under foot eg, snow or ice, any surfaces within the sports
      ground over which a spectator may have reasonable cause to pass may
      present a hazard to spectators, such surfaces shall be cleared of such
      hazard before spectators are admitted to the sports ground.


4.9   Annual Ground and Structural Inspection

      A detailed inspection of the sports ground including all installations
      and components eg, retaining walls, perimeter walls, boundary walls,
      fences, gates, stairways, terraces, floodlight towers etc, shall be
      carried out annually by a person with a relevant and recognised
      professional qualification and experience of inspecting similar existing
      structures. A copy of the report shall be submitted to the Council.

      An inspection shall be carried out annually by a Consulting Engineer and
      a certificate obtained stating that the structure and cladding of the
      stand and covered enclosure are adequate for their capacity loading and
      that exposed structural members are adequately protected to minimise
      atmospheric corrosion.

      In particular, all steelwork and fabric shall be treated as and when re­
      quired to prevent deterioration to structural strength and condition all
      in accordance with the recommendations given in the relevant British
      Standard Specification and Codes of Practice.


4.10 Annual Inspection of Electrical Installations

      The Holder shall have an inspection made annually of the whole electrical
      installation within the sports ground and shall submit a copy of the
      relative Inspection Certificate to the Council immediately it is issued
      by the person or firm concerned. Such Inspection Certificate shall be in
      the form prescribed in Section E of the Regulations for the Electrical
      Equipment of Building as published by the Institution of Electrical
      Engineers and shall be signed by a Corporate member of the said
      Institution or by a Contractor currently enrolled with the National
      Inspection Council for Electrical Installation Contracting or by a
      qualified representative of an electricity supply authority or by a
      Surveyor of an Engineering Insurance Company.

      Without prejudice to the foregoing requirements for the inspection of the
      whole electrical installations within the sports ground the Council may
      require any particular part of the installations to be separately tested
      at any time if it has reasonable cause to suspect that it may be defec­
      tive in some way.


                                       10
    The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented
    at any inspection of the electrical installations or part thereof if it
    so wishes.

    Any electrical installation or part thereof which fails to pass the
    appropriate test shall be repaired or replaced within one month of the
    issue of the appropriate Certificate. Any electrical installation or part
    thereof which has to be repaired or replaced shall be retested on comple­
    tion of such repairs or replacement so as to comply with the above
    mentioned Regulations.


4.11 Parking of Vehicles within the Sports Ground

     No vehicles other than emergency vehicles (ie, police, fire, ambulance
     etc) shall be parked in any part of the sports ground while it is in use
     for a specified activity unless with the prior agreement of the Chief
     Constable. Without prejudice however, to this requirement, the Chief
     Constable may agree with the Holder the allocation of a specific area or
     areas within the sports ground for the parking of disabled persons'
     vehicles while the sports ground is in use for a specified activity.


4.12 Arrangements for Attendance of Police Officers

     The Holder shall, subject to the proviso hereinafter written, arrange at
     his own expense for the attendance of an adequate number of police
     officers while the sports ground is in use for a specified activity to
     ensure the lawful and orderly behaviour of spectators provided that the
     number of police officers to be in attendance within the sports ground
     during any such use shall be determined by the Chief Constable.


4.13 Methods of Admission and Segregation of Supporters

     The Holder shall discuss and agree with the Chief Constableprior to the
     use of the sports ground for a specified activity:

     4.13.1 the methods of admission to be employed in connection with such
            specified activity (in particular, whether admission shall be by
            ticket only), AND

     4.13.2 the special arrangements if any, to be made for the segregation of
            spectators.

     Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Condition, it shall
     be at the discretion of the Chief Constable to indicate to the Holder
     that the agreement reached in terms of the said provisions can also apply
     to all or any future uses of the sports ground for a specified activity
     without further discussion between them.




                                       11
4.14 Stewarding Arrangements - General

    While the sports ground is in use for a specified activity, the Holder
    shall ensure the attendance within the sports ground of such number of
    stewards as are required by the Chief Constable to ensure compliance with
    the Conditions of this Certificate and such stewards shall:

     4.14.1 be fit and capable to carry out their duties,

     4.14.2 be within the age group 18-65 years,

     4.14.3 be properly trained and instructed,

     4.14.4 hold a valid identity pass bearing the authorised user's
            photograph and attesting that they have completed within the
            previous two year period a course approved by the Council covering
            basic fire prevention, basic fire fighting and evacuation
            procedures.

     4.14.5 be readily identifiable by dress (eg, white coat, fluorescent
            jacket etc),

     4.14.6 be provided by the Holder with written instructions, approved by
            the Council, as to their general duties in order to fulfil the
            following functions:

            a)   the manning of exit gates, turnstiles and other strategic
                 points

            b)   the control and direction of spectators entering, using or
                 leaving the sports ground

            c)   patrolling the sports ground and dealing with any emergency,
                 including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire

     A designated number of stewards on duty in implementation of   this
     Condition shall have personal radio communication facilities   which the
     Holder shall ensure are in a proper working condition at all   times. The
     number of stewards and type and condition of equipment shall   be to the
     satisfaction of the Chief Constable.

     Where the public is admitted to the sports ground for the sale of tickets
     only and for no other activity, it shall be a sufficient discharge of the
     requirements of this Condition if the Holder ensures the attendance of
     sufficient stewards to ensure the orderly behaviour of the public during
     the period of sale.

     All stewards and other persons employed in the sports ground during its
     use for a specified activity shall be fully instructed as to their
     responsibilities in the event of an emergency and exercises for stewards
     and other persons employed within the stadium shall be carried out not
     less than once each playing season to test emergency procedures.

     The number of stewards required for particular events is given in
     Appendix III.


                                         12
4.15 Exit Gates - Attendance by Stewards

    All exit gates shall be attended bystewards throughout the entire period
    when spectators may be in the sports ground in connection with its use
    for a specified activity and it shall be the duty of such stewards to
    open the exit gates in the event ofan emergency and in any event not
    less than fifteen minutes before the anticipated end of the specified
    activity or at any other time on the request of a police officer. When
    opened for any reason, all exit gates shall be secured in the fully open
    position and kept free of all obstructions.

4.16 Positioning of Television Cameras etc

     Television cameras and portable equipment shall be restricted to posi­
     tions to be approved in advance by the Chief Constable on behalf of the
     Council and shall not be allowed to cause any obstruction to the police
     or emergency services in the carrying out of their duties.

4.17 Provision of Pirst-aid Medical Facilities and Aabalances

     The Holder shall provide and maintain within the sports ground a suitably
     equipped first aid room and shall ensure the attendance of properly
     trained first aid personnel in the ratio of one per 1,000 spectators on
     each occasion when the sports ground is in use for a specified activity,
     all   to the satisfaction    of the Council.

     The   Holder shall   employ     a medical practitioner to bepresent oneach
     occasion when the    sports ground is in use for a specified activity and
     available to deal    with any medical exigency at the ground for the period
     one hour prior to    the event to half an hour after the event.

     The practitioner's whereabouts shall be notified to those in the police
     control room and shall be immediately contactable.

     The medical practitioner shall be trained and competent in advanced first
     aid.

     The attendance of the first aid personnel shall not be considered to be
     necessary when the public is admitted to the sports ground for the sale
     of tickets only and for      no other specified activity.

     The   Holder shall employ    from the Scottish AmbulanceServicefully
     equipped and staffed ambulances in accordance with the undernoted table
     on each occasion when the sports ground is in use for a specified
     activity.

     Crowd Capacity                           Provision

     Less than 5000                           Nil
      5,000 - 25,000                          1 accident and emergency unit
     25,000 - 45,000                          2 accident and emergency units
     45,000 +                                 3 accident and emergency units




                                         13
4.18 Public Address System

     The Holder shall maintain for his own use and for the use of the police
     and emergency services as and when required while the sports ground is in
     use for a specified activity, a public address system capable of being
     heard under reasonable conditions by all spectators of normal hearing in
     any part of the sports ground and its immediate •nvirons to which
     spectators have a right of access. Such public address system shall be
     approved and be operated and controlled from a position to be approved,
     by the Chief Constable on behalf of the Council and shall be provided
     with an emergency power supply so that it, is capable of being operated at
     all times. The system shall be capable of control to individual areas and
     shall be installed such that when operated from the Police control, it
     shall override any other transmissions and audio systems. The public
     address system shall at all times be maintained by the Holder in good
     working order to the satisfaction of the Chief Constable on behalf of the
     Council.

     The wiring for the public address system shall be either MICC cable or
     PVC cable in conduit and the emergency source of power supply shall be
     provided from batteries kept at full capacity by trickle charging from
     the main supply.

4.19 Toilet Facilities

     The Holder shall ensure the provision and adequate maintenance to the
     satisfaction of the Council of sufficient toilet facilities, both male
     and female in all parts of the sports ground.


4.20 Sale of Tickets, Programmes and Refreshments - General

     In allocating premises or facilities for the sale of tickets, programmes
     or refreshments, the Holder shall take all necessary steps to ensure that
     such allocation does not obstruct entrance or exit routes in any way.


4.21 Provision of Refreshments

     The Holder shall ensure that all premises, appliances and equipment
     associated with the sale of refreshments are maintained in a safe and
     proper working condition at all times.

     All containers in which liquid refreshments are sold or distributed to
     spectators while the sports ground is in use for a specified activity
     shall be made of soft plastic or other soft material. This requirement
     shall not apply to any part of the sports ground to which access is given
     only at the specific personal invitation of the Holder.


4.22 Facilities for Authorised Persons

      The Holder shall make available adequate viewing and inspection facili­
      ties to authorised persons immediately before, during and after a speci­
      fied activity or at any other reasonable time when considered necessary
      by the Council.


                                         14
    4.23 Accommodation and Facilities for Lothian and Borders Police

         The Holder shall provide and maintain within the sports ground at his own
         expense suitable accommodation and facilities for the use of the police
         officers on duty in connection with the use of the sports ground for a
         specified activity. The accommodation provided shall be approved by, and
         be adequate to meet the requirements of, the Chief Constable and shall be
         maintained as aforesaid to the Chief Constable's satisfaction.


    4.24 Cutting Equipment

         The holder shall provide and maintain within the sports ground the
         following cutting equipment




«
         Designated stewards shall be trained to operate the equipment and the
         holder shall ensure attendance of two personnel at each event. The
         equipment will be released for use on the instruction of a nominated
         police officer.


    4.25 Stand and Stand Concourse

         4.25.1 All seating within the Stand shall be maintained securely fixed in
                position.

         4.25.2 All doors leading onto or between exit routes shall be half hour
                fire resisting, close fitting and*self closing and shall be so
                maintained.


         4.25.3 All final exit doors from the Stand shall open out, be fitted with
                panic bolts and shall be maintained in efficient working order.

                All doors fitted with panic bolts shall be indicated "POSH BAR TO
                OPEN" with a sign complying with British Standard 5499, Part 1:
                1984.

                If the Holder wishes to use slip bolts, chains and/or padlocks to
                afford additional security over and above that provided by panic
                bolts no exception will be taken to this provided any slip bolts,
                chains and/or padlocks are removed from the exit doors before the
                admission of spectators and are placed on a numbered master board
                in a central position to be approved by the Firemaster. No such
                slip bolt, chain or padlock shall be replaced until all spectators
                have left the stand.




                                          15
4.26 Electrical Fire Alarm System

    There shall be a manually operated electrical fire warning system
    comprising an adequate number of break glass call points and sounding
    devices installed to comply with British Standards 5839, Part 1: 1980.
    The call points shall be sited within the general area of the offices,
    dressing rooms, gymnasium, working areas such as the switch room/drying
    room, and shop.

    A red flashing light shall be provided and sited in the Police Control
    Area and shall be interlinked to the fire warning system in the sports
    ground so that on actuation of the fire warning system, visual indication
    is given to the Senior Police Officer present.

     Power for the fire alarm system shall be provided from batteries kept at
     full capacity by trickle charging from the mains supply and wiring shall
     be either MICC cable or PVC cable in conduit.


4.27 Provision of Emergency Signs and Notices

     4.27.1 A sign bearing the word 'EXIT’ in green block capital letters at
            least 125 mm high on a white background shall be provided through
            out the stand to provide clear guidance to all exit routes. Such
            signs shall be of the illuminated type and shall comply with
            British Standard 5266, Part 1: 1975 and British Standard 2560,
            1978. Where there is adequate illumination by the emergency
            lighting system, "EXIT* signs and, where necessary, directional
            arrows shall be provided and shall comply with British Standard
            5499, Part 1: 1984.

            On any occasion when a large number of foreign spectators is
            expected within the stadium, the Bolder shall provide additional
            exit notices in the appropriate language(s).



     4.27.2 All fire resisting doors which are required to be self closing and
            close fitting shall be indicated "FIRE DOOR KEEP SHOT" on both
            sides by signs complying with British Standard 5499, Part 1:
            1984.

     4.27.3 All final exit doors from the sports ground including the Stand,
            shall be clearly and permanently indicated on the outside of the
            door "FIRE EXIT KEEP CLEAR” by a sign complying with British
            Standard 5499, Part 1: 1984.


4.28 General and emergency lighting systems

     4.28.1 The general lighting systems in all parts of the sports ground
            accessible to spectators and participants and particularly on
            entrance and exit stairways, gangways and other routes shall
            comply with the CIBSE lighting guide and shall be maintained in a
            safe and efficient working condition, to ensure that spectators
            may enter, make use of or leave the sports ground safely.

                                      16
     4.28.2 A maintained emergency lighting system complying with British
            Standard 5266, Part 1: 1975 shall be provided in all parts of the
            sports ground accessible to spectators and participants and
            particularly on entrance and exit staircases, gangways and other
            routes. The system shall be maintained in a safe and efficient
            working condition to ensure that spectators may enter, make use of
            and leave the sports ground safely.


4.29 Fire Fighting equipment

     Portable fire fighting appliances of types approved by the Firemaster
     shall be located as indicated on the drawing listed in Part 6 of this
     Schedule and maintained at such points throughout the Stand to the
     satisfaction of the Firemaster.


4.30 Fire routine procedures

     The Holder shall take the necessary steps to instruct all staff, includ­
     ing stewards, likely to be working within the sports ground while it is
     in use for a specified activity, of the procedures to be adopted as
     undernoted in the event of an outbreak of fire being discovered, namely

     a)     The Fire Brigade to be summoned,

     b)     A responsible person or persons to proceed to the scene of the
            fire to find out if it has been extinguished or is under control,

     c)     Where the fire:

            i)    is affecting the stand seating or any exit therefrom,    or

            ii)   is located elsewhere within the Stand and is not under
                  control

            to take immediate steps to arrange the evacuation of the Stand by
            using the public address system.

     The full details of fire routine procedures shall be agreed with the
     Firemaster. Exercises to test fire routine procedures shall be carried
     out not less than once each playing season and may be so carried out in
     conjunction with the exercises referred to in Condition 14 of this part
     of this Schedule.


4.31 Use of Liquified Petroleum Gas

     The use of liquified petroleum gas within the sports ground will not be
     allowed.




                                       17
4.32    Testing of Systems

       The following arrangements shall be made by the Holder for the testing of
       the undernoted systems:

       4.32.1 Fire Alarm - the manual fire alarm systems shall be tested in
              accordance with the procedures set out in British Standard 5839
              Part 1, 1980.

       4.32.2 Emergency Lighting - the emergency lighting system shall be
              tested in accordance with the procedures outlined in British
              Standard 5266, Part 1: 1975,

       4.32.3 Public Address System - the public address system shall be
              tested at the same time as the fire alarm system and shall be
              checked to ensure that it operates correctly from both the normal
              and secondary power sources,

       4.32.4 Fire Fighting Equipment - the fire fighting equipment shall be
              checked and tested by a competent firm of fire engineers at
              regular periods, but not less often than once per annum.

       4.32.5 Boiler and Pressure Vessels - All boilers, calorifiers, water
              heaters and pressure vessels shall be inspected annually by a
              suitably qualified insurance inspector and a certificate obtained
              which lists all plant items covered, their condition, the
              condition of safety devices and whether the ventilation
              arrangements are satisfactory.


 4.33 Production of Annual Inspection Certificates and Reports

        Notwithstanding any reference within this Schedule to the period for
        production of annual inspection certificates or reports, the inspections
        shall be carried out during February or March of each year and a copy of
        the inspection certificates or reports pertaining to the following shall
        be delivered to the Council not later than 31 March each year.

        a)    Testing of crush barriers and handrails        (Clause 3.5)
        b)    Ground Condition                               (Clause 4.9)
        c)    Structural integrity of the Stand
               and Covered Enclosure                         (Clause   4.9)
        d)    Electrical Installation                        (Clause   4.10)
        e)    Fire alarm system                              (Clause   4.32.1)
        f)    Emergency lighting system                      (Clause   4.32.2)
        g)    Public address system                          (Clause   4.32.3)
        h)    Fire fighting equipment                        (Clause   4.32.4)
        i)    Boiler and pressure vessels                    (Clause   4.32.5)


 4.34 Rearrangement of Fixtures or Events

        Where, because of weather conditions, or for any other reason, it has
        become necessary to rearrange a fixture or event at short notice, the
        Chief Constable will be consulted before the revised date of the fixture
        or event has been finally decided and the fixture or event will not
        proceed unless adequate police coverage can be provided.

                                          18
4.35 Notices

     The Holder shall ensure that notices are prominently displayed at all
     entrances to the sports ground intimating that admission will be refused
     to any spectator carrying:

     a)    any glass, metal, earthenware or other similar container designed
            for the carriage of liquid, and

     b)    a container of any description which contains alcoholic liquor.

     c)        fireworks, flares and similar articles

     The notices shall also clearly indicate that any spectator subsequently
     found within the sports ground carrying such containers will be immedia­
     tely ejected therefrom. Sufficient stewards will be employed at the
     entrances to the sports ground to ensure that these restrictions are
     implemented. The Holder will provide receptacles at entrances for the
     disposal of cans, bottles and containers etc, and timeously remove these
     receptacles before the termination of the event.


4.36 Tickets

     Where it has been decided that admission to a match will be by ticket
     only, arrangements for the sale of tickets should be publicised as far in
     advance of the day of the match as possible. Tickets will not be sold at
     the sports ground or within the Region on the day of the match.

     The form of tickets shall be agreed by the Council.

     Information on tickets shall be unambiguous, simple and clear and shall
     correlate absolutely with the information provided in respect of each
     event both inside and outside the ground.

     Retained ticket stubs shall contain information necessary to guide
     spectators once inside the ground.


4.37 Gangways and Emergency Access Points on to Pitch

      All gangways shall be marked by painting in a suitable colour the tread
      and/or riser.

     Gangways shall be kept clear of viewing spectators.

      Emergency access points on to the pitch shall be kept clear of all
      advertising hoardings or obstructions at all times when the sports ground
      is in use for a specified event.




                                          19
4.38 General

     For the avoidance of doubt where any condition of this General Safety
     Certificate requires the provision of the services at the sports ground
     of members of the Lothian and Borders Police Force, the extent of the
     provision of such services shall be determined by the Chief Constable
     notwithstanding anything to the contrary in such Condition.

     Whilst any Condition of the General Safety Certificate is not fully
     complied with, the sports ground shall not be used for a specified
     activity except with the written consent of the Council.




                                       20
APPENDIX I

PART 5 - ATTENDANCE LIMITS


Area of Sports Ground


GRANDSTAND:             South    1102
                        Centre   1613
                        North    1101        3816

ENCLOSURE:               South    352
                        North     500         852

SEATED TERRACING:                2000        2000

TERRACING               South    8500
                        East     7090        15590


                        MAXIMUM ATTENDANCE   22258




                                        21
APPENDIX II

PART 6 - LOCATION OP PLANS



The following drawings are referred to in Parts 3.3, 3.4 3.5 and 4.29 of this
Schedule and form part of the General Safety Certificate.


(1) Site Plan     location of turnstiles and entrance gates

(2) Site Plan     location of exit gates

(3) Site Plan     location of crush barriers and handrails

(4) Site Plan     Pire fighting equipment.



TABLE 1 - LOCATION OP TURNSTILES OR ENTRANCE GATES

                                   Providing             Position           Number of
Part of Sports Ground              Access from           on Plan            Turnstiles

Grandstand and Enclosure South     Albion Road               1                  1-7
Terracing South                    Albion Road               2                  8-19
Terracing East                     Albion Avenue             3                 21-24
Terracing West                     Hawkhill Avenue           4                 25-28
Terracing North (seated)           Hawkhill Avenue           5                 29-30
Grandstand and Enclosure North     Albion Place              6                 31-34




TABLE 2 - LOCATION OP EXIT GATES

                                                 Position        Number        Min width
Part of Sports Ground        Exit to             on Plan         of Exits      of Exits


Grandstand & Enclosure
(South)                   Albion Road                A                           3.00 m
Ditto                     Albion Road                B                           3.600m
Terracing (South)         Albion Road                C                           6.100m
Terracing (South)         Albion Road                D                           5.200m
Terracing (East)          Hawkhill Ave (3 gates)     E                          14.700m
Terracing (North)         Hawkhill Avenue            P                           6.100m
Grandstand & Enclosure
(North)                      Albion Place            G                            4.5 m




                                            22
TABLE 3 - LOCATION OF CRUSH BARRIERS AND HANDRAILS




TABLE 4 - FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT




                                      23
APPENDIX IV

PART 8 - RECOMMENDED IMPROVEMENTS
                                  THB TAYSIDB REGIONAL COUNCIL

                               SAFETY OF 8PORT8 GROUNDS ACT, 1975

  THE DUNDEE UNITED FOOTBALL COMPANY LIMITED - TANKADICE PARK, DUNDEE


                                     GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


We,    THE        TAYSIDE       REGIONAL COUNCIL, CONSIDERING that            we      received          an
Application dated 24th December, 1976 from J.                     Johnston Grant, Chairman
of the Board of Directors of The Dundee United Football Company Limited
for    a     General Safety Certificate under the Safety of                        Sports    Grounds
Act, 1975 in respect of Tannadice Park, Dundee, a Stadium designated by
the     Safety of Sports Grounds (Designation)                  (Scotland) Order, 1976 as a
Stadium       requiring          a    Safety      Certificate   under       said     Act,     FURTHER
CONSIDERING          that       we    issued to the said J.      Johnston          Grant    and        his
successors           in office as Chairman foresaid (hereinafter referred to                             as
"the       Holder")        a    General Safety Certificate in respect                of     the        said
Tannadice          Park        dated 15th June, 1978 together with a first Notice                        of
Amendment           thereto       dated     8th    May, 1979;   FURTHER       CONSIDERING              that
following upon an appeal by the Holder against the inclusion of certain
matters in the said General Safety Certificate as amended by said first
Notice        of     Amendment,        we     issued to the Holder      a    second        Notice        of
Amendment           dated 24th September, 1980 containing amendments to the said
General           Safety       Certificate and first Notice of          Amendment          consequent
upon       the      determination           of said appeal by the Secretary of              State        of
Scotland;            FURTHER         CONSIDERING     that the Reporter       before        whom        said
appeal       was heard, recommended inter alia that we should in due course
issue        to     the Holder a new General Safety Certificate to                    replace           the
said       General Safety Certificate and the said first and second                           Notices
of     Amendment           thereto     which we have agreed to do;           THEREFORE,           we     do
hereby        issue to the Holder this General Safety Certificate in                          respect
of     the        said Tannadice Park the extent of which is as shown on Plan                             &
annexed and signed as relative hereto with details of the Stand therein
being shown separately on Plans B l . B2 and £ also annexed and signed as
relative           hereto and that on the terms and conditions contained in                             the
schedule           annexed       and signed as relative hereto which,               together           with
said Plans shall form part of the Certificate hereby issued;        DECLARING
that   the said General Safety Certificate dated 15th June,       1978 and the
said first and second Notices of Amendment dated 8th May,        1979 and 24th
September,   1980   respectively   shall be revoked and   this    Certificate
shall come into operation all as at the Ninth day of December, Nineteen

Hundred and Eighty Six.
                                       SCHEDULE


WRITTEN AGREEMENT ON SAFETY


There     shall be a written agreement between the club and the police
setting        out their respective responsibilities for crowd safety and
control and in particular for the filling of each terraced area and
the     monitoring          of spectators in each area to avoid        overcrowding,
any     variation          of the agreement in respect of an individual             match

should be agreed in writing in advance.


SPECIFIED ACTIVITIES FOR WHICH CERTIFICATE ISSUED


This Certificate is issued in respect of the use of Tannadice Park,
Dundee        (hereafter       referred    to as "Sports Ground")       for   football
matches        (hereinafter referred to as "the specified activities") on
every      occasion when these are held and spectators are admitted                    to
the     Sports Ground or any part thereof;              provided however that         the
terms and conditions of this Certificate shall not apply in respect
of     the use of the Sports Ground for practice or training                   sessions
 for    football          matches or other sporting events to which           not    more

 than five hundred non-paying spectators are admitted.


 Subject       to        the terms and conditions of this Certificate          and    any
 variation          or     amendment   thereto    and   to   any   general    statutory
 requirements             the Sports Ground may also be used for       the    following
 purposes ancillary to the specified activities, namely:-


 (a)    the playing of music or singing,
 (b)     the    provision        of news or comment relative to        the    specified

        activities,
 (c)     the sale of tickets for forthcoming football matches, the sale
         of     programmes,       news    sheets and souvenirs and      the    hire     of

         cushions,
 (d)     the sale and consumption of refreshments,
 (e)     public collections of any nature,
     (f)   any   other     activity   or purpose ancillary        to    the       specified
           activities      which has been approved by the Council in               writing
           at    least     fourteen   days in advance of the proposed              date   on
           which such other activity or purpose is intended.


3.   MAXIMUM NUMBERS OF SPECTATORS TO BE ADMITTED


     The   maximum   number     of spectators to be admitted to             the    Stadium

     shall be 19353.


     The   maximum number of spectators to be         admitted         to   the
     different parts of the Stadium shall be as follows:-



(a) MAIN STAND


     Area A - 362
     Area B - 574
     Area C - 513
     Area D - 803
                                                      2252

 (b) STAND ENCLOSURE                                   381

 (c) SOUTH WEST ENCLOSURE (FAMILIES)                  1255

 (d) WEST AND NORTH TERRACING                         8690

 (e) NORTH TERRACING                                  3408

 (f) EAST TERRACING                                   3060
                                                        119
 (g) PRIVATE VIEWING BOXES
 (h) DIRECTORS’ BOX                                      52

 (i) PRIVATE SEATING                                    118
                                                            18
 (j) SPONSORS BOX
                                                      19353


Accommodation for spectators in the main Stand seating, private viewing
 boxes     and     directors      seating,    shall    be        exclusively         seating
 accommodation.          Accommodation for spectators elsewhere in the               Stadium

 shall be exclusively standing accommodation.
ATTENDANCE RECORDS


The    Club      shall       keep    written    records of    the    total        number        of
spectators           who    are     present on every occasion       when      a     specified
activity        is held at the Sports Ground to include, separately,                            the
numbers        of     spectators admitted to the above          mentioned           different
parts     of        the    Sports     Ground;   and such     records    shall        be     made

available for examination by the Council if requested.



ENTRANCES TO SPORTS GROUND


The      Club       shall ensure that spectators (other than                 those    gaining
admission           to     the    private viewing boxes and      directors           seatings)
 shall     enter          the Sports Ground only by means of           the     computerised
 turnstiles          numbering       40   in total (or by so many of them              as       may
 reasonably require to be in use at any specified activity) situated

 at the locations marked T1 to T42 inclusive on Plan A-


 All     turnstiles when in use shall be manned for such a period                           prior
 to     the commencement of a specified activity and operated in such a
 way     as to control the admission by spectators to the sports ground

 in an orderly and well regulated manner.


 Each     turnstile           shall be inspected and its potential                rate of       flow
 measured.            Thereafter, regular inspections shall be made to ensure
 that      each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the

 rate anticipated.


 The      correlation between each viewing area in the Sports Ground and
 the      turnstiles serving it shall be such as to ensure that                           all    the
  spectators              intended    to be admitted to that viewing area can pass

  through the             turnstiles within one hour.


  Turnstiles              shall be closed when the permitted capacity of the area
  served        by       them is about to be reached and arrangements                 shall           be
  made     to        ensure quick and effective communication                with     turnstile

  operators for this purpose.
I




                                                   -   6    -




    6.   FINAL EXITS FROM THE STADIUM


         The club shall ensure that Spectators leave the Sports Ground only

         by means of:


         (a)   The     main exit eates numbering 11 in total and situated at the
               locations marked G1 to G3 inclusive and G5 to G12 inclusive on

               Plan A:-


               Each gate shall be:-


               (i)        fitted    with hinged doors capable of opening                      outwards
                          through     180    degrees             and   capable   of   being     opened
                          immediately by any person in an emergency;


               (ii)       kept     closed    before and during              specified    activities
                          unless     and until opened by the steward as hereinafter
                          provided        (or by any person other than the Steward                    in

                          time of emergency);


                (iii)     manned     as     soon       as the turnstiles are opened             by     at
                          least     one     steward who shall be provided with                  a     key
                          before     he     goes on duty and shall unlock the exit                     he
                          controls        before       the       sports ground is in use        for     a

                           specified activity.


                (iv)       opened and secured in a fully open position


                           (a)        during       the          15 minutes before the end of          any

                                      specified activity;


                           (b)        in    event          of an emergency       occurring     before,
                                      during or after any specified activity;



                           (c)        at any time on the request of a police or fire

                                      officer.
1




                                               - 7 -


                  In     any of these circumstances a gate shall be         closed
                  or      remain closed only on the instructions of a police

                   or fire officer.

          (v)      regularly       inspected       by the Club and maintained in   a
                   safe     and    proper state of repair and in good       working
                   order     and kept free from obstructions of any kind           at

                   all times;
                   and


          (vi)     provided with locks, all such locks to be on a master

                   suite


    (b)   The folding shutter exit door situated at the location marked

          G4 on Plan A and Plan Bl.


          Said door shall:-


          (i)      remain closed and attended by a Steward and capable of
                   being opened by anyone in a emergency


          (ii)     regularly           inspected   by the Club and maintained in    a
                    safe     and       proper state of repair and in good   working
                    order     and kept free from obstructions of any kind          at

                    all times.


    (c)   The    roller shutter at the exit door, for the use of spectators
          leaving the private viewing boxes/executive suite and situated

          at the location marked G4B on Plan A and PIfi.D— 2JL-


          Said Shutter shall be:-


           (1)     secured        in    a full open position from the    time   when
                    spectators enter the Sports Ground at the commencement
                    of     any specified activity (or at any time         beforehand
                    at     the request of a police or fire officer) and shall
                    remain open during the whole time thereafter while the
                    Sports Ground is in use for a specified activity.
                                                       -   8    -




            (ii)      regularly           inspected        by the Club and maintained in                   a
                      safe      and       proper state of repair and in good                       working
                      order         and kept free from obstructions of any kind                            at

                      all times.


7.   ACCESS FROM ENTRANCES AND TO EXITS


     The    means     of     access       leading directly from              all    turnstiles         and
     leading directly to all final exits shall be regularly inspected by
     the Club and the surfaces thereof shall be maintained in a safe and
     proper     state       of repair and when necessary re-laid and shall                            be

     kept free from obstructions of any kind at all times.



8.   DIVISION OF SPECTATOR ACCOMMODATION


     (a)    There     shall        be no direct means of access between                       segregated
            areas     at      any     time when the Sports Ground is in                      use     for     a
            specified         activity      except         in       the   event    of   an     emergency

            occurring;


      (b)   To provide for the segregation of spectators on the

            terracings:-


              (i)       there       shall    be    a       segregation       fence      at    the     west
                        boundary          wall of the South-west Enclosure situated at
                           the location mark "segregation fence" on Plan A",


              (ii)      the     North Terracing shall be divided by a segregation
                           fence and a barrier rail running in parallel and which
                           shall     be    maintained for the full depth of the                       North
                           Terracing       and    situated           at the locations         as     marked

                           "segregation fence" and "BR3" on Plan _A;


              (iii)        The east and north terracing shall be divided by a
                           segregation fence and barrier running in parallel
                           and shall be maintained for the full depth of the
                           Terracing and situated at the locations as marked

                           "segregation fence and "BRA" on Plflll .A*
iv)       the       non-viewing area behind the North Terracing shall
          be        divided      by     a segregation fence     which     shall    be
          maintained             for    the full depth of this area from          the
          rear        of    the terracing to the boundary of the             Sports
          Ground           and         situated   at   the    location       marked

          "segregation fence extension" on flfln A-


          The        gates       within     all segregation fences on       £IaD— A
          shall        be     kept closed and padlocked and manned by              at
          least        one       Steward     during the whole    time     when    the
          Sports           Ground is in use for a specified activity, and
          that Stewards shall at all such times be in possession

          of a key to said padlocks.




To     provide for the better control of spectators leaving the
Stadium        by    means of the exit route at the rear of               the     West
Terracing, a barrier rail shall be maintained adjacent to said
exit     route and situated at the location as marked                     "BR2"     on
Plan a so as to divide the West Terracing in such a                       way as to
direct     spectators leaving from the north of said barrier rail

to use said exit route.


To     provide for better control of spectators entering the west
terracing           there shall be provided an outward opening gate                 at
the     south west corner of said terrace, which will be used                       as
an     exit gate only and only opened after commencement of                       play

or at any other time in an emergency.


All     structures, including fences, barriers, gates or railings
dividing        or     sub-dividing the different parts of the               Stadium
shall     be        of a strength no less than that recommended in                 the
Green     Code        for handrails dividing stairways             into    channels;
and     they        shall     be tested along with and in like            manner    as

handrails (See Clause 9).


All gates in radial fences shall be painted in different
 colours from the rest of the fence and clearly marked

 "Emergency Exit".
      The    provisions            of Clause 11 as regards notification             of    the
      date     of     the annual inspection and test, repair,                   replacement
      and    removal         all     in   relation    to    handrails     and     also    the
      provisions        of     Clause      11   as regards     records     of     tests       on
      handrails        shall apply equally in relation to said                   structures

      and fences, barriers, gates and railings.




CRUSH BARRIERS, BARRIER RAILS AND HANDRAILS


(a)   General


      type,       strength,         height,     length     and spacing    of     all     crush
      barriers        and      barrier-rails,        and     handrails,    shall         be in
      accordance        with        the recommendations contained in             the     Green

      Code.


(b)    Crush Barriers


       Crush        barriers        throughout the Sports Ground numbering               80    in
       total        shall be maintained at the existing             locations as marked
       N1    to     N43 inclusive, W1 to W20 inclusive, El to E14 inclusive

       and SI to S10 inclusive on Plan A.


(c)    Barrier Rails


       Barrier        Rails throughout the Sports Ground numbering                       10    in
       total        shall be maintained at the existing             locations as marked

       BR1 to       BRIO inclusive on Plan A and £l§n_£-


       Barrier        Rails shall have an equivalent strength to                   that        of
       handrails at right angles or parallel to the direction of flow
       (as     the case may be) referred to in paragraph 13 of the Green
       Code;         and they shall be tested along with and in like manner

       as handrails (See Clause 11).
                                                 - 11 -


   (d)    H andrails


          Handrails      throughout the Sports Ground numbering 16 in                  total
          shall        be maintained at the existing locations as                marked HIto

          H16 inclusive on Plan A            and Plftn 81-


          Without prejudice of the foregoing generality:




          (i)        the      handrails      on the stairway (marked S2 on Flap— t)
                     leading      to the     folding shutter exit door marked          G4 on
                     Plan A and which extend from the foot of said stairway
                     onto the flat or level area at the foot thereof (being
                       the    three handrails marked H6 to H8 inclusive on said
                       Plan)    shall contain side hinged outward opening gates
                       within     the    handrails    which   gates   shall      have    the
                       facility       to open against the handrails and within the

                       line of the said exit door.


           (ii)        the handrails on the stairway (marked SI on £las_A) «t
                       the     south-east corner of the Stadium (being the               five
                       handrails        marked   HI   to H5 inclusive on      said      plan)
                       shall     be     maintained    down the whole length       of     said

                       stairway, as shown on said plan.


           (iii)       the     handrails     on the stairway near to       the    souvenir
                       shop     (being the handrails marked H15 and H16 on               Elan
                       Bl)     shall be maintained so as to divide said stairway
                       into two equal sections down the centre line thereof.



10. BALUSTRADING


    The    sections of balustrading which lie at the foot of stairways or
    gangways       or elsewhere within the Stadium shall have an                 equivalent
    strength to that of crush barriers of the stronger type referred to
in     paragraphs     8.12 and 13 of the Green Code;    and they    shall    be
tested     along with and in like manner as crush barriers (See Clause

11).


The     provisions of Clause 11 as regards notification of the date of
the     annual inspection and test, the provision for emergency tests,
reports        on   the   tests,   repair, replacement and   removal   all   in
relation        to crush barriers and also the provisions of Clause 12 as
regards        records of tests on crush barriers shall apply equally        in

relation to said sections of balustrading.


INSPECTION AND TEST OF CRUSH BARRIERS, BARRIER-RAILS ETC.


In this Clause and in Clause 12, all references to crush barriers

shall include:-


 (a)    the crush barriers referred to in Clause 9(b), and


 (b)     the sections of balustrading referred to in Clause 10; and


 (c)     all references to handrails inclusive of:-


         (i)         the structures dividing or sub-dividing the difference
                    part of the Stadium referred to in Clause 8;


         (ii)        the barrier rails referred to in Clause 9(c)      and


         (iii)       the handrails referred to in Clause 9(d)



 Inspections


 All     crush barriers and all handrails shall be maintained in a safe
 and     proper state of repair at all times and shall be inspected           at
 least once very year by an independent firm of Structural Engineers

 appointed by the Club.
Tcoting.

Twenty        per     cent of all crush barriers and twenty per cent of                         all
barrier-rails             shall     be tested in every second year by            recognised
Testing        Specialists          appointed by the Club all in accordance                     with
the     requirements           of    Appendix C of the Green Code and            so        as     to
ensure        that every crush barrier and every barrier-rail shall be

tested at least once in any period of ten years.


The     Club shall notify the Council in writing at least twenty-eight
days     in      advance thereof of (i) the proposed dates of                    the       annual
inspection            and biennial testing,         (ii) the precise location of                 all
crush barriers and barrier-rails to be tested and (iii) the name of
the     firm        of    Structural Engineers and Testing Specialists                     to     be

engaged for these purposes.


 If     the    Council         has reasonable cause to believe           that     any       crush
 barrier       or        barrier-rail       might not be capable of        satisfying            the
 requirements             of   a    test under Appendix C of The Green            Code,          the
 Council may require the Club, on giving them at least fourteen days
 prior        written notice to include such crush barrier or barrier-rail
 within        the       scope of any biennial test.         If the   Council          consider
 that     the        testing of such crush barrier or barrier-rail should                          be
 carried        out as a matter of urgency, independently of any                       biennial
 test, they may require the Club, on giving them at least seven days
 prior written notice, to arrange for such a test to be carried out.


 The     Club        shall     afford       the   Council   the   opportunity         of        being
 represented             at    any annual inspection, biennial test or                emergency
 test      and       shall      arrange      for a Report thereof     to    be    issued           to
 themselves           and      simultaneously       to the Council by      the    Structural
 Engineers and Testing Specialists as soon as possible.


 Any     crush barrier or barrier-rail which is stated in any Report or
 Certificate from the Structural Engineers or Testing Specialists to
 be     in     need       of    maintenance or repair        following     the     inspection
 thereof         or      which      fails    to meet the    prescribed     test        shall       be
 repaired, strengthened or replaced as necessary within six weeks of
 the     date         of such Report or Certificate and within a                 further          two
                                          - 14 -


   weeks     shall    be    reinspected or retested in      accordance     with    the

   requirements of Appendix C of The Green Code.


   Any     crush     barrier or barrier rail which requires to        be    replaced
   shall     be removed by the Club immediately upon their receiving                the
   Structural        Engineers'   or     Testing   Specialists'   Report    of     such

   defect.


12. RECORDS OF INSPECTIONS AND TESTS ON CRUSH BARRIERS, BARRIER-RAILS

   ETC.
   The Club shall keep written records of:-


    (a)    The date of all annual inspections, biennial tests and

           emergency tests.


    (b)    The Reports and Certificates issued by the Structural
           Engineers and the Testing Specialists following thereon.


    (c)    The precise location of all crush barriers and barrier-rail
           with     reference to every biennial test and emergency test.


    (d)    The     precise location of all crush barriers and        barrier-rails
           which     are repaired, strengthened or replaced at any time             and
           the     date    when such repair, strengthening or replacement           was

           carried out.


13. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS RE:          EAST TERRACING


           East Terracing Fences and Passageway


           There shall be maintained on the East Terracing:-


           (i)        Steel mesh fence at the location marked "chain link

                      fence" on Plan A :


            (ii)      Concrete    post    and rail fence at the location          marked
                      "concrete post and rail fence" on Plan A:
                                           - 15 -


          (iii)     Between      the     fences   adjacent      to      the     northeast
                    flood-lighting        pylon, a lateral passageway at the top
                    of     the   terracing at the existing location as                marked

                    "passageway" on Plan A ;


          (iv)      Palisade     fence     forming   the east        boundary    of    the
                    Sports Ground as marked "palisade fence" on Plan A.

14. SEATING ACCOMMODATION IN STAND


    (a)   All seats within the main Stand seating shall be maintained
          securely fixed in position at all times.


    (b)   All gaps or spaces directly under the main Stand seating shall
          be     kept free of all debris, litter and combustible materials,
          and     shall    be completed cleared of such after each              specified

          activity.


15. ACCESS FROM MAIN STAND SEATING TO EXITS


    (a)   Travel distance from seating to exits


          The     seating accommodation and gangways within the main                   Stand
          shall     be maintained so as to ensure that the travel                 distance
          for spectators from any part of the main Stand to at least one
          exit from the main Stand does not exceed 30 metres.


    (b)   Gangways


          All gangways within the main stand shall be


          (i)       a     minimum of 1.1 metres in width without              projections
                     and    in every case sufficiently wide for the number of

                     seats served thereby, and


          (ii)      properly      maintained in a safe condition and kept free
                      from obstructions of any kind at all times.


    (c)   Stairways and other exit routes
                                                -    16 -


          (i)      all     stairways           and other exit routes within the               main
                    Stand     (the       7     main stairways and exit          routes       being
                    marked "A" to "G" inclusive on Plan Bl and Plgn P2 and
                    Plan     C)     shall       be     properly    maintained      in    a    safe
                    condition           and kept free from obstructions of any kind

                    at all times.


          (ii)     there     shall        be        maintained across the     head      of     the
                    stairways           leading       from turnstiles T14 and T15/16             as
                    marked        on Plan A at the ground floor level within the
                    Stand,        locking           lever arm barriers (as marked            "lever
                    barrier 1" and "lever barrier 2" respectively on


                    Plan     Bl).        The Club shall ensure that these               barriers
                    are     locked in position across said stairs immediately
                    following           the    closure      of    said   turnstiles      at     the
                    commencement              of any specified activity and remain               so
                    locked        during the whole time while the Stadium is                     in
                    use for a specified activity.


                    Said barriers shall be regularly inspected by the Club
                    and      maintained             in a safe and proper state of            repair

                    and in good working order at all times.

16. ACCESS FROM TERRACINGS TO EXITS


    (a)   Gangways and exit routes


          All     gangways        and    other exit routes          within   the     Terracings
           (including the Stand Enclosure and South West Enclosure) shall

          be: -


           (i)      a minimum of 1.1 metres in width and


           (ii)     properly maintained in a safe condition and kept free
                     from obstructions of any kind at all times.
                                                           - 17 -


   (b)    East Terracing


          Reference         is     made       to the provisions in         Clause       13(iii)      in

            relation to the passageway mentioned therein.



17. TELEVISION CAMERAS


   The siting of television structures, cameras and relative equipment
    shall     be    restricted           to    positions to be approved            by    the       Chief
    Constable       and     the     Council in advance of their being                   set    up     or

    altered.


    Cameras        and    equipment           shall be located so as not           to    cause       any
    obstruction           to     the     police     or    emergency       services       (including
    stewards) in the carrying out of their functions and duties.



18. MAINTENANCE OF TELEVISION PLATFORM


    The     metal        platform upon which television personnel,                      cameras      and
    relative        equipment are positioned shall be regularly inspected                             by
    the Club so as to ensure that it is at all times maintained without
    any risk to the safety of the spectators or others underneath or in

    the vicinity thereof.


    The Club shall ensure that said platform is inspected at least once
    every year by an independent firm of Structural Engineers appointed
    by    the      Club     at     the    same     time    that     the    crush     barriers        and
    barrier-rails are so inspected in accordance with Clause 11.


    The     Club      shall further ensure that said platform and the                          lifting
    device      for       the cameras and equipment are at all times capable                           of
    bearing        the     loads       which they are required to sustain;                    and     the
    platform        and     lifting       device     shall both be marked            with      a     sign

    specifying the safe working load.
                                              -   18 -


   The     provisions of Clause 11 as regards notification of the date of
   the     annual    inspection, reports following the inspection,                        repair,
   replacement       and       removal     all in relation to        crush        barriers     and
   barrier-rails         and     also    the provisions of Clause            12     as    regards
   records     of    inspections on crush barriers and barrier-rails                         shall
   apply equally in relation to the television platform.


19. MAINTENANCE OF FLOODLIGHTING PYLONS


   The     provisions          of Clause     18 (other      than    the   third          paragraph
    thereof)    shall apply equally, and separately in relation to all of

    the Floodlighting Pylons within the Sports Ground.


    Reference       is   made     to the document issued by the              Directorate        of
    Telecommunications, St.              Andrew’s House, Edinburgh, dated November,
    1977    and entitled "Masts and Towers provided by Local                        Authorities
    for Police and Fire Services radio schemes." It is recommended that
    the    provisions          of that     document      relating    to   inspections          and
    examinations         of    the masts and towers referred to therein should be
    followed, so far           as applicable, by the firm of Structural Engineers
    carrying    out       the annual inspection of the flood              lighting          pylons
    within the Sports Ground and accordingly brought to their notice in

    advance thereof by the Club.
                                                - -19



20. MAINTENANCE OF SPORTS GROUND GENERALLY


    (a)   General


          In addition to the specific requirements of this Clause and of
          any other provision contained in this Certificate, it shall be
          the responsibility of the Club to inspect and to maintain in a
          good     and    safe      state of repair           at all times, the           whole      and
          every     part of the Sports Ground                 including all structures               (to
          include         those    not      subject      to    any    specific            inspections
          examinations        or        tests),    all        fittings       and     fixtures,       all
          installations           and     facilities,         all    fire     safety        and     other
          equipment,        all     turnstiles, all           fences, gates and doors,               all
          stairways        and other exit routes, all gangways and seating and
          generally        every        other     item   which might         have        any    bearing
          whatsoever upon the safety at the Sports Ground.


          The     Club shall carry out, without delay, such works of repair
          and     maintenance       within the Sports Ground as may be                         required

          from time to time.


    (b)   In particular but without prejudice to the foregoing:-


            (i) General Inspection between matches


                   During     the period between successive uses of the Sports
                   Ground     for specified activities, the Club shall arrange
                    for    a general visual inspection to be made of the whole
                   Sports Ground for any sign of damage to any part thereof
                   which     might        create a potential danger                 to     spectators.
                   Particular           attention should be paid to the condition of
                    the     Terracings            including         the     Stand,        Enclosures,
                    stairways and exit routes.                Crush barriers, balustrades,
                   handrails        and     barrier      rails should          be        examined     for
                    deformation or any other overt signs of weakness.
(ii)   Surfaces


       The    surfaces of every part of all pathways,                      stairways,
       gangways,       terracings,       accesses      and exits          within        the
       Sports       Ground over which spectators may have reasonable
       cause to pass shall be maintained at all times in a good
       state of repair free from ruts, potholes, depressions or
       other defects and obstructions of any kind.




                                                             i

(iii) Structures


       All     steel     work     and fabric (including            the     television
       platform        and the floodlighting pylons) shall be treated
       as     and    when    required      to    prevent      deterioration              to
       structural strength and condition all in accordance with
       the      recommendations         given     in    the        relevant            B.S.

       specification and codes of practice.


 (iv) Detailed Annual Inspection


       At     least once every year, the Club shall arrange for                               a
       detailed        inspection     to    be made of           the   whole       Sports
       Ground,       including all structural items in every part of
        the     Sports Ground and the fabric thereof, all                      fixtures
        and fittings, installations, facilities and equipment so
        as to ensure that any defect, missing item or inadequacy
        is    forthwith       repaired     or replaced;            that     any        other
        damage       is made good and that the Club is complying with
        the      whole       terms   and        conditions        of   this        Safety
        Certificate         and   the recommendations contained                   in     the

        Green Code.
         (v)   Inspection by Regional Council Representatives


               On a regular basis representatives from Police, Fire and
               Roads      Departments, Tayside Region, will by             arrangement
               with      the      Club, carry out detailed inspections           of    the
               whole Sports Ground and report thereon to the Council to
               ensure        that the Club is complying with the whole                terms
               of     the      Safety    Certificate     and    the    recommendations
               contained in the Green Code.             A copy of such report will

               be sent to the Club.


        (vi) Records of defects and repairs


               The Club shall keep written records of the date when any
               defect,         missing item or inadequacy is discovered during
               any       detailed or general inspection of the Sports Ground
               and       the      date   and   nature   of     the    remedial    action
               subsequently taken or work carried out.



        (vii) Removal of Litter


               All       litter      and debris accumulated as a result          of     any
                 preceding         specified    activity shall be removed to           safe
                 storage before the Sports Ground’s further use.



ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO SPORTS GROUND


Alterations         and/or        additions (whether permanent or temporary)              to
any     part     of the Sports Ground (including all structural items                     in
every     part      of      the    Sports Ground and     the    fabric    thereof,       all
fixtures       and fittings, installations, facilities and equipment and
the     placement of television cameras and relative equipment)                        shall
not be carried out except with the prior consent of the Council.


Such     consent shall be additional to any planning, building control

or other consent required by the Club.
                                                        - 22 -

   Notice        in     writing           shall    be given by the            Club       to    the       Council
   (addressed           to        the     Director       of Law and         Administration)              of     any
   proposed           alterations           or     additions          and     such    notice         shall       be
   accompanied           by        full     details          and,     as    and   when        necessary          or
   appropriate,              by        drawings, calculations and                 specifications.               The
   work     shall        not           be started until the approval in writing                          of     the

   Council has been obtained.


   Alterations           and/or           additions           approved by the        Council         in       terms
   hereof        shall        be        required to meet            any     relevant      recommendations
   contained           in the Green Code unless the Council are satisfied                                      that
   it     would        be impracticable or otherwise unreasonable to insist                                      on

   compliance in full with the recommendation.


22. RAIN, SNOW AND ICE CLEARANCE


   When      any part of the Sports Ground to which spectators have access
    and     in    particular              any     part of the          surfaces      of       the     pathways,
    stairways,          gangways,            terracings,            accesses and exits              within       the
    Sports       Ground over which spectators may pass, has been affected by
    rainwater,           flooding,              snow    or      ice which is still             lying      on     the
    affected areas on the day immediately prior to the day on which the
    Sports       Ground            is to be in use for a specified activity, the                                Club
    shall        take        all        necessary        measures to ensure           that,         so    far     as
    reasonably           practicable,              the        affected areas are          cleared         of     all
    accumulations                 of     water,        snow     and    ice, prior        to    the       time     of
    admission           of spectators to the Sports Ground;                          and it shall be the
    responsibility                 of     the     Club to       satisfy themselves             prior      to     the
    admission of spectators to the Sports Ground that the Sports Ground
    and every part thereof as aforesaid to which spectators have access
    have     been        cleared of accumulation of water, snow and ice                                   to     the
    extent that the affected areas are as far as reasonably practicable
    free     from hazards and otherwise safe for all manner of                                       spectators
    while entering, remaining within and leaving the Sports Ground.


    The     Club        shall           bring     these        provisions to       the        notice of          the
    respective           Secretaries              of The Scottish Football Association,                          The
    Scottish           Football           League and any other Body responsible                           for    the

    rearrangement of fixtures.
                                                    - 23 -


23. REARRANGEMENT OF FIXTURES


   Where      because of weather conditions or for any other reason it has
    become       necessary to rearrange a fixture, the Club shall give                           such
    prior     notice           as     shall in the opinion of the Chief         Constable             be
    sufficient           for        him   to arrange for the provision of          such     police
    services        at      the       rearranged fixture as he shall determine              to        be
    necessary         or       expedient, irrespective of whether the new date                       was
    determined           by the Club or The Scottish Football Association or The
    Scottish Football League or any other Football Body or Association.


    In     the    event that the Chief Constable does not, in                    his      opinion,
    receive sufficent notice of any rearranged fixture and is therefore
    unable       to      arrange          for the attendance of an       adequate      number         of
    police officers thereat, the fixture shall pot proceed.


24. POSTPONEMENT OF KICK OFF


    The option to postpone kick-off shall be at the discretion of the
    officer in command at the ground.                        Crowd safety shall be the
    paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.



25. NOMINATION OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON


    On      every     occasion when a specified activity is to be held at                            the
     Sports      Ground the Club shall nominate a responsible person to take
     charge      of      the        Sports      Ground   on the Club’s    behalf      and       to     be
     continually            present        therein from at least sixty minutes prior                   to
     until       at least fifteen minutes after the specified activity and in
     such     other         case for such further period as his attendance may                         be
     required         for       safety reasons.          Such nominated person shall not               be
     engaged        on      any       duties     which will prevent      him   from    exercising
     general        supervision            of    the Sports Ground on behalf of           the        Club

     during the whole of said period.


     The     Club        shall keep a written record of the person                 nominated           in
     accordance            with       this Clause at every specified activity and                    this
     information            shall be made available for examination by the Council

     if requested.
                                     - 24 -


26. ARRANGEMENTS FOR ATTENDANCE OF POLICE OFFICERS


    The Club shall arrange at their own expense for the provision of
    police services at the Sports Ground while it is in use for a
    specified activity.     The extent of the provision of police services
    shall on each occasion be a matter to be determined by the Chief

    Constable.


27. POLICE ACCOMMODATION


    The    Club   shall provide and maintain within the Sports   Ground   at
    their own expense accommodation and facilities suitable for the use
    of police officers and adequate in the Chief Constables opinion for

    their requirements in policing the Sports Ground.


28. ARRANGEMENTS TO BE MADE OR CONFIRMED BETWEEN THE CLUB AND THE
    CHIEF CONSTABLE BEFORE EVERY SPECIFIED ACTIVITY


    The    Club   shall   within such time as in the opinion of the Chief
     Constable is reasonable prior to every specified activity consult
     the Chief Constable and confirm arrangements in connection with


     (a)   the attendance of Police Officers at a specified activity,



     (b)   the    admission of spectators to the specified activity, and in
           particular whether admission should be by ticket only,


     (c)   the segregation of home and visiting supporters at the

           specified activity,


     (d)   the nomination of a responsible person in terms of Condition

           25 hereof, and


     (e)    the precise number and location of the turnstiles to bel in use
            for   the admission of spectators to the specified ac 1iv Lty and
            the allocation of turnstiles to O.A.P.*s, juveniles, et
                                                - 25 -


29. STEWARDS AND CLUB STAFF


    The    Club shall be responsible for the recruitment of a                 sufficient
    number           of stewards to undertake certain functions and             duties      in
    connection with the safety of persons at the Sports Ground.


    All    stewards so recruited shall be physically and mentally fit, of
    good     physique        and     capable of carrying out      their    functions     and
    duties          at all     times.        Stewards shall preferably not be     over      60

    years of age.


    The     Club shall be responsible for the instruction and training                      of
    stewards and all other staff employed by the Club in performance of
    their     functions        and duties, the allocation of specific             functions
    and     duties     to specific stewards, the conduct of stewards and staff
    within          the Sports Ground and the due and proper implementation and
    performance by the stewards and staff of their functions and duties
    including        such     functions and duties as may be recommended by                 the
    Chief Constable and Firemaster as hereinafter mentioned.


    The      Club     shall        prepare     and issue to all stewards    and     staff        a
     booklet containing a list of the locations within the Sports Ground
     where stewards are to be positioned together with the functions and

     duties to be carried out by stewards and staff


     (a)     in     terms     of     this     Certificate   and   in   particular      Clause

             6(a)(iii) hereof;              and also;


     (b)     in relation to:-


             (i)      the control and direction of spectators entering, using

                      and leaving the Sports Ground;


             (ii)     patrolling the Sports Ground to ascertain any potential
                      or actual fire or other hazard or emergency;
       (iii) dealing           with    any        potential or actual           fire     or    other
              hazard       or emergency to include raising the fire                           alarm,
              summoning          the        Fire Brigade, evacuating spectators                     and
              extinguishing any fire;                    and


(c)    as otherwise determined by the Club in the best interests of
       safety at the Sports Ground.


Thefunctions and duties of stewards and staff as laid down by the
Club    and   any        amendments,          additions or variations              by    the     Club
thereto       shall       be    notified          to     the        Chief   Cbnstable     and       the
Firemaster.


At     each   match,       there shall be on the perimeter track,                        for     each
self-contained           terraced area, a steward (if the club is monitoring
that     area)     or a police officer (if the police are monitoring                                it)
whose     sole     duty        is to check crowd conditions in                   that    area       for
possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
occupied      by     spectators.             Whoever       is so appointed         shall       be     in
addition      to     any other steward or police presence.                        He shall          have
ready access by radio to the control room.


Stewards      with       duties        in     relation         to    the    terraced     areas       and
especially         those with duties under Recommendation above, shall                                be
fully     briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of                                  crowd
densities,         to     the recognition of signs of distress and                        to     crowd
dynamics.          Training shall include demonstrations at the ground and
photographs,            designed       to enable stewards to                recognise     different

crowd densities.


The Chief Constable or the Firemaster shall be entitled at any time
 to    make   recommendations                to    the    Club        in    connection    with       any
 functions       or duties to be carried out by stewards and staff or for
 the    amendment or variation of their existing functions or                                  duties.
 In so far as any such recommendations are accepted by the Club they
 shall either be included in a revised booklet which shall be issued
 by    the Club to all stewards and staff or shall, with the                                  approval
                                                   - 27-




    of    the Chief Constable and the Firemaster, be issued by the                               Club,
    and    in    name of the Club, to all stewards and staff as a                             separate
    document         or    supplement in the form in which                the    recommendations
    were submitted by the Chief Constable and/or the Firemaster.


    The    Club       shall,      however,        accept     and   issue    as    aforesaid           any
    recommendations              by    the     Chief   Constable     or    the    Firemaster           in
    connection            with any function or duty to be carried out by stewards
    or    staff which is or may hereafter become a function or duty to be


•
    so carried out in terms of this Certificate.


    On    every occasion when a specified activity is held at the                               Sports
    Ground      the        Club       shall    ensure that there        shall    be        continually
    present       within the Sports Ground from at least sixty minutes prior
    to    and until at least fifteen minutes after the specified activity
    such     number of stewards and other staff as are necessary to ensure
    compliance            with the provisions and conditions of this                       Certificate
    and     the proper implementation and performance by the stewards                                 and
    staff of their functions and duties.


    All stewards must at all times be readily identifiable by dress
    (e.g. white coat, fluorescent jacket).


    The     Club       shall also ensure that all stewards, and                       in    particular
    those       with       functions or duties in connection with the manning                          of
    gates and the control and direction of spectators along exit routes
    generally,            shall       have    ready access at al times           to        loud hailer
    equipment.


    In     addition         to    any other arrangements made by the Club                      for    the
    instruction            and training of stewards and staff in the                        performance
    of     their functions and duties, the Club shall arrange on not                                 less
    than     two occasions during each playing season for all stewards and
    staff       to     attend         the     Sports Ground for     a     detailed          review    and
    explanation            of the functions and duties of stewards and staff                          and
    the     carrying         out of practical exercises in connection                        therewith.
    The     Club shall keep a written record of the dates when such review
    and     exercises were carried out.                    Every new steward starting                shall
    be made fully aware of the functions and duties required of him.
                                                 -   28   -




   When     the     public are admitted to the sports ground solely for                      the
   purchase        of     tickets, the Club shall ensure that on each                  occasion
   there     are        continually present within the area where                tickets     are
   sold a sufficient number of                 Stewards and other staff       to ensure that
   the     procedure           is    carried out in an         orderly manner and    with    due
   regard to the safety of the persons present on such occasion.



30. ALL TICKET MATCHES

    (a)    The decision as to whether admission to any specified activity
           should be           byticket only shall rest with the,Club;               but   before
           reaching            such       decision   the      Club shall   consult    the Chief
           Constable to obtain his views.                     See also Clause 28(b).


    (b)    Where        admission          to any specified activity is by ticket            only
           the     Club        shall ensure that the arrangements for the sale                 of
           tickets         are       as    far in advance of the day of        the    specified
            activity           as possible.      Tickets shall not be        sold at or in the
           vicinity            of the Sports Ground after 12 noon on the day of any
            specified           activity      which is to be held in the         afternoon     of
            that        day;    and likewise, shall            not be sold as aforesaid after
            5.00        p.m.    where the specified            activity is to be held in      the

            evening.


     (c)    Information on tickets shall be unambiguous, simple and clear
            and shall correlate absolutely with the information provided
            in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground.
            Retained ticket stubs shall contain information necessary to

            guide spectators once inside the ground.


     (d)    The     Club shall ensure that information on tickets                     requesting
            spectators              to be in position by a particular time corresponds
            with        the planned arrangements for admitting spectators to the

            ground.
                                                  - 29 -


31. FIRST-AID ROOM, MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES


    The Club shall provide and maintain within the Sports Ground to the
    satisfaction of the Council a suitably equipped first-aid room.


    There     shall     be    at the Sports Ground at each match at              least     one
    trained     first aider per 1,000 spectators.                 The club shall have the
    responsibility for securing such attendance.


    The     club shall employ a medical practitioner to be present at each
    match     and     available       to    deal with any medical       exigency    at     the
    ground.         He shall be trained and competent in advanced first                   aid.
    He    shall be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off
    and     shall     remain until half an hour after the end of              the    match.
    His     whereabouts shall be known to those in the police control room
    and he shall be immediately identifiable and contactable.


    One     fully     equipped        ambulance    from     the    appropriate     ambulance
    authority         shall        be in attendance at all matches with an expected
    crowd      of     up to 10,000.         Over 10,000    in attendance there shall        be

    two fully equipped ambulances in attendance


    The attendance of first-aid personnel shall not be necessary when
     the public is admitted to the Stadium for the sale of tickets only.



32. TOILET FACILITIES


    The      Club     shall    provide and maintain to the satisfaction              of    the
     Council        sufficient       toilet facilities both male and female in             all

     parts of the Sports Ground.


 33. PARKING OF VEHICLES INSIDE THE STADIUM


     Apart from emergency vehicles (i.e.                  police, fire, ambulance, etc.)
     no   other vehicles shall be parked in any part of the Sports Ground
     while     it is in use for a specified activity except with the                      prior
     agreement        of     the    Chief    Constable.     Without    prejudice    to     that
     requirement,however, the Chief Constable may agree with                       the     Club
                                                -   30   -




   that     a    specific area or areas within the Sports Ground                 shall   be
   allocated          for     the    parking of other vehicles      including     disabled
   persons vehicles and vehicles carrying television equipment.



34. DRINKING VESSELS


    All    containers in which liquid refreshment is sold or                distributed
    to spectators shall be made of soft plastic or other soft material.



35. AUTOMATIC FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM IN STAND


    An    automatic         fire detection system complying with B.S.             Code    of
    Practice B.S.           5839:     Part 1:       1988 shall be provided by the siting
    of    such     number of heat detectors at such points within the                Stand
    accommodation           and     other   areas as the Firemaster      shall    specify,

    those currently installed being shown on


    Power       for     the automatic fire detection system shall           be    obtained
    from     batteries kept at full capacity by trickle-charging from                    the

    mains supply and the wiring shall be MICS cable.


    The     automatic detection and manual fire alarm systems shall be                    so
    linked       that       the     sounding devices provided and      situated     at   the
    location          points        shown   on Plan Bl will operate     equally     on   the
    activation of a call point or heat detector.


36. MANUAL FIRE ALARM/WARNING SYSTEM IN STAND


    The     Club       shall      not be required to provide a fire       alarm     audible
    warning        system other than within the general area of the               offices,
    dressing          rooms,        clubrooms and working areas of the Stand        as   the
    Firemaster shall specify and as shown on Plan PI.


    The public address system is accepted as the method to be used to

    evacuate the seated stand.


    Power       for     the       fire alarm warning system shall be      provided       from
    batteries          kept at full capacity by trickle-charging from the mains

    -supply and the wiring shall be MICS cable.
                                               -   31   -




37. INDICATOR PANELS


    Indicator        panels       shall     be provided and located            at   the    General
    Office      and a repeater panel in the Police Control Room as shown on
    Plan     Bl and shall be capable of showing clearly the operation of a
    heat detector and/or manual call point of the fire alarm system and

    the location at which activation occurred.


38. EMERGENCY LIGHTING SYSTEMS THROUGHOUT THE STADIUM


    (a)    From Generator


           The      generator       referred       to       in   Clause   39   shall      be   fully
           automatic        coming        into operation on the failure of the                 mains
           supply      to serve an emergency lighting system approved by                         the
           Firemaster in the following areas to operate in the event of a

           power failure.


           (i)         All the areas of the Stadium listed in Clause 3 other
                       than those covered by the provisions of sub-paragraph

                        (b) of this Clause.
             (ii)      The stairs and exit routes B, E, F & G referred to in

                       Clause 15(c)(i).
             (iii)     The administration office and corridor.
             (iv)      The Changing Room and corridor.
             (v)       The Police Room.
             (vi)      The First Aid Room.
             (vii)     The Switch Room.


                       All       as indicated (by the appropriate symbol) on                    £lfiH

                       11   -




     (b)   From Batteries


           An       emergency       lighting system approved by the Firemaster                   and
             powered by batteries kept at full capacity by trickle-charging
             from     the       mains     supply shall be provided for              the   following
             areas to operate in the event of a power failure:-
                                                     - 32 -


           (i)          The stairs A, C and D referred to in Clause 15(c)(i)

           (ii)         The Executive Suite at ground and first floor levels,

                            including the private viewing boxes.

           (iii)            The Refreshment Room.

           (iv)             The first floor corridor from the Executive Suite to

                            the Directors seating area.


           All as indicated (by the appropriate symbol) on Plan Bl-



39. DIESEL GENERATOR


    The    generator           shall be sited as shown on p;<m._A in a building                  of

    fire    resisting construction.


    If     the existing generator shall at any time prove to be                         incapable
    of     carrying          any     additional     load   either   due    to     any     of    the
    requirements             under     this Certificate or for any other              reason    the
    Club     shall          forthwith install and maintain a generator capable                   of

    carrying the required load.



40. PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM


    The     club shall provide a public address system to communicate with
    individualareas                outside        and inside the ground, with          groups     of
    areas        or with the whole ground.             Important announcements shall              be
    preceded           by     aloud signal to        catch the attention         of    the     crowd
    despite        a        high     level ofnoise in the ground.         This        arrangement
    should        be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every

    match.


    Such     public           address system shall be operated and controlled                   from
    the     position           shown    on   Plan Bl and shall      be    provided       with     an
    emergency               power supply so thatit is capable of being operated                  at

    all times.
                                           -   33   -




   The     public    address    system     shall        be   extended    to    provide      an
   additional       micro-phone wired in such a manner that the Police have

   priority for broadcasting.


   The     wiring     for the public address system shall be MICS cable                     and
   the      emergency    source      of   power supply        shall     be    provided   from
   batteries        kept at full capacity by tricklercharging from the m a m s

   supply and from the existing generator.



41. CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION


    Closed     circuit television shall be so installed as to enable crowd
    densities       outside    the    ground,       within    concourse       areas   and    on
    terracing       and any other standing areas, to be monitored before and

    throughout a match.


42. LAND LINES


    To complement radio communications, there shall be a completely
    separate system of land lines with telephone links between the

    control room and key points at the ground.


43. FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT


    Portable and other fire fighting equipment, all in such numbers and
    of      such types as shall be specified by the Firemaster from time to
     time     shall be located and maintained at such points throughout the
     stand     and elsewhere within the Sports Ground as also specified                       by
     the     Firemaster, the location of such as are presently required                       m

     or under the Stand being shown on flap Bl and Flap


 44. TESTING OF ELECTRICAL AND FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT


     (a)     Annual and Emergency Tests of Electrical System Generally


             The    Club shall arrange to have an inspection/test carried out
             annually    of    the    whole         electrical    systems      including     all
                                                   -    34   -




installations               and    wiring within the Sports Ground and                                    shall
submit          a    copy     of the relative certificate                              to     the    Council
immediately it is issued by the person or firm concerned.


Such       certificate shall be in the form prescribed in Section E
of     the Regulations for the Electrical Equipment of                                              Buildings
as     published            by the Institution of Electrical Engineers                                       and
shall        be signed by a corporate member of the said institution
or     by       a    Contractor             currently enrolled                     with      the     National
Inspection            Council For Electrical Installation Contracting or
by     a     Qualified            Representative                  of        an    Electricity             Supply
Authority            or     by     a    Surveyor             of        an        Engineering        Insurance

Company.


Without             prejudice          to    the       foregoing                 requirements        for     the
inspection/testing                      of     the      whole               electrical        system         and
installations               within           the       Sports          Ground,         the    Council        may
require             any particular part of the system or installations or
wiring          to     be     separately               tested          at        any   time     if    it     has
reasonable             cause to suspect that it may be defective in                                         some
way        on       giving        the Club at least seven                          days      prior    written
notice requiring them to arrange for such a test to be carried

 out.


The        Club       shall notify the Council in writing of the date                                         of
 each       annual          inspection/test                  at least twenty-eight                    days     in
 advance            thereof        and the name of the person or firm                                 carrying

 out the inspection/test.


 The       Club       shall afford the Council the opportunity                                       of     being
 represented               at any annual or other inspection/testing of                                       the
 electrical system or installations or any part thereof.


 Any        part      of     the electrical system which fails to                                    pass     the
 appropriate test following any annual or other inspection/test
 shall          be repaired or replaced and re-tested on the completion
 of        such repairs or replacement so as to comply with the above
                                            -   35    -




      mentioned     Regulations,         such    repairs,      or   replacement    and
      re-testing        all   to be carried out as soon as possible and                in
      any     event prior to the date of the next specified activity to

      be held at the Sports Ground.


(b)   Specific Tests of Particular Items


      (i)        Automatic Fire Detection System in Stand (Clause 35)
      (ii)       Manual Fire Alarm/Warning System in Stand (Clause 36)

      (iii)      Indicator Panels (Clause 37)


                 The Club shall arrange for these items to be tested in
                 accordance       with    the        procedures set out   in    British
                 Standard Code of Practice B.S., 5839 Part 1:                  1988.


       (iv)       Emergency Lighting Systems throughout the Stadium

                  (Clause 38)


                  The     Club   shall arrange for the system to           be     tested

                  monthly by simulating a power failure.


                  The battery operated system shall be tested separately
                  from the generator system but with the same frequency

                  and on the same occasion.




        (v)       Public Address System (Clause 40)


                  The     Club    shall arrange for this item (including               the
                  Police         override       micro-phone)        to    be      tested
                  simultaneously         with the fire alarm systems to           ensure
                  its property operation from normal and secondary power

                  sources.
                                        -    36   -




    (vi)   Fire Fighting Equipment (Clause 43)


           The Club shall arrange for all fire fighting equipment
           to be tested in accordance with the procedures set out
           in     British Standard Code of Practice B.S.                  5306      Part

           II 1980.


           Copies of any reports or certificates issued following
           any     inspection/test of any of the above items (i)                       to
           (vi)     shall    be submitted to the           Council        immediately
           upon     being    issued to the Club by the person or                    firm

«          concerned.


           Without       prejudice          to the foregoing requirements              for
           the     inspection/testing of the above items (i) to (vi)
           the     Council       may    require       any of said     items      to     be
           separately        tested         at any time if it       has    reasonable
           cause      to suspect that it may be defective in some way
           on     giving the Club at least seven days prior                   written
           notice requiring them to arrange for such a test to be

            carried out.


            The    Club     shall notify the Council in writing of                     the
            date    of    any     inspection/test to be          carried         out    in
            accordance       with       the requirements of this Clause                and
            the    name     of    the       person or firm     carrying       out      the

            inspection/test.


            The     Club shall afford the Council the opportunity                       of
            being represented at any inspection/test.


            If,     following       any inspection/test, any repair to                  or
            replacement          of any of the above items (i) to (vi)                  is
            required,       the item shall be repaired or replaced                     and
            re-inspected/re-tested on completion of such repair oR
            replacement,           such       repair      or    replacement            and
            re-inspection/re-testing all to be carried out as soon
                                                       -    37   -




                        as      possible and in any event prior to the date of the
                        next         specified      activity         to be held        at     the          Sports

                        Ground.


45.   RECORDS OF TESTS ON ELECTRICAL AND FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS AND

      EQUIPMENT


      The Club shall keep written records of:-


      (a)    The date of all annual and other inspections/tests carried out
             in    accordance with Clause 44(a) and of all specific and other
             tests carried out in accordance with clause 44(b)


      (b)    All reports and certificates issued following thereon.


      (c)    A    complete       list of all items tested on any                   particular                date
             with a description of the location thereof.


      (d)    Complete        lists      of all items (a) which passed and                         (b)       which
             failed      any test on any particular date with a description                                     of

             the location thereof.


      (e)    The      date     when      any item which failed a                test        was       repaired,
             renewed         or replaced with particulars of the works of                                  repair,
             renewal            or       replacement         and          the      date               of       any
               re-inspection/re-testing               and the report or certificate issued

               following thereon.


 46. QUALIFIED ELECTRICIAN


      The      Club     shall        ensure     that on every occasion             when           a    specified
      activity        is held at the Sports Ground there shall be present within
       the     Sports     Ground from at least fifteen minutes prior to until                                       at
       least      fifteen       minutes        after the specified activity at                        least     one
       qualified        electrician           who   shall    be       conversant        with          the     whole
       electrical        systems        and installations within the Sports Ground                              and
       sufficiently          equipped         to rectify any defect, failure or any                           other

       fault which might foreseably occur.
      It     shall be the responsibility of the person nominated in terms                            of
      Clause     25 to know the whereabouts of said qualified electrician                            or
      electricians        at     all times during the aforementioned period and                      to
      advise any Police or Fire Officer thereof it requested.



47.   FIRE DOORS IN STAND ACCOMMODATION


      (a)     Fire      Doors    within      the Stand accommodation numbering                15     in
              total     shall be maintained at the existing locations as marked

              D1 to D15 inclusive on Plan Bl.


              Said Fire Doors shall:-


              (i)        be maintained, close fitting and self-closing and


               (ii)      have     a fire resistance of not less than half an                    hour

                          (and     not    less than one hour in the case of the                 Fire

                          Door     marked    D2)       for stability        and   integrity     when

                          tested     under       the    conditions     of     B.S.     476:        Part

                          8:1987, and


               (iii)     be     clearly and permanently marked on both faces                       with

                          the    words "FIRE DOOR - KEEP SHUT” in accordance                       with

                          the B.S.       5499:     Part 1:    1984 and


               (iv)       be regularly inspected by the Club and maintained in a
                          safe     and    proper state of repair and in good                  working
                          order     and kept free from obstructions of any kind                      at

                          all times.


       (b)       The shutter of the Souvenir Shop shall have a                       fire resistance
               of not less        than half an hour as aforesaid.


 48. OTHER DOORS IN STAND ACCOMMODATION


       The       Club     shall ensure that certain doors (not being                   Fire Doors)
       within the Stand           accommodation shall be and remain                  fixed ina fully
                                          -   39   -




   open     position       and free of any obstructions during the whole               ti*e
   while the Sports Ground is in use for a specified activity,

   namely:-


   (1)     The door at the head of stair A as marked on Plan C.

    (2)    The Folding Shutter referred to in Clause 5(b) and marked G4

           on Plan A and Plan_ftl.                                ■

    (3)    The Roller Shutter at the head of stair B MR marked on Plan <

    (4)    The Roller Shutter at the foot of stair B as marked on Plan

           &1-
    (5)    The Roller Shutter referred to in Clause 5(c) and marked G4B
           on Plan A and Plan JLL.
           The metal gates at the foot of              tffmlr-   S9 M R marked on Plan A
    (6)
           and Plan Bl.


4 9 . SIGNPOSTING FOR SPECTATORS


    All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground
    shall    be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple and clear and shall be
    designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their

    appropriate viewing area.


50. EXIT SIGNS (All to comply with B.S. 5499 Part 1: 1984)


     (a)    On the Main Exit Gates


            The     11    main   exit gates specified in Clause 6(a)               shall   be
            clearly       and permanently marked on the outside face (on to the
            street)       with   the words "EXIT - KEEP CLEAR" written in              block
            capital letters each measuring at least 125 mm in height.



     (b)    Along Exit Routes in Stand


            Signs        bearing the word "EXIT" of such type and specifications
            as    the      Firemaster   may stipulate and             clearly   denoting   the
            direction of route to be taken by spectators towards the final
                                                   - 4 0   -




          exits     from the Stand shall be provided and maintained by                       the
          Club     at     such locations along the exit routes               and    stairways
          within        the    Stand     as    the Firemaster        shall   specify,    those
          presently           existing being shown (by the appropriate symbol) on

          ?l*n Pi-

          Such     signs shall be adequately illuminated by the general and
          emergency            lighting       systems   to     the    satisfaction      of    the

          Firemaster.


   (c)    For Foreign Visitors


          On     any occasion when a visiting team to the Sports Ground                        is
          from a country where English is not the spoken language of the
          country        the     Club shall consult the Firemaster at               least     one
          week     prior        to     the    specified activity as to        any    need     for
          providing internationally accepted directional graphics at the
           locations          where     signs have been provided in accordance               with
           sub-paragraph             (b) or elsewhere and/or the need to provide and

           issue any special instruction to Stewards.



51. SWITCH ROOM


   The     Switch Room situated under the Stand shall not be used for any
    purpose       other than a Switch Room and shall be kept tidy and                        clear

    of extraneous materials at all times.


52. STORAGE OF DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES


    If    it is necessary to store or use liquified petroleum gas or                           any
    other      dangerous substance within the Sports Ground the Club shall
    take all necessary precautions for the safe storage thereof.



53. SUMMARY OF WRITTEN RECORDS TO BE KEPT


    (a)     Reference is made to the following Clauses of this Certificate
            wherein       it is provided that written records shall be kept                        by

            the Club, namely, those referred to in:-
                                                       -   41    -




      (i)      Clause 3 (Attendance Figures)
      (ii)     Clauses 9, 10 and 11 (Inspections and Tests etc. of
                         Crush Barriers, Barrier-Rails Etc.)
      (iii)    Clause         18 (Inspections of Television Platform)
      (iv)     Clause         19 (Inspections of Floodlighting Pylons)
      (v)      Clause         20 (Defects and Repairs throughout Sports

                Ground)
      (vi)     Clause         25 (Nominated Official)
      (vii)    Clause         29 (Training of Stewards etc.)
      (viii) Clause           44 (Tests on Electrical and Fire Safety Systems

                and equipment)
      (ix)     Clause 5          (Tests and Inspection of turnstiles)



(b)   Additional Records


      The Club shall also keep written records of:-


      (i)      The        execution of any other work within or                             pertaining
                to        the    Sports Ground associated with any                           aspect     of
                spectator           safety             other         than    those     mentioned        in

                sub-paragraph (a).


       (ii)    Any        accident           or        incident which causes            injury        (but
                excluding           a    playing field or track injury) and                        which
                    is    brought        to the notice of the Club (whether by                          an
                    individual          or        by       a    Police or     Fire     Officer     or        a
                    Steward)      as having occurred within the Sports                            Ground

                during any specified activity.


(c)    Availability of Records


       All    the        foregoing       records                specified     or     referred     to     in
       sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) shall be made available by the Club
       to the Council and further, without prejudice to the foregoing
       generality,            the Chief Constable, the Firemaster and any other
       duly    authorised          representative                    of     the    Council      shall    be
       entitled          to    inspect        these records at any                   time    within     the
       Club’s     own premises and the Club shall allow access to            their
       premises      by the Chief Constable, the Firemaster, or any other
       duly     authorised      representative   of    the   council   for    that

       purpose.


SUMMARY OF TESTS/INSPECTIONS TO BE CARRIED OUT


(a)    Clause 5 - Turnstiles - Inspected regularly


(b)    Clause 6(a) - Main Exit Gates - Inspected regularly


(c)    Clause 6(b) and (c) - Folding and Roller Shutters - Inspected

                       regularly


(d)      Clause         7-       Means of Access from Entrances and to Exits
                          Inspected regularly


(e)     Clauses 9, 10 and 11 - Crush, Barriers, Barrier Rails etc.
                          Annual Inspection/Biennial testing and as

                             required


 (f)     Clause 10      - Balustrading - Annual Inspection/Biennial
                             testing and as required




 (g)    Clause 15(c)(ii) - Lever-arm Barriers - Inspected regularly


 (h)     Clause 18      - Television Platform - Annual Inspection


 (i)     Clause 19      - Floodlighting Pylons - Annual Inspection and as

                             required


 (j)    Clause 20       - Whole Sports Ground - On-going requirement for
                             Inspection/detailed Annual Inspection


 (k)    Clause 29       - Training of Stewards - At least two times each
                             playing season
                                              -   43   -




   (1)     Clause 44(a) - Electrical System generally - Annually and as
                              required


   (m)       Clause 45       - Fire Safety Systems and Equipment - as detailed


   (n)       Clause 47       - Fire Doors - Inspected regularly


    (o)      Clause 31       - Fire Aid Room and Equipment - Inspected
                              regularly


55. THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE AND THE GREEN CODE


   This     Safety        Certificate    should be read in conjunction   with    the
    whole        provisions of The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 197 5 and        any
    amendment or re-enactment thereof for the time being in force.


    It     may     be amended or replaced by the Council in       accordance    with

    said Act       if that is deemed appropriate.


    The     Green       Code is a voluntary Code and has no   legal force      except
    insofar        as     its recommendations and provisions have been      included
    within the terms and conditions of this Certificate.             The Club are,
    however,        strongly recommended by the Council to be mindful at          all
    times        of the provisions and recommendations of the Green Code          and

    to observe the spirit and intentions thereof.


56. INTERPRETATION


    In this Safety Certificate and the Schedule thereof


    (a)     "The Council" means The Tayside Regional Council.


    (b)     "The Club" means The Dundee United Football Company Limited.


     (c)    "The Sports Ground" means the Sports Ground at Tannadice Park,
            Dundee referred to in the application for this Certificate and

            as shown on the plans.
                                     -   44   -




(d)   "Plan A", "Plan Bl", "Plan B2" and "Plan C" means the plans or
      drawings    so marked and annexed and signed as relative to       the

      Certificate.


(e)   "The Chief Constable" means the Chief Constable for Tayside or

      his authorised representative.


(f)   "The Firemaster" means the Firemaster of the Tayside Fire
      Brigade or his authorised representative


(g)   "The   Green Code" means the booklet entitled "Guide to        Safety
      at Sports Grounds" issued by the Home Office/Scottish Home and
      Health Department and any revised edition thereof which may be

      published from time to time.


The   foregoing    is   the   Schedule relative to   the   General   Safety

Certificate in respect of Tannadice Park, Dundee.




 Director of Law and Administration

 Tayside Regional Council




 footba11/DU-SAFETY
