                                Hillsborough Scrutiny

General

Confident that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a thorough report in which the
families and the public can have confidence.

The Home Secretary has undertaken to make public the advice given by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith in his report, and to take whatever action is needed if he suggests
material evidence about the disaster has been overlooked.


Will the Home Secretary ensure that the families get access to information held by
South Yorkshire Police?

The Home Secretary is aware of the Family Support Group’s representations about
difficulties in obtaining access to information held by the South Yorkshire Police.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has said that the force has made every effort
to respond to requests for information subject to legal constraints.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has confirmed that he has not seen any sign that the police
are deliberately obstructing requests for information from other parties.


Will the Home Secretary extend the timescale for submissions in view of the delays
experienced by the families in obtaining information?

This is entirely a matter for LJ Stuart-Smith, however he asked for any remaining
submissions to reach him by 5 December and he has indicated that he expects to
report shortly.

He has assured the Home Secretary that he has been given full access to the material
held by South Yorkshire Police and that the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully
the issues raised by the Family Support Group and others.


Will the Home Secretary amend the Scrutiny’s terms of reference in the light of the
families’ concerns?

The terms of reference which the Home Secretary has given LJ Stuart-Smith allow
him to establish conclusively whether any material evidence was overlooked in the
consideration of the causes of the disaster or the consideration of criminal or other
proceedings.

The Judge will also be able to recommend any other action which should be taken in
the public interest. His terms of reference are, therefore, very wide indeed and I am
confident that they will allow him to carry out a full scrutiny of the evidence which
has been submitted by the families and others.


Are you aware of the families’ concern about LJ Stuart-Smith’s position in the light of
his remark in Liverpool?

The Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this remark, which he made
off-the-cuff and without any intention to offend or for it to be taken seriously. He has
made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not the subject of the Scrutiny.


Background

The Home Secretary announced in June that he was asking Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
to conduct a scrutiny to ascertain whether there is any new evidence relating to the
1989 Hillsborough disaster which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s
inquiry, the Coroner’s inquest and the prosecuting and police disciplinary authorities.
The Judge has indicated that he will submit his report by the end of the year.

Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to conduct a public inquiry into the Hillsborough
disaster in which 96 Liverpool fans died immediately following the tragedy in 1989.
Lord Taylor reported on both the causes of the tragedy and on his recommendations
for crowd safety at sports grounds.
