MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512


Date:    28 November 1997

To:     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




CHANGES TO STATEM ENTS


When Mike & I were in Sheffield we noticed ‘recollections’ by PC Groome which contained
a very large number o f seemingly significant alterations, too many to note down at the time.
I have had South Yorkshire send me Groome’s original and amended statements, and have
noted the changes as attached.

2.      Attached to Groome’s original recollections is a note from Chief Superintendent Wain
which I think you should see (also attached). It is plainly a standard note sent, quite soon
after the event, to other (all?) officers who were involved. It says that the material was
needed ‘for the forthcoming Committees o f Inquiry’ but ‘the exercise has no connection with
the investigation into the policing o f the FA Cup semi-final which is being conducted by a
team headed by Mr Dear’ (Chief Constable of the West Midlands police).

3.     Given that West Midlands police were investigating the disaster for Lord Taylor,
indeed under his command, this is wrong, and misleadingly wrong.




C F BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\034.DOC
PC 446 QroQme (was at the Spion Kop end o f the ground, but went to Leppings
Lane when trouble broke out and helped carry somebody over the pitch)

Deleted - ‘An officer of Inspector Calvert’s experience of policing would have
been far better placed at the Leppings Lane end of the ground’ (though in fact
Inspector Calvert was supervising the potentially difficult arrangements at the Spion
Kop where a small number o f Liverpool fans had to be accommodated with
Nottingham Forest).

Deleted - ‘The control room seemed to have been hit by some sort of paralysis’
(after the balloon went up at 1502).

Amended - ‘It was noticeable that the only supervisory officers above the rank of
Inspector on the pitch were Chief Inspectors Beal and Sumner and Superintendent
Greenwood. Certain supervisory officers were conspicuous by their absence. It
was utter chaos’. This was changed to ‘On the pitch were Chief Inspectors Beal
and Sumner and Superintendent Greenwood’. The words in bold were deleted.

Deleted - ‘Why, during the period 2.00 pm to 2.45 pm when the Leppings Lane
end and the West Stand were not very full, except for the centre pen, was the
kick-off not put back and the delay broadcast to the supporters outside. You
cannot pass 30-40 thousand through the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end in
one hour. At 2 pm I would estimate that only 12,000 were in the ground.

Why was there a 10 per cent reduction in manpower from the previous semi­
final in 1988. 80 more police officers at the Leppings Lane end could have made
a difference, filtering fans at the Leppings Lane end. Approximately 980 officers
were used for the semi-final in 1988,1,000 for the semi-final in 1987 and 1,200
for the semi-final between Wolves and Spurs.

The control room staff are not used to working in the pressure of a control room.
The staff for control room duties should be from weekly leave staff or mornings,
as they are used to making decisions under pressure.

.... The policing at Hillsborough has become complacent over the least 2-3 years
.... various officers working the track and in the ground had warned that things
were starting to go wrong over this period, yet no action was taken. Manpower
levels were steadily c u t....

The decision to replace Chief Superintendent Mole before the semi-final needs to
come under some scrutiny. This man had many years experience of policing big
matches at Hillsborough.’.
