         OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER                                      MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE
         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                          WATERY STREET
         (Wesi Dittrict)                                                       SHEFFIELD
                                                                                   S3 7ET
         H.M. Coroner                                                                Telephone:
         Christopher P. Dorries                                          Sheffield (0742) 738721
                                                                 5 February 93


          Ref FJH/DEB/Church

         Messrs Atkinson & Firth (Solicitors)
         Yorkshire Bank Chambers
         Vestgate
         Shipley
         BD18 3RF
         For the attention of Mrs Hedar




         Dear Mrs Hedar

         Gary Church (D eceased)

         Thank you for your letter of l^t February 1993. Some confusion seems to have
         arisen in this matter. When I received your original letter I assumed
         (wrongly) that you were asking for copies of identification photographs of
         the deceased rather than post-mortem photographs in the literal sense.

         Full realisation of your intentions places me in some difficulty. The
         voluminous amount of photographic and video material relating to the
         Hillsborough Inquest has now been archived and thus is no longer held at this
         office. I have no doubt that a number of photographs were taken during the
         post-mortem examination. Our archive material will only contain one set of
         such photographs and I could not release those "originals” to you for obvious
         reasons. The negatives are most certainly not held by my office, they will
         be with the Scenes of Crimes Department at the South Yorkshire Police
         Headquarters which seems rather to bring us back to the situation I set out
         in my first letter to you.

         However*,-! can “say witK aliiio^s'E'complete* certainty T H a T ^ e p'ost-nrartem----
         photographs would not have been*taken in evidence''at the Inquest. Although
         Coroners are frequently given post-mortem photographs it is very rare indeed
         that it is necessary to put the relatives to the trauma of having such
         photographs produced in Court. Rule 57 of the Coroners Rules 1984 indicates
         that I am only empowered to supply copies of documents that have been taken
         in evidence. I think it is the case of R v Hammersmith Coroner ex parte
         Peach (1980) Q.B.211 in which it was made quite plain that papers given to
         the Coroner by the police or a similar organisation for the purpose of an
         Inquest remain the property of that organisation. I have always taken the
         view therefore that I have no authority to release such extraneous material
         without the specific consent of the owner - in this case the South Yorkshire
         Police.




SS6ACA
                                           Fax: (0742) 726247
   This seems to me to be of narn
   kind enough to make it clear t w         relevance in the situation where you
   the purpose of litigation - wh!       7°Ur re<*ue8t for the photographs is for
   South Yorkshire Police.                °ne of the defendants is likely to be the

  You will appreciate th e r e f o r e t w u ,
  anything further. However I          ! Vthe lawPresently stands I cannot do
  have had a long conversation with Chi»f%t0 a®sist insofar as I can and I
  expressed certain views. Mr Mole          Superintendent Mole in which I
  contact with the legal advisors to t h e ^ n     *" t0 “ that he wi“ make .
                  **• - * «     — , tox ^                                                -


i
1 “ »:°.r£ o“ ^ , ,pn t ^ L “ . r c le
                                     ‘.c ri,beingIpu,h',i fc°" » i u « <» Po»t . t
appreciate the very limited p o w e r s * ^        '*? *nd 1 h°P* you c,n •*»
Wish to discuss the matter furthlr
pleased to hear from you.
                                              L   °n
                                                       .t"e telephone
                                                            Such
                                                              c i'c>“ » f n c e s .
                                                                        I shall be
                                                                                    If ,ou

V a ii




^ P Dorries
H M Coroner
