/
                                                                 IP O
    42-6.JS

    From: J L Goddard                            cc:   Mr Addison
          F8 Division                                  Mr Bolton
          Ext. 3314                                    Miss A Edwards
                                                       Mr Cogbill
            22 June 1990                               Mrs Lee
                                                       Mr Crawley, SHHD
                                                       Mr McClelland, NIO



    Miss P Edwards

    Mr Fulton

    Miss Goose

    Mr Grant




              REPORT


    In recommendations 70-73 of his final report on the Hillsborough
    Stadium Disaster Lord Justice Taylor makes recommendations on
    offences and penalties.       We are considering these and in
    February I sought the views of ACPO and the Crown Prosecution
    Service on them.       ACPO's reply was not received until 8 June.        I
    now attach a draft submission on which I should welcome,         first,
    substantive contributions on the use of attendance centres
    (Miss Goose), the use of electronic tagging (Mr Grant),         the
    legislative vehicle for making these changes (Mr Fulton) and any
    legal issues (Miss P Edwards) and, second, any other comments which
    they or copy recipients would wish to make.


    2.      The draft is written very much with the initial but firm view
    of the Home Secretary in mind.       This was that he wished to accept
    the recommendations for the creation of offences provided that
    doing so did not cause any harm.       I have referred to the drawbacks,
    as we see them, in the submission - and they seem particularly
    acute in the case of obscene or racial chanting - but if anyone
    thinks more or less should be made of them I should be glad to
    know.     ACPO's and the C P S 's support the creation of all the
proposed offences makes it more difficult to persuade the Home
Secretary that he should not follow his initial view.


3.      The CPS think a general offence of disorderly conduct, which
cited the three specific offences in recommendation 71 as examples,
would be preferable to making 3 separate offences.     I have set out
some arguments in paragraph 8 of the draft submission against a
general offence but I am ready to be guided on the question of
which formulation would be better.


4.      In paragraph 1 of the draft submission I intend to provide an
"executive summary" which I will draft in the light of the
responses to this note.


5.      The draft submission says nothing about the position in
Scotland and N Ireland on the assumption that they will not wish to
adi^J^ Taylor-type proposals or at least not commit themselves at
the moment.     Perhaps Mr Crawley and Mr McClelland could confirm
this.


6.      As for handling I should be grateful for Mr Fulton's advice on
the possibility of using the Criminal Justice Bill as a legislative
vehicle if Ministers accept in principle the creation of the
offences.     It may be possible to seek the necessary H and L
committee approvals at the same time and as part of a larger
package.     Home Office Ministers will probably be eager to publicise
their conclusions although strictly I doubt whether they should do
so ahead of approval in H.     As to timing of implementation,    the
football season 1990/91    is now impossible, but we should be
criticised if the new measures were not in place for the 1991/92
season.


7.      Interest in these Taylor recommendations remains high.
Ministers will be looking to make an announcement before Parliament
rises for the summer.     I should therefore be glad of responses to
this note by 3 July - I am sorry for the tight timetable.
8.   If any of the recipients of this note do not have access to
the relevant portions of the final Taylor Report Ms Jago (273-2850)
is ready to provide relevant copy extracts.




                            J L GODDARD
