HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY - PART II
NOTE OF MEETING AT HOME OFFICE ROOM 662, QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
MONDAY 11 SEPTEMBER 12.15pm


Present:     Lord Justice Taylor
             Mr Johnson
             Professor Maunder
             Mr Whalley
             Mrs Wither - (minutes)


Visits at Home


1.   The following visits by Sir Peter are to be arranged


22 September           Ryder Cup Golf accompanied by Mr Whalley.


                       Mr Whalley would talk to Mr Jones to arrange
                       for a visit to Nechells in the morning,
                       followed by lunch with the Police Authority
                       Chairman.   Sir Peter could then go on to see
                       the arrangements for handling the crowds in
                       the afternoon.   Mr Dear would be present.


23 September          Millwall -v- Sheffield Wednesday accompanied
                      by Mr Sweet.


30 September          Chelsea -v- Arsenal accompanied by Mr
                      Whalley.


6 October             Visits Manchester United's and Manchester
                      City's grounds (with lunch at Old Trafford)
                      accompanied by Mr Whalley.


7 October             Salford -v- Leigh (Rugby League) accompanied
                      by Mr Whalley.


14 October            Possibly Rangers -v- Dundee United (Ibrox)


21 October            Newmarket,


4 November            New Zealand -v- Wales (Cardiff Arms Park).
25 November           Barbarians -v- All Blacks (Twickenham).


12 December      -   Varsity Match (Twickenham).


2.     In addition, individual visits would be undertaken by
Professor Maunder and Mr Johnson in their respective areas.      Mr
Whalley could make the initial approaches if this was helpful.


3.     The following matches were possibilities for Professor
Maunder:-


24 September     -    Sunderland -v- Newcastle United.


27 September     -   Newcastle -v- Watford.


30 September     -   Hull City -v- Newcastle United.


4 November       -   Newcastle United -v- Middlesbrough.


4.     Mr Johnson suggested he might visit Manchester United,
Liverpool FC, Everton FC and Manchester City and would contact
the clubs direct to arrange.


5.     Sir Peter suggested that, at any visit, the aim should be to
see the crowd coming into the ground.      Lunch might be taken with
the club if it were offered and the first half of the match could
be spent on the terraces and the second half in the directors'
box.    At some point the opportunity should be taken for informal
discussion with fans themselves.


6.     The following points of interest might be raised with the
clubs on any of these visits


i.     what changes have been made since the Interim Report?


ii.    what proposals, if any, have they for increasing their
       seating and what are their views?
iii. what are their views on alcohol, closing pubs locally or
        earlier kick-off?


iv.   arrangements between police and clubs for stewarding;


v.    presence of perimeter fencing, "moats" and relative levels
        of ground and terraces;


vi.     has there been an increased awareness of the changing state
        of the crowd?


vii. what, if any, problems have they had in having the gates
        open?


Meetings to discuss points raised in evidence


7.    It was decided that Professor Canter would not be invited to
join any working party, but might be invited to submit a paper.
He could be told points of particular interest and invited in for
discussion.


8.    As regards meetings in general, two (or possibly three)
meetings could be arranged for one day given the limitation of
time.     Sir Peter would prefer to defer these meetings until
October when everyone would have had the opportunity to digest
the written material already submitted.     However, it would be
useful to have briefings by the Department of Environment and the
Home Office.     These should be arranged for Tuesday 17 October.    A
meeting with ACPO should be arranged for Wednesday 18 October
(Professor Maunder would not be able to attend).


9.    The Scottish visit (if on 14 October) would not include
visits to the Scottish organisations;     they could be invited to
London at a later date.


Working Party on the Green Guide


10.     Professor Maunder might run a working party on the Green
Guide.     It should be smaller than the one for the popplewell
report (five or six members seemed sufficient).       These might be:-



      i.    Professor Maunder (Chairman)
      ii.   Mr Campbell from the Institute of Structural Engineers
            or Mr Michael Dickson
      iii. Mr Bush - (Liverpool City Council)
      iv.   Brian Stickley or David Mould
      v.    Dr Chris Nicholson
      vi.   Someone nominated by FA.


11.   The secretary would be Mr Sweet and Mr Whalley will sit in
on meetings when available.       The working party would meet in
Newcastle.


12.   Professor Maunder would like a brief indicating how far the
working party might go in reporting to Lord Justice Taylor and Mr
Whalley would draft terms of reference for consideration.          The
function of the working party should be to identify areas of the
Green Guide which need clarification and where possible make
recommendations.       Mr Whalley would pick out points from the
Interim Report and Dr Eastwood's statement which need
clarification eg testing of barriers;       corrosion and gradients on
exits rather than entrances.


13.   The tenor of the guide might have to be altered making clear
the boundary between flexibility and firm requirements.       The
working party would have two approaches
      i.    to clarify on the technical side what good practice
            should be;


      ii.   how parts of it (or the Guide as a whole) could be made
            binding.


14.   Timetable and scope .


a)    As regards completion, there are no timescale restrictions;
      the Football Spectators Bill will go ahead to Royal Assent
      in any case.     However, it was thought best to aim for
January completion.


Following the Interim Report, Sir Peter asked Mr Johnson to
look into the police arrest procedure, a matter which
emerged from evidence given.    Also, it would be useful to
find out what the clubs and local authorities are doing as a
result of the Interim Report.    The Home Office had briefed
the Home Secretary.   Professor Maunder suggested it would be
useful to have the results of any comprehensive survey of
activity if the Home Secretary were to commission one.


Should the final report look at football radically or
consider specific issues such as the organisation of the FA
and the Football League?    It was decided that both
approaches should be kept open as the Inquiry developed.
Financial questions could not be ignored but the extent of
detail to be considered could not be settled at this point.
Mr Whalley would ask DOE whether there had been any survey
of the football industry by management consultants.


The discussion then went on to the division between the
Football Association and the Football League and whether it
was in the Inquiry's remit to ask why one body does not run
football.   Views from other countries such as Germany, Italy
and Holland were relevant including funding and the extent
government involvement.    The FA could be asked to give
comparable information on other countries but the Department
of Environment could help us on the basic information.


Funding was relevant to ground improvement in terms of
safety and in this respect Sir Peter would like to know more
about the merits of the arguments on transfer fees.      The FA
should be asked to expand oh this;    where the club gets the
money from and why is there such a huge gap between transfer
fees and money spent on ground improvement.


The terms of reference were looked at at this point to see
whether it was necessary to crowd safety and control that
the whole organisation of football be looked at.       Professor
        Maunder pointed out that the link was funding for safety but
        Sir Peter felt it may be ultra vires to go on to the
        organisation of the FA and Football League.


        However, they could be asked how they fund safety at
        football grounds and the FA and Football League could be
        asked direct.    It might also be useful to compare the
        FA/Football League with the comparable structure in Scottish
        football.    The FA/FL could be asked if a joint organisation
        had ever been considered and what the issues were.


e)      The range of sports to be covered would include football,
        Rugby Union, Rugby League, tennis and cricket, plus the
        Ryder Cup Golf and Newmarket on 21 October for the Dubai
        Champion Stakes and the Tote Cesarewitch (Handicap).


Overseas Visits


15.     The following visits abroad could be arranged:


Nimes        -      to see gates.


Utrecht      -      to see purpose built stadium.


Rome & Milan - to see San Siro Stadium shared by AC and Inter
Milan (and discuss arrangements for World Cup 1990).


Enquiries were proceeding about Barcelona and Lisbon.


16.     Mr Whalley said there would be some expectation that
meetings with the governments/authorities of the countries will
be included and it was agreed that this would be necessary.


17.     The trips would take place in late October/November at the
weekend or mid-week.       All parties should see Nimes and Utrecht
and Mr Johnson should be involved in the Italian visit.        Mr
Whalley would find out what the fixtures are for late October/Mid
November from the clubs.       It was decided that, while it would be
interesting to find out what sort of entertainment at big stadia
was provided in USA/Canada, it was not necessary to make a
transatlantic trip.


Other points raised


18.   Points 9-14 of the aide-memoire would be addressed later on:
they were summaries of the issues rather than points for
immediate consideration.


19.   In addition, Sir Peter would like an afternoon session at
some stage with sports journalists.      He would like in particular
to see Chris Dighton and Chris Lightbown from the Sunday Times,
David Miller from the Times and Edward Grayson from the
Telegraph.   The Press Association could be invited to nominate
others.


20.   Sir Peter also asked if any police prosecution had produced
a confession or explanation as to the behaviour of a football
hooligan.    Mr Johnson said the police intelligence on this matter
was massive and he would gather this together,     in particular from
the Metropolitan Police.    He said there was evidence of gangs and
Mr Anderton and his sub-committee had collated information on
football intelligence.


21.   The meeting concluded at 4.30pm.
