 •.                                                                                                            ^A4l& ' U it*
The Institution of                                                                                               J u. tau
Structural Engineers                                                                                                                        The Institution of
Founded 1908 Incorporated by Royal Charter 1934
                                                                                                                                            Structural Engineers
                                                                                                                                            11 Upper Belgrave Street
                                                                                                                                          • London SW1X8BH

                                                                                                                                           01-235 4535
From the President
P L C a m p b e ll   | P D i e C E n g F IS tr u c l E FICE F I M a r E F I H T F ID E F A S C E M C o n s F                              Fax: 01-235 4294

 RJWM/MT                                                                                                           f*b„ 2- O 'lL c)* '^     25 July 1989

                                                                                                               C''vCtL   /bU^ {jJJbvJ
R Whalley Esq

•
Secretary to the Taylor Inquiry
   om 662
au Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT                                                                                                                             6

Dear Mr Whalley

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

Your letter of 23 May 1989 requested further written evidence from us on the m atter
of our ad hoc Committee's work on appraisal of sports grounds. I now enclose 6 copies
of this Committee’s draft report updated following their meeting of 9 May 1989. An
earlier draft of this was sent to you with my letter of 26 April, together with the brief
given to this Committee at its inception and the constitution of its membership.

This Committee's work was started three years ago, following the Popplewell Inquiry
and so has not directly addressed the situation at Hillsborough. The Committee's rem it
was to produce a collected body of reference material relating as far as possible to all
m atters which need to be appraised in sports grounds. Accordingly I feel that much of
the draft report should be relevant to the work of the Inquiry, and I hope that you will
find it of value to your deliberations. Should further clarification or discussion of the
draft report be needed Mr Michael Dickson, the Committee's chairman, is willing to
help.

The constitution of the Committee is given in the report. Not all members of the
Committee are members of this Institution as other parties concerned with operation,
assessment and development of sports facilities are represented. This was done in order
to be able to identify those areas of management, appraisal, design and crowd movement
in sports facilities that have influence on the safe performance of a structure or its parts.
However, in producing the report it was the intention to deal primarily with the technical
background to this task of structural behaviour. It must be appreciated that in putting
this into context, some of the items discussed are not the direct responsibility of structural
engineers.

A meeting of the Committee                                                          has been arranged for Thursday, 14 September at the
Institution in the expectation                                                     that the Inquiry's interim report will be available for
discussion by our Committee.                                                        The Committee intends to review whether it needs to
incorporate modifications to the                                                   report in the light of the Inquiry's interim findings.



                                                                                                                                                     /- 2 -
                                            - 2-


The Committee is now reasonably confident that it has established a reliable technical
background to the appraisal of sports grounds. Accordingly an open seminar is being
organised on Thursday, 26 October so as to enable the technical deliberations to be
broadened into a discussion on the wider context, the Institution is hoping to a ttra c t
club management, sporting authorities, police, local authority and Home Office
representatives as well as professionals (architects, surveyors) likely to be engaged in
the design and appraisal of sports grounds to these discussions. Of course, I would be
delighted if Lord Justice Taylor felt he could attend and/or participate at this seminar.

Please le me know if the Institution can be of any further help.

Yours sincerley
                                                                   ASG/89/12


                THE INSTITUTION OF STRUCTURAL ENGINEERS




                        APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS

                                        5th draft




  This draft has been prepared as a result of the discussion on the 4th draft (ASG/89/3)
  at the meeting on 9 May 1989 and written comments sent in by members thereafter.

  This draft will be discussed at a meeting of the Committee on Thursday, 14 September
  1989 when it is expected that the interim report by Lord Justice Taylor will be available




JULY 1989
 AD HOC COMMITTEE ON APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS


 CONSTITUTION


 M G T Dickson BA MS CEng MIStructE (Chairman)
  (Buro Happold)
 B K Bardhgn-Roy BE CEng FIStructE FICE
   (Jan Bobrowski & Partners)
 Professor D V Canter PhD FBPsS FBIM
   (University of Surrey)
 J F Dickie BSc PhD CEng MIStructE
   (University of Manchester)
 M G Green BEng CEng MIStructE MICE
   (Buro Happold)
*A JM Heselden FIFireE
   (Fire Research Station)
   D Kaye CEng FIStructE
     (Ove Arup & Partners)
   J R Partington CEng MIStructE
     (Lancashire County Council)
•/ B B Pigott BA BAI(Dublin) CEng MICE
     (Fire Research Station)
 A F K Shaw BSc(Hons) CEng MIStructE MICE
   (Leeds City Council)
 R J C Stanton CEng MICE MIHT
   (G Maunsell & Partners)
 B Stickley CEng FIStructE
   (Home Office)
 S Thorbum FEng FIStructE FICE FASCE FIHT FGS
   (Thorbum Associates)
 O L Turner OBE ARIBA
   (Department of the Environment)
 R J W Milne BSc (Secretary)
   (The Institution of Structural Engineers)


 Special contributions have also been provided by:
 Professor A Bolton MScTech PhD FEng FIStructE FICE
   (previously with Heriot-Watt University)
 N J Cook DSc(Eng) PhD CEng MIStructE
   (Building Research Station)
 T V Lawson PhD BSc DIC CEng FRAeS
   (University of Bristol)
 Jake Pauls
   (Life Safety Specialist, Hughes Associates Inc., USA)



 * Until retirem ent in mid-1988
 y From May 1989
CONTENTS

FOREWORD

1   SCOPE

    PLANNING MATTERS^ WHAT MANAGEMENT SHOULD KNOW
    2.1  Regulations and safety
    2.2  Management conekleratienB
         2.2.1   Planning life safety requirements
         2.2.2   Preparation of drawings of sports grounds
         2.2.3   Access for emergency vehicles
         2.2.4   Considerations affecting capacity
         2.2.5   Division of ground
         2.2.6   Signposting
         2.2.7   Exit gates
    2.3  Refurbishment and reconstruction without disruption to (dub activities
         2.3.1   General
         2.3.2   Preplanning
         2.3.3   Control of unruly behaviour
         2.3.4   Spectator comfort
    DESIGN MATTERS
    3.1  Ground aspects of design and safety
    3.2  Other aspects
    3.3  Usage
         3.3.1    Place in the community
         3.3.2    Managing grounds safely
         3.3.3    Additional facilities beneath stands
         3.3.4    Comfort
         3.3.5    Viewing and sightlines
         3.3.6    Circulatory space
    3.4  Safety of spectators
         3.4.1    Home Office guide
         3.4.2    Deviations
         3.4.3    Information transmission
    3.5  Structural safety
         3.5.1    Appraisal and Codes
    3.6  Loading
         3.6.1    Permanent loads and load combination
         3.6.2    Vertical imposed floor loads
         3.6.3    Imposed roof loads
         3.6.4    Wind loads
         3.6.5    Imposed horizontal surge loads
         3.6.6    Dynamic loads
         3.6.7    Handrail loads
         3.6.8    Crush-barrier loadings
    3.7  Structural safety in fire
         3.7.1    Fire resistance
         3.7.2    Smoke venting

    FIRE AND FIRE SAFETY
    4.1   Fire safety appraisal strategy
          4.1.1    Allocation of stands to two categories
          4.1.2    Category 1: stands
          4.1.3    Category 2: stands
          4.1.4    Circulation areas


                                 I
    4.2   Guidance for assessing minimum standard of construction and planning
          4.2.1    General
          4.2.2    Compartmentation/protection of tiers
          4.2.3    Influence of fire and smoke on escape routes
          4.2.4    Measures to prevent or retard early fire growth
          4.2.5    Fire resistance of structure and supplementary stands
          4.2.6    Fire resistance appraisal
    4.3   Guidance for assessming minimum standard for management activities
          and related action fire nfopjutinns
          4.3.1    Quality assurance for larger facilities
          4.3.2    Emergency procedures and staff training
          4.3.3    Public-address system
          4.3.4    Fire detection (fire alarm systems)
          4.3.5    Fire loading
          4.3.6    Contents
          4.3.7    Litter
          4.3.8    Provision of fire-fighting equipment
          4.3.9    Measures to restrict the extent of fire spread in later stages
    4.4   Fire and smoke assessment
          4.4.1    Smoke assessment
          4.4.2    Smoke control measures                                         I
          4.4.3    Restriction of flame travel under roofs
    4.5   Provision of additional fire precautions to extend means of escape
          time
    4.6   Covered grounds
    4.7   New stands and covered grounds

5   CROWD SAFETY AND COMFORT
    5.1 General
    5.2 Passageway blockages
    5.3 Flow rates
    5.4 Sequence of calculation
    5.5 Control of crowd flow in emergency
        5.5.1    Entry control
        5.5.2    Exit control
    5.6 Crush barriers

6   STRUCTURAL APPRAISAL
    6.1  General approach
    6.2  Existing survey drawings
    6.3 Survey of condition and record of findings
    6.4 Potentially dangerous, degraded or substandard fabric
         6.4.1   Drawings
         6.4.2   Inspection
         6.4.3   Recording of results of condition
    6.5  Potentially combustible materials and building fabric
    6.6 Testing of materials and elements
    6.7 Testing of crush barriers/handrails
    6.8 Appraisal of effects of wind
         6.8.1   Wind tunnel tests
         6.8.2   Analysis of the effects of dynamic loading
         6.8.3   Resonant wind loading
         6.8.4   Spectator loading
         6.8.5   Regular inspection of slender structures




                                2.
    6.9    Appraisal of structures against disproportionate collapse
    6.10   Replacement or strengthening of doubtful elements

    TEMPORARY STANDS, FLOODLIGHT PYLONS, ETC.
    7.1 Temporary stands
    7.2  Other structures

8   ELECTRICAL LAYOUTS


APPENDIX A1         DAY-TO-DAY RESPONSIBILITIES OF MANAGEMENT
APPENDIX A2         DRAFT RULES FOR INSTRUCTION OF REWARDS ON EVENT
                    DAYS

APPENDIX B          GROUND FLOW RATES
APPENDIX C          PERFORMANCE OF CRUSH BARRIERS
APPENDIX D          TSTTNG OF CRUSH BARRIERS
APPENDIX E         SIGHTLINES AND VIEW DISTANCES
APPENDIX F         SPECIMEN DRAWINGS REQUIRED FOR APPRAISAL
APPENDIX G         SPECIMEN LICENCE CERTIFICATE
APPENDIX H         BIBLIOGRAPHY
ILLUSTRATIONS FOR REPORT




                                 3
FOREWORD


In July 1986, the Institution of Structural Engineers initiated an ad hoc committee
to bring together all current technical knowledge relevant to the appraisal of sports
grounds and their individual elements. The Committee’s task was to establish a
fully referenced body of knowledge within three years which would be complementary
to the Guide to safety of sports grounds (HMSO 1976). This Guide, first published
in 1975, had itself been reissued as a result of discussions by a technical panel chaired
by Mr Martin Killoran. This panel had been set up to advise Mr Justice Popplewell
in his inquiry following the tragedies at Birmingham, Bradford and Hysel.

It is hoped that this report will help engineers and other professionals undertake
the difficult task of appraising the many existing sports grounds in the UK and
elsewhere. The task is to provide uniform and acceptable levels of safety to the
public users of these grounds under all operating conditions. However, the location,
age, size, condition and acceptable spectator capacity of individual grounds and
their stands vary widely.

The establishment of satisfactory and consistent overall performance of such facilities
throughout the country and for all conditions requires reliable engineering 'm ethods^^
based on accepted scientific criteria. To effect appraisal satisfactorily, there hal^P
to be a thorough understanding of how the ground will be managed and operated
and how orderly entry, containment and egress of spectators will be planned for
and managed, even in an emergency. This requires appraisal which addresses the
interrelated param eters dealt with in the separate sections of this report as a
complete system.

Knowledge of some of these parameters does not particularly fall within the
professional experience of members of the Institution of Structural Engineers, whose
task it often is to adjudge the condition and maximum allowable capacity of sports
grounds. Membership of this committee therefore consisted of members of the
Institution with a wide range of relevant professional experience, and members from
other allied technical professions whose primary skills extended the range of the
committee's discussions.

Inevitably in its careful deliberations the committee has encountered some areas
where current knowledge in the public domain appears inadequate. It is intended
that some of these areas are addressed in the appendices to this report. Regrettably
too, there has been the further tragedy at Hillsborough. So further consideration
of aspects of this report may be necessary following the publication of Mr Justice
Taylor's Inquiry expected later this year.

Nevertheless, it has been our aim to provide a properly referenced document which
is as complete as possible in technical matters. This report will then be able to
form a base for broadening the discussion to the sports authorities, ground managers,
police and other professional bodies concerned with the operation, appraisal and
design of sports grounds. There is an urgent need both to eliminate risk of further
failure and to increase the chance of success and appeal of such facilities.




                                                                        M G T DICKSON
                                                                              Chairman
                                                                     ad hoc Committee
July 1989                                                   Appraisal of Sports Grounds




                                      4
1   SCOPE
    Broadly, the recommendations of this report can be applied
    to all grounds and structures of assembly use that provide
    permanent (or temporary) seating or standing facilities
    for the public. Generically, in this report, such places
    are referred to as sports grounds. The range of sporting
    and leisure events, including occasional events is wide,
    but includes soccer, rugby, cricket, tennis, greyhound
    and horseracing, certain athletics, swimming and other
    spectacular events.

    It is intended that the report be complementary to the
    Guide to safety a t sports grounds to improve the knowledge
    of and communication between different categories of
    person concerned in the operation of sports grounds.

    It is aimed primarily at advising on life safety in existing
    sports grounds. As such, it attem pts to take account
    of the constraints and difficulties that are present within
    these grounds. It is important to distinguish between
    life safety and danger from unruly crowd elements.

•
    Although it is not a design brief for new construction
    work or total reconstruction at sports grounds, the principles
    may well still be applicable. Such work should not be
    to a standard lower than that set out here, and the scope
    offered by new design work should lead to better standards
    than can be achieved at grounds already built with regard
    to reliable standards of life safety.

    In particular, this publication aims at providing methods
    and reference material to help establish an even level
    of safe spectator capacity, ingress and egress in respect
    of the arrangement, size and condition of all elements
    of that ground, and of its level of management.

    It is to act as a reference source to the multi-faceted
    problem of refurbishing, appraising, or designing sports
    grounds and of establishing the maximum approved capacity
    of each section of the ground in relation to its layout,
    construction materials and condition. It also aims at
    developing an overall engineering methodology and body
    of scientific knowledge to enable competent and
    professionally qualified personnel to carry out reliable
    and complete appraisal of existing sports grounds.

    As such, this publication provides a companion to Appraisal      Appraisal of existing
    of existing structures first published by the Institution        structures, Institution of
    of Structural Engineers in July 1980. In conjunction with        Structural Engineers,
    the Guide to safety at sports grounds, it emphasises the         July 1980
    need to 'secure reasonable safety at the stadium' by seeing
    that obvious defects such as trip hazards, weak handrails,
    obstructed exit routes or impaired or inappropriate
    structural elements are rectified, and that exit routes
    are properly signed and available at all times.

    One particular such risk in many existing stands is the
    existence of unprotected combustible construction. This
    report has therefore developed a method whereby the
    maximum permissible time for evacuation to an area
    of safety can be assessed against the likely fire hazards,
    compartmentation     available,  standards    of   egress,
    construction, etc. and the level of effective organization
    and management.

                                           5*
Assessment on this bases for fire safety is given in
Section 4.

Above all, the report is aimed at achieving structural
adequacy under all the relevant loadings and conditions,
both of the overall construction and its individual elements,
and the elimination by methodical appraisal of potential
hazards that result from the presence of dense crowds,
their behaviour and their movements. Section 3, 5 and
6 (and for temporary events Section T) deal with this aspect
of appraisal.

Safety of crowds cannot reasonably be achieved without
carefully considered action, and organized management
techniques applied both to the day-to-day running and
during public occupation. This is therefore addressed
as an important factor in Section 2 in some detail.

Since the process of appraisal for safety in such situations
is an interactive process, this document is addressed to
all the following persons:

.   directors and managers of sports clubs who must run
    clubs to a budget and provide a service to the customer
    that can be afforded and which is satisfying, safe and
    controllable

    engineers, architects and other professional consultants
    engaged by the clubs' managers to appraise, design
    the refurbishment and organize any necessary
    maintenance

.   public officers responsible for approving measures
    for refurbishment and maintenance, and for licencing
    sports grounds for their various uses.
2   PLANNING   MATTERS             :    WHAT       MANAGEMENT
    SHOULD KNOW

    2.1   REGULATIONS AND SAFETY

          The Safety a t sports grounds Act 1987 imposes a
          licensing system on sports grounds* with a capacity
          of more than 10 000 and individual stands having
          a capacity of 500 or more. The implications of
          the Act for club managements are far reaching.
          In future managements will need to be aware not
          only of the regulations and associated documents
          but also of what measures will need to be implemented
          (see Appendix G for specimen licence certificate).

          Building Regulations are also relevant and would
          apply to new stands and to certain alterations to
          existing stands. The main regulations are:

          The Building Regulations 1985 (for England & Wales)
          The Building Standards (Scotland) Regulations 1977
          (for Scotland)
          The Building Regulations (Northern Ireland) 1977
            (for Northern Ireland)

          For England and Wales approved document B2/3/4
          Fire spread gives guidance on the fire safety provisions
          of the regulations. For Scotland requirements are
          set out in Parts D and E of the Regulations and
          for Northern Ireland in Part E.

          It is the responsibility of club management to appraise
          themselves of the necessary measures to prevent
          risk to their clubs and the public by employing
          professionally competent personnel to advise them
          on any repairing, refurbishment, and requirements
          that will be necessary before their sports ground
          can be used to its full potential or to an agreed
          capacity.

          Management will be responsible for overall safety
          of the public. This means, inter alia:

              provide for stewarding of the right quality that
              is properly briefed for the particular event and
              present in sufficient numbers to manage the
              event adequately

          .   having available drawings of the overall facility
              (1 : 1000 city plan; 1 : 200 ground plan and section
              showing principal means of ingress and egress,
              compartmentation with capacity of each clearly
              indicated, and other facilities such as location
              of stewards and public-address system




          * Sports grounds are widely defined in the Act to
          include not only soccer, rugby, cricket, tennis, etc.
          but also horse and greyhound racing, athletics, etc.
          grounds


                                          7
   being able to identify and redress where necessary
        potentially combustible materials and building
        fabric
        potentially dangerous, degraded or substandard
        fabric

        potentially dangerous areas of overcrowding,
        whether on ingress or egress routes and spectator
        viewing areas.

   establishing the principles for good manageable
   access and egress

   providing good information transmission systems
   both inside and outside the ground

   keeping the conditions of seated stands, terraces,
   viewing slopes, stairways, etc. in good condition

   establishing the need for appraisal, testing and
   refurbishment (usually without disruption to
   the sports programme and club facilities) to
   bring the ground to the required standard

   establishing a planned preventative maintenance
   routine

   establishing a strategy for means of escape in
   emergencies

   maintaining reasonable first-aid provisions

Management will need to estim ate the necessary
work and prepare a financial operating plan (probably
on a quarterly basis) so that the aims can be achieved.
A list of many of the day-to-day routine
responsibilities is given in Appendix A.


MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS

2.2.1    Planning life safety requirements
        Planning for large numbers of people entering,
        staying within and leaving sports grounds
        requires skills beyond those needed for planning
        a system for inanimate objects. People come
        in many different shapes and sizes with varying
        capabilities and handicaps. They may well
        have varying reasons for coming to the sports
        ground and so expect different things of it.

        Furthermore, although in general most people
        behave sensibly and appropriately most of
        the time, relatively small problems when
        experienced alone can be magnified to
        disastrous proportions in a large crowd. Broadly
        there are two ways in which crowd safety
        can be jeopardized.
   One is by an unexpected incident or disturbance
   or pattern of crowd movement, as when a
   barrier collapses or someone slips within
   a crowd moving down a flight of steps. Because
   people may not know what is happening or
   be confused by its unexpectedness, pressures
   can build up in the crowd far beyond those
   normally experienced.

   A second route to disaster is when some
   individual or group in the crowd sets out
   to cause damage or injury. Either by eliciting
   reciprocal responses from others or by other
   forms of aggravation of their actions, a few
   people may in this way, have an effect far
   beyond their numbers.

   The only way to avoid both kinds of potentially
   dangerous incidents and minimize their
   consequences, should they occur, is by careful
   planning, design, management, maintenance
   and adherence to conditions of the certificate.
   An illustration of the American approach
   to life safety in auditorium management,
   also applicable to sports grounds, is given
   in Appendix B.

.2 Preparation of drawings of sports ground
   The impact of a new sports ground on the
   local    infrastructure      requires      careful
   consideration from the aspects of road safety,
   traffic congestion, environmental changes
   and the effect on the lives of the local residents
   during match days.

   The convergence of large numbers of people
   on a locus within an urban neighbourhood
   can create both traffic congestion and the
   potential for road accidents. The construction
   of a major sports ground within a community
   can also create social and physical stress.

   An open-plan sports ground, free from boundary
   fences and having freedom of access from
   most points of the compass is the ideal and
   affords the best solution to smooth safe crowd
   flow. However, in regard to the social
   behaviour of the spectators converging on
   the sports ground, where confrontation of
   supporters is to be avoided separate access
   points to the respective parts of the sports
   grounds will be necessary.

   Such effects may be judged from a plan of
   the sports ground and surroundings at a scale
   of about 1:1000. Further larger scale (1:200)
   drawings of the ground and its constituent
   parts will be required, sufficient to show
   clearly all spectator viewing areas, exit and
   entry   routes,   barriers,  capacities,  and
      demonstrate by calculation, appraisal or
      testing that the constructional and structural
      elements will provide adequate levels of
      life safety.

      Both plan and section drawings are required
      at this larger scale so as to illustrate the
      3-dimensional arrangement of each particular
      zone.

2.2.3 Access for emergency vehicles
      Adequate roads for emergency vehicles such
      as fire appliances and ambulances should
      be provided and maintained, so that speedy
      and direct access can be obtained to all
      buildings within the ground. Emergency routes
      should be defined (in consultation with the
      licensing authorities) and marked on the plan.

      Where necessary, roads in the vicinity of
      the ground should have restricted parking                                 4k
      so that at all times there are no delays or                               ™
      obstructions to the access of emergency
      vehicles. This restriction may extend to
      a distance in excess of 0.5 km. When
      practicable, such roads should be kept entirely
      free of parked vehicles.

2.2.4 Considerations affecting capacity
      In many instances, the need to attain the          Guide to safety at sports
      required safety standard will relate to the        grounds, HMSO, London
      maximum number of spectators who are liable        1986 (Section 16)
      to be admitted to the ground (or a particular
      part of it). For example, a football ground
      with a potential maximum spectator capacity
      is liable to pose significant crowd pressure
      risks. To accommodate safely a maximum
      crowd a t such a ground might entail substantial
      remedial    upgrading work;       alternatively,
      consideration might be given to accepting
      a much smaller number of spectators who,
      properly dispersed, could be accommodated
      safely without having to incur costly repairs
      or alterations. The first step, therefore,
      is to assess how many people can be safely
      accommodated in the different sections of
      ground given the existing condition of the
      ground, i.e. to determine a safe spectator
      capacity. A range of increased capacities
      can then be prepared based on various
      improvements/remedial works.
      Although controlling crowd numbers may serve to
      reduce some risks to an acceptable level,
      remedial work is likely to be necessary to
      overcome others. Obvious defects such as
      trip hazards (especially at the head of stairs
      or steps), loose or weak handrails on stairs,
      and obstructed sections of exit or ingress
      routes, should be rectified as part of the



                               IO
general care and maintenance of a ground.
Structures should be sound and inspected
by suitably qualified persons. Design, layout
and signposting of entrances and exits and
routes require particular attention so that
they can safely cope with the number of
spectators who will use them before and
a fte r an event or in an emergency. Similarly,
the condition of terraces or viewing slopes
and presence or otherwise of crush barriers,
correctly sited and meeting the described
strength tests are important factors.

Broken, uneven terracing causes stumbling.
Barriers not only serve to break up crowd
pressures but also assist in controlling
movement onto and off the terraces by
directing and restricting the rate of arrival
to suit the capacity, and         encouraging
the formation of queues so that spectators
arrive in an orderly fashion.

It follows that in general in a ground where
it is proposed to retain a high spectator
capacity, the measures needed to be taken
to accommodate safely such large crowds
are potentially more extensive. In this respect
the calculation of the spectator capacity
of a terrace or that through a given route(s)
depends on the configuration and condition
of all the elements associated with calculation.
It is recommended that physical means of
directing crowd flows in and out are
incorporated.

Division of ground
Where migration of spectators could prove
hazardous, a ground should be divided into
sections. Each section of a ground has its
own limit of safe capacity, and a major
migration can cause dangerous overcrowding.
Each section of the ground (e.g. each end
or side) should be self-contained with its
own entrances, exits and toilet and refreshment
facilities. For football grounds in particular
there should be controlled access from one
such major section to another. At other
sporting events, such as greyhound racing,
spectators may need to move freely between
different parts of the ground, and this should
be borne in mind when considering access
to and from the sections of the ground.
Automatic counting procedures may be
necessary to ensure that the approved capacity
of any particular zone is not exceeded.
Signposting
A comprehensive system of signposting that
clearly indicates routes to the various parts
of the ground, and the the exits from the
ground, should be provided. Signs relating
        to fire safety and other safety signs (e.g.
        first-aid facilities) should also be provided.
        Exit gates themselves should be clearly
        signposted, preferably using illuminated signs.
        Directional signs should be provided to
        encourage crowds in any particular section
        to flow in one direction when leaving the
        ground.

2.2.7 Exit gates
        Locked exit gates should be manned by a
        steward at all times when the public are
        in the ground, so that they can be opened
        immediately from inside by anyone in an
        emergency. The use of a common pass key
        for all exits should be considered, as should
        one-way exits to cope with normal conditions.

        All gates should open outwards with the
        direction of the required flow. Inward opening
        and sliding gates are not suitable unless kept
        open while the public are present.

        All gangways and exit routes must be
        unobstructed and capable of being used to
        their full capacity at all times when the public
        are in the ground. Every part of an exit route
        should be able to accommodate the required
        flow from the terrace or stand exit in
        accordance with the approved flow rates
        and exit times.

REFURBISHMENT     AND     RECONSTRUCTION
WITHOUT DISRUPTION TO CLUB ACTIVITIES

2.3.1   General
        Changes in legislation and the need to make
        significant improvements in the provisions
        for spectators have presented football clubs
        with a serious challenge to their existence.
        Clubs of different standing and for different
        principal sporting uses are confronted by
        major expenditure on their existing grounds
        in order to meet future standards of comfort,
        safety and competition.

        Functional and financial considerations often
        necessitate redevelopment work being carried
        out in phases, and management of projects
        of this kind requires special technical and
        practical skills especially in the case of
        large-span structures. Whether the aim is
        to construct a single stand within an existing
        ground or to create a completely new complex,
        the project requires technical, managerial
        and financial skills of a high calibre.

        Safety provisions should comply with the
        requirements of the Guide to safety at sports
        grounds. Conformity with fire regulations
        is of paramount importance.
      Ingenuity of design, construction and the
      creation of new provisions should influence
      the health and welfare of sports facilities.
      Good design linked to technology is sufficiently
      advanced to permit reliable construction
      of new concepts in sports grounds and help
      establish their commercial viability.
2.3.2 Preplanning
      There are many important m atters to be
      considered in the refurbishment or creation
      of sports grounds, and preplanning and project
      management are essential elements of
      reconstruction.

      Preplanning commences      with a definition
      of the overall concept of the proposal for
      development, by identifying and researching
      the potential market for the facilities and
      by making arrangements for financing the
      reconstruction work.

2.3.3 Control of unruly behaviour
      2.3.3.1   Benefits of seating. Although seating
                all spectators can never entirely
                remove unruly behaviour, malicious
                individuals are easier to identify
                and control in seated facilities.
                It is also much easier for those who
                wish     to    perpetrate   clandestine
                mischief to do so in terracing.
                Furthermore, seating is more likely
                to a ttrac t those who wish to watch
                the sport in comfort for itself
                compared with those few who may
                be attracted       to the miscreant
                possibilities    of    the     terraces.
                Disturbances     in densely packed
                standing terraces are difficult to
                control unless access is maintained.

   2.3.3.2      Access and surveillance. To optimize
                crowd control, easy access to groups
                of spectators is important and an
                adequate system of passageways
                as illustrated in clauses 96-100 of
                the Guide to safety at sports grounds
                facilitates crowd control. The use
                of both fixed and roving CCTV and
                video cameras can help to identify
                miscreants and also act as a deterrent
                to unruly behaviour.

                Because large quantities of alcohol
                can encourage        unruly behaviour
                in some people, the taking of alcohol
                into public areas of sports grounds
                in the UK has been restricted by
                the 1987 Act, as have all forms
                of hard container that could be
                used as projectiles.

                                 13
2.3.3.3   Open planning. The             provision
          of a high security fence between
          the spectators and the playing field
          prevents both the exercising of
          control over crowd misbehaviour
          and the egress of spectators at a
          time of panic or disaster. The use
          of fences to restrict crowd movement
          in a cage environment may not be
          the best solution. Safety may well
          be better served by an open-plan
          concept for grounds where spectators
          are placed within specific areas
          to which access and egress are rapid
          and simple. Provided that sightlines
          are also open, the general feeling
          of spaciousness can enhance the
          overall attractiveness of the facility.

          Where such fences have to be
          provided,     emergency    gates    of
          sufficient    width   and   proximity,
          adequately linking with all areas
          of the terrace and capable of being
          opened     without   danger towards
          the pitch should be provided. These
          must be manned at all times the
          public are present.

2.3.3.4   Open approaches to stands. The
          latter-day concept of high walls
          and fences around grounds within
          which paykiosks are located is no
          longer tenable, and new grounds
          should eliminate      the   restrictive
          strips of land between the boundary
          fences and the spectator stands.
          The positioning and number of pay
          kiosks, or turnstiles, should be
          carefully    considered.     Sufficient
          capacity of controlled ingress points
          need to be provided to each spectator
          zone to provide for orderly controlled
          access to the event and prevent
          excessive queuing.       The location
          of such provision should be such
          as to avoid restriction to crowd
          flow on egress.

          Reliable counting systems should
          be provided to enable management
          to have immediate knowledge of
          the number of spectators in each
          zone.

          The removal of the barriers to free
          movement      outside    the    stands
          eliminates the feeling of being within
          a stockade and may well promote
          better    crowd     behaviour.     The
          occasional misdemeanours by some
          spectators is readily handled within
          an   open-plan system.       Incidents

                           14
                within strips of land between boundary
                fences and stands are difficult to
                handle and control, and the ease
                of access provided by the removal
                of boundary fences facilitates crowd
                handling by police, and operations
                by fire and ambulance services.

      2.3.3.5 Barriers of sufficient strength for
              guarding stairs, ramps and other
              spectator    areas. Stairs   providing
              access and egress to stands should
              be well designed to obviate dangerous
              jostling by spectators and dangerous
              forward movements to groups of
              spectators. Collapse of a mass
              of individuals can cause severe
              crushing of persons caught in the
              zones of maximum thrust, resulting
              in injuries and confusion. Therefore,
              barriers must be sited and designed
              to withstand crowd pressures and
              to prevent collapse and to control
              movement and divert flow (see Section
              5).

      2.3.3.6   Readily     accessible   exits. Rapid
                exit of spectators in emergency
                situations is important. Exits should
                be readily accessible and should
                be fully allowed for in appraisal
                of stand capacities. If necessary
                extra emergency routes/exits should
                be provided.

      2.3.3.7   Fire safety. The materials used
                in the construction of new grounds
                should inhibit combustion and the
                spread of fire,        thus providing
                spectators with an opportunity for
                escape and survival.          Section 4
                considers this aspect of life safety.

                Where    practicable    materials   in
                existing structures should be treated
                to improve resistance to fire.
2.3.4 Spectator comfort
      Comfort is a relative description in the context
      of open-air grounds since climatic conditions
      largely control the amount of comfort
      experienced by spectators.

      Seating should be clean and comfortable,
      and the manoeuvrable spaces between the
      seats should be adequate for all sizes of
      persons. Seating decks should be free of
      columns to permit a clear view of the playing
      surface by all spectators. Spectators should
      be as close as possible to the playing surface,
      commensurate with public safety in respect
      of the activity in question.

                                IS
Quite apart from safety considerations,
enjoyment will be enhanced by good lighting,
clear audible public address systems. The
use of fittings and fixtures that are either
reasonably vandal proof and easily replaceable
should be considered.
DESIGN MATTERS
3.1   GROUND ASPECTS OF DESIGN AND SAFETY

      The safety of the sports ground covers two aspects.
      First structural safety, which means that each individual
      structural component as well as the whole structure
      should be sound, adequate and durable, and able to
      resist the pressures and loadings associated with high
      crowd densities and all other loading conditions.
      Adequacy inevitably includes structural fire protection.
      The second aspect is safety of spectators, which
      concerns hazards to the crowd and elimination as far
      as practicable of the sources of such hazards.

3.2   OTHER ASPECTS

      However, the implementation of safer sports grounds
      has to be made with regard to human behaviour, so
      that both the risk of failure is reduced and the chance
      of success is increased. In the light of limited budgets
      priority (in terms of safety) has to be given to those
      aspects of any facility that most improve safety. Lack
      of adequate funding does not justify potentially
      dangerous conditions. Such conditions will require
      restricted use or closure.

3.3   USAGE

      3.3.1   Place in the community
              Sports grounds need to be seen by the
              community as a comfortable recreational
              facility suitable for the family. They should
              be capable of diversification of use.

              The football authorities hope that grounds
              will become a more broadly based recreation
              facility for the family, to compete with
              television and become a facility for the
              community. There is a need to think in wider
              design terms, e.g. the implications of
              converting standing areas to seated areas,
              provision of family only sections, separation
              of home and away fans for soccer, and other
              uses.

               Grounds need the flexibility to cater safely       Code of practice for
               and comfortably for multiple usage from            pop festivals, GLC
               pop festival, football league, international
               tennis to, say, secondary school sports, which
               may require very different crowd safety
               control arrangements.

      3.3.2   Managing grounds safely
              The great challenge in designing sports grounds     Canter D, Comber M,
              to give greater safety is to do so without          Uzzell D: Football in
              creating the impression that the place is           its place: an
              a fortress or prison. Physical structures           environmental psychology
              carry meanings to the public that may not           of football grounds,
              be intended or even though of by designers          Methuen 1988
              and engineers. It is therefore necessary that
they consider what the meanings and social
implications are of what they design and
build.

They should consider implicit messages that
their structures may carry for different groups
who see and use them. The symbolic
implications of spatial arrangements, materials,
textures and colours should all be examined
closely. Freedom of movement and standard
and range of secondary services all indicate
to staff, spectators and the interested public
the regard in which they are held.

Anxiety    and     distress    in    threatening
circumstances, are magnified by a feeling
of lack of control over one’s own actions.
The greater the freedom the spectator feels
in using a sports ground, the happier that
experience is likely to be. Designers should
seek to enhance this feeling of being in control,
taking into account the current significance
of the role of police in managing most large
crowds.

Designing to reduce the impact of vandalism
is a special case in which an imaginative
design response should be combined with
effective management.       Making potential
targets for vandals as tough as possible
(sometimes known as ’target hardening’) can
create an ambience in which the public may
feel alienated and vandals challenged. Design
and maintenance strategies that allow broken
fitments to be rapidly replaced (’target
softening’) may create a situation that is
more inviting to the public and less attractive
to vandals.

Additional facilities beneath stands
The use of grounds on an interm ittent basis,
is a commercial limitation that necessitates
additional income from other sources such
as pools and sponsors. The use of space for
diverse commercial businesses within sports
grounds can provide financial resources for
the club and can benefit the local community
by employment and service to industry. Space
available below inclined seating may well
be suitable to provide additional facilities
provided that such uses are adequately
compartmented from the stands above. In
providing such facilities, full account must
be taken of its effect on the safety of the
ground in general usage, including the need
to provide adequate fire compartmentation
between the different uses.
3.3.4   Comfort
        Comfort of the spectator also forms a major
        consideration in the design of stands. Inevitably
        in these days of television, fewer and fewer
        people will be attracted to sports grounds
        unless comfort conditions are improved. The
        level of comfort can be raised by providing
        a warmer environment, roomy seats or
        accommodation, protection against elements
        (i.e. against rain or chilly wind), refreshment
        facilities of reasonable standards, as well
        as toilet facilities.

3.3.5   Viewing and sightlines
        One of the important parameters in the design
        of sports grounds is ’good viewing’. It is
        essential that the spectator should be able
        to see the principal object of the sports (such
        as the football, tennis ball, the athlete, the
        horse or the car as the case may be. This
        is also a primary consideration in appraising
        an existing sports ground. When large crowds
        are present and densities are high, the
        frustration from lack of proper visibility
        of the principal object can cause distress
        and other emotional reactions with a
        consequent build-up of pressure within the
        crowd. Where viewing areas do not afford
        a satisfactory view of the event, they should
        be eliminated from capacity calculations.

        Some consideration of viewing and sightlines
        is given in Appendix E.

3.3.6   Circulatory space
        It is necessary to provide a greater area for
        circulation in the case of perambulatory
        viewing such as athletics and horseracing
        than for stationary viewing such as football.

SAFETY OF SPECTATORS

3.4.1   Home Office Guide
        Since the Ibrox Park disaster on 2 January
        1971, the safety of spectators in sports grounds
        has been extensively studied in the UK. The
        sources of problems have been identified
        and recommendations given in the Guide
        to safety at sports grounds to minimize hazards
        to the crowd, with particular emphasis on
        football grounds. Recommendations include
        both ingress and egress arrangements to and
        from the sports ground and means of escape,
        standards for stairways, ramps and handrails,
        fire precautions as well as the standard for
        viewing slopes and terraces, including layout
        of and design criteria for crush barriers.
        Pressures can be set up within a departing
        crowd by impatient people; such incipient
        pressures can and must be contained and
        controlled by careful attention to the detailed
        design of barriers, stairways, gangways and
        exits. Reference should be made to Section
        5 for further information on flow rates etc.
3*4.2   Deviations
        Although the recommendations of the Guide
        are not mandatory, they are accepted as
        guidelines by the local authorities in enforcing
        the Safety of sports grounds Act 1975. The
        Guide however, was prepared primarily in
        the experience of football grounds; therefore
        some of the recommendations may need
        modification before being applied to grounds
        used for other activities such as tennis,
        horseracing, etc.

        Deviations from individual guidelines are
        possible without necessarily detracting from
        the overall safety of the ground. The variety
        of type, function and layout of sports grounds
        and the inter-relationship of the different
        parts of them means that a flexible approach
        should be maintained to take account of the
        particular circumstances at individual grounds.

        It is necessary to evaluate flow characteristics,
        which are generally based on notional ideas.
        The rate of ingress at which people move
        is variable and could easily change, e.g. parents
        looking for children etc. Ingress and egress
        rates are hard to calculate as people do not
        divide themselves evenly. People will go
        where they want in order to get on to ’targ et’
        to where they are going, rather than sorting
        out into an even distribution. At certain
        events, e.g. Olympics, people drift in and          Jake Pauls: American/
        out depending on the attraction of the event.       Canadian Olympic Games
        To have even flow it is essential that exits
        are free from obstruction, and/or loose or          Life safety code
        ill-repaired surfaces and remain free of smoke      handbook, FK 802, 1988
        in the event of a fire in the facility. Crowds
        progress at different rates, which are slower
        for old than young people and are also reduced
        with increasing density. Planning for orderly
        ingress and evacuation of large crowds in
        any condition is difficult and needs serious
        quantitative and qualitative consideration
        by an appropriately qualified professional
        person. Section 5 and Appendix B deal with
        this aspect more fully.

        The types of safety problem to be considered
        within a ground and in its immediate
        surroundings, all of which are linked in some
        way, include:

        1.   hazards that cause individuals to trip,
             slip and fall, causing individual injury
             and possible serious further injuries as
             a result

                              20
               2. uncontrolled and    unacceptable   build
                   up of crowd pressures during ingress
                   and/or within any spectator zone during
                   the performance

               3. danger of crushing of people during            Life safety code
                   evacuation, particularly in emergency         handbook, 4th edit., 1988
                   conditions.                                   Ed. James K. Lathrop
              4. risk from fire (see Section 4)

               5. failure of elements of construction under
                   the effects of crowd pressures (see
                   Sections 6 and 7).

      3.4.3   Information transmission
              The importance of communicating clearly
              and audibly to people, particularly those
              waiting either on exit or entry, cannot be
              stressed too strongly. Good public-address
              systems are required.
3.5   STRUCTURAL SAFETY

      3.5.1   Appraisal and Codes
              References
              Structural safety is the primary consideration
              of structural appraisal and design. For a
              new structure, the design generally follows
              the recommendations of the Codes of Practice
              appropriate to the m aterial to be used. If
              guidance in some respect is not clear cut
              or sufficient in the Code it is based on
              engineering judgment and appreciation backed
              up by experience and/or tests.

              In the current Codes of Practice an accepted
              level of safety is deemed to be achieved
              by the use of partial safety factors on loads
              to allow for the possibility of a given load
              being exceeded accidentally and by partial
              safety factors on the strength of materials
              to cater for its probable variation in the
              actual construction. At the design stage,
              for example, many factors remain unknown
              and need to be covered by a safety margin
              in loads and materials.

              Where the design involves the construction
              of structures of unusual configuration, long
              span or the use of unconventional materials
              it is especially important that the construction
              be monitored on a continuous basis by
              competent engineers familiar with the
              intentions of the design so that safety margins
              are not impaired by faulty or substandard
              construction.

              In the appraisal of existing stands, however,
              the situation is somewhat different since
              most of the variables are determinate. In
              consequence, it is possible and often preferable
                                    2.1
              to apply engineering judgment as to the
              appropriate level of these safety margins
              such that the assessment does not become
              inordinately conservative. When appraising
              existing structures particular attention has
              to be paid to the effects of joints or elements
              from corrosion, from cracking and from
              potential degradation by fatigue. What is
              most important is the application of rigorous
              methodology to the m atter of appraisal so
              that nothing is missed or misinterpreted.
              Accordingly, it is essential that this appraisal
              is carried out by a chartered structural or
              civil engineer with appropriate experience
              of such structures.

              The Institution of Structural Engineers has        Appraisal of existing
              published Appraisal of existing structures,        structures, IStructE,
              which gives general guidance for assessing         London, 1980
              structures. It is recommended that this
              document should be followed in the structural
              assessment of existing stands and their
              components.

3.6   LOADING

      3.6.1   Permanent loads and load combinations
              All relevant loads should be considered            NFPA 102 Assembly
              invidually or in the approriate combination        seating, tents and
              to give the most critical effects on the           membrane structures,
              elements and the structure as a whole.             1986, Chap 4
              In addition to its self-weight and any other
              permanent loads, the structure should be
              designed to withstand loadings from crowds
              and their movement, wind, snow and any
              other forces to which it may be subjected.
      3.6.2   Vertical imposed floor loads
              For the most part, it is likely that the loading   BS 6399: Part I: 1984
              in BS 6399: Part 1, Table 7 is appropriate.        Loadings for
                                                                 buildings
                  areas without fixed seating 5.0 kN/m2          Additional information
                  or a concentrated load of 3.6kN                in South African Civil
                                                                 Engineer; August 1971
                  areas with fixed seating 4.0 kN/m2             ’measurement of live
                                                                 load on a temporary
                  corridors, passageways   and    stairs         stand for spectators’.
                  5.0 kN/m2 or a concentrated load 4.5
                  kN.

              In come circumstances, it may be appropriate
              to appraise a stand in the light of the static
              and dynamic loads it is likely to receive.

              In this context at peak crowd densities without
              obstacles a person will occupy an ellipse
              equivalent to 54 persons per 10 m. Seated
              areas generally operate at a density of 2.4
              to 3.6 seats per m 2 dependent on the type
              and arrangement of seats. These figures
              are exclusive of gangways.

                                  22
            3.6.3    Imposed roof loads
                     The roof structure must be able to withstand        BS 6399: Part I
                     the effects of imposed loadings given in
                     BS 6339: Part 3. Attention should be paid           BS 6399: Part 3
                     to the effects of concentration or asymmetry
                     caused by possible patterns of snow drifting        BRE Digest 332
                     in valleys in relation to the shape of the roof     (May 1988)
                     and to the possible effects of previous remedial
                     works on the self-weight of the roof.

                     In determining the adequacy of the roof attention
                     should be paid to its accessibility. This will
                     apply particularly to existing roofs, where
                     access other than for cleaning, although
                     unintended, may be possible.
            3.6.4    Wind loads
                     Both in the design of new stands and in the         Supplement to the
                     appraisal of existing ones, the assessment          national building Code
                     of wind loadings is crucial.                        of Canada 1985,
                                                                         Commentary B
                     For locations in the UK, reference should
                     be made initially to CP 3: Chapter V: Part          Wind loads, National
                     2* and BRE digests 119, 283 and 284.                Research Council of
                                                                         Canada, Ottawa, 1985
                                                                         CP 3: Code of basic
                                                                         data for the design
                                                                         of buildings: Chapter V:
                                                                         Loading, Part 2: Wind
                                                                         loads*
                                                                         BRE digests:
                                                                         119 The assessment of
                                                                         wind loads (1984)
                                                                         283 The assessment of
                                                                         wind speed over
                                                                         topography (1984)
                                                                         284 Wind loads on
                                                                         canopy roofs (1986)
                                                                         Cook, N. J.:
                                                                         ’Reduction of wind
                                                                         loads on a grandstand
                                                                         roof’, Journal of Wind
                                                                         Engineering &
                                                                         Industrial Aerodynamics,
                                                                         10 1982
                                                                         ’A novel working approach
                                                                         to the assessment of wind
                                                                         loads for equivalent static
                                                                         design’, Cook, N. J., &
                                                                         Mayne, J. R. Journal of
                                                                         Industrial Aerodynamics,
                                                                         1979



* This code is due for replacement by:
BS 6399: Loading for buildings, Part 2: Wind loads
The new Code is expected to include a static/dynamic classification.
For stands of unusual configuration, form        cook, N. J.: ’Calibration
or location, this assessment may require         of techniques for the
specialist knowledge where consideration         prediction of peak
of both quasi-static loadings and dynamic        pressures', BRE, 1982
effects may be necessary, along with both
overall and localized effects.

When wind loading data are insufficient,
reference should be made to available
meteorological information on wind speeds
and direction, and an appropriate assessment
of design wind speed made for that particular
location.

For correct assessment of wind loadings on       Cook, N. J.: Simulation
a particular group of stands, a representative   techniques for short test
wind tunnel test may be required (see Section    section wind tunnels:
6 of Appraisal of existing structures).          roughness, barrier and
                                                 mixing device methods,
                                                 BRE, 1982
Where necessary specialist literature should     N. J. Cook. The
be consulted or specialist help sought.          designer's guide to wind
                                                 loading of building
                                                 structures: Part 1:
                                                 Background, damage
                                                 survey and structural
                                                 classification,
                                                 Butterworth, 1986
                                                 Part 2: Static structures,
                                                 Butterworth (in
                                                 preparation).
                                                 Redfeam, D.: A test rig
                                                 for proof-testing
                                                 building components
                                                 against wind loads, BRE,
                                                 Information Paper
                                                 IP19/84, 1984
                                                 Recommendations for
                                                 calculating the effects
                                                 of wind on construction,
                                                 Report no. 52, 2nd Ed.,
                                                 European Convention for
                                                 Constructional Steelwork,
                                                 Brussels
                                                 Supplement to the
                                                 national building Code
                                                 of Canada 1985,
                                                 Commentary B
                                                 American National
                                                 Standards Institute A58.1
                                                 Minimum design loads
                                                 in buildings and other
                                                 structures
                                                 'A novel working approach
                                                 to the assessment of
                                                 wind loads for equivalent
                                                 static design' Cook, N. J.
                                                 6c Mayne, J. R., Journal
                                                 of Industrial Aerodynamics,
                                                 1979

                    24-
                                                            Cook, N. J: ’Reduction
                                                            of wind loads on a
                                                            grandstand roof’, Journal
                                                            of wind engineering
                                                            and industrial aerodynamics
                                                            10, 1982
                                                            Eaton, K. J.: 'Buildings
                                                            and tropical windstorms’,
                                                            Overseas Building Notes
                                                            no. 188, April 198
                                                            Calibration of techniques
                                                            for the prediction of peak
                                                            pressures,
                                                            Cook, N. J., BRE Crown
                                                            Copyright, 1982
3.6.5   Imposed horizontal surge loads
        In addition to wind forces, the structure will
        need to resist applied longitudinal or transverse
        horizontal loads resulting from coordinated
        motions in the crowd.

        Recent research indicates that a force of           BS 5973: Access and
        up to 156 N per person parallel to rows of          working scaffolds and
        people, and 200 N per person perpendicular          special scaffold
        to seating rows should be allowed for. Such         structures in steel
        a force can be particularly significant to
        frameworks whose own self-weight is low
        (such as temporary stands), or those in a
        poor state of maintenance, and where crowd
        densities are high.
3.6.6   Dynamic loads
        Traditionally design has dealt with dynamic
        loads as equivalent static loads, increasing
        the value of dynamic forces by perhaps 15%
        or 20% and then treating them as static. This
        is perfectly satisfactory both from strength
        and stiffness requirements as long as the
        dynamic forces cannot excite resonant
        vibration. When an existing structure is known
        to be very lively or for any new structures,
        it should be confirmed that the amplitudes
        of vibration are small enough to avoid fatigue
        problems.

        For flexible roof structures, there is the
        possibility that steady winds may excite vortex
        shedding and hence resonant vibration of
        an appreciable amplitude. Likewise, concerted
        swaying, jumping or dancing by spectators
        may excite resonance of floors, barriers or
        handrails where there are natural frequencies
        below 4 Hz.




                              1 5
3.6.7   Handrail loads
        Handrails and balustrades should be capable         BS 6180: Protective
        of withstanding the loads defined in Table          barriers in and around
        3 of BS 6180. The strength of handrails             buildings
        (including supports) used to divide a stairway
        into channels should be as given in Table
        2 of the Guide to safety at sports grounds.
        This is especially important where masonry
        or other discontinuous materials are employed.
3.6.8   Crush-barrier loadings
        The loadings for which crush barriers, perim eter   Tuan, C. Y. & Saul,
        or dividing fences need to be designed are          W. E.: Journal of
        given in Section 9 of the Guide to safety           Structural Engineering,
        at sports grounds. Clearly, the individual          ASCE, Vol HI, no. 2
        building elements to which such barriers
        are fixed must withstand such localized load
        effects (see Section 6)

        The loading to which such barriers need to          Crush Barrier Strengths
        be designed are listed in the Guide to safety       and Spacings, Horn^Bf"
        a t sports grounds and take into account the        Office Note, March
        maximum number of rows of spectators,               1973
        the activity levels and the incline of the
        sloping terrace.      Different categories of       Creasy, L. R.:
        activity were categorized as ’lean’, ’strain’       Protective crowd
        and ’heave’ in studies carried out by the GLC.      barriers, Ministry of
        These studies form the basis of forces for          Works, 1948
        which crush barriers need to be designed
        (see Section 6, Appraisal of existing structures
        of existing structures and Appendix C).

STRUCTURAL SAFETY IN FIRE

3.7.1   Fire resistance
        The statutory requirement for the minimum
        period of fire resistance of a structure is
        normally specified in the Building Regulations
        or associated guidance.

        However,       single-storey   sports    ground
        structures, being open to the air without
        significant internal compartmentation for
        additional uses, may not be required by Building
        Regulations to have a specific fire resistance
        rating for structural members that only support
        a roof. Structural members that are built
        into or support a wall or cladding however
        may need to be fire resisting depending on
        the distance of the wall or cladding from
        the site boundary. The relevant period of
        fire resistance may be ? h or lh depending
        on the size of the stand. However, when
        there are additional enclosed uses (such as
        beneath inclined seating or if the structure
        supports tiers of seats one above the other),
        then those elements must have a minimum
        1 h fire resistance.
        The structure should be able to withstand
        a fire without collapse and prevent its growth
        and spread for a sufficiently long period to
        enable safe evacuation of the occupants. The
        degree of fire resistance required, therefore,
        varies with the fire risk of the building as
        well as the facility for rescue operations.
        In general it       is governed by three
        considerations:

        (i)   type of occupancy (i.e. the purpose for
              which the building is used)

        (ii) floor area and       cubic   capacity   of
             compartments and

        (iii) general height above the average ground
              level.

        Considerations (i) and (ii) are indicative of
        the expected fire load, the area of ventilation
        and the geometry of compartments that
        influence the fire severity and thus determine
        the degree of fire risk. Consideration (iii)
        relates to rescue operations. The higher
        the building, the more time is likely to be
        needed to evacuate the occupants to safety.

        Roof members do not normally need any
        specific fire rating unless they are designed
        to provide stability for the structure. In
        that case the period of fire resistance for
        the roof members will be the same as required
        for the pertinent area of the structure. Also,
        where the fire effect on a particular element
        may cause a disproportionate area to collapse,
        an additional protection may be necessary
        for the element to provide a minimum of
        1 h fire resistance. Steel columns supporting
        large areas of roof on the stands where there
        is a potential for a high local fire is such
        a case in point.
3.7.2   Smoke venting
        The form, organization and constructional
        material of a stand or sports ground must
        be such that accumulation of the products
        of combustion (smoke, toxic gases) does not
        occur so as to inhibit escape to the outside,
        either in still wind conditions or under the
        various directions of prevailing wind. When
        there are significant fire loadings, wind-
        tunnel studies may be required to assess the
        likely consequences of particular       wind
        directions, and additional smoke venting
        provided.

        Outdoor places of assembly are not to be
        considered as inherently 'smoke protected',
        expecially if they are constructed of
        combustible material.   Such constructions

                            2.7
will need evaluation using applicable methods
if there is any doubt as to the integrity of
the evacuation routes as 'places of safety'
free from smoke logging.

The provision of fire resistance as required       Cook, G. M. E. &
by Building Regulations is usually sufficient      Morgan, P. B. E.:
to ensure structural stability during the time     Thermal bowing in fire
necessary to permit safe escape, and also          and how it affects
professional   fire   fighting   from    inside    building design, BR1
conventional buildings.      Deformations of       Information Paper
substantial steel, concrete and masonry can        IP 21/88
be large in fire temperatures, rising as high
as 1200°C for considerable periods. Within
indeterminate constructions second order
stresses should be investigated. Premature
failure from thermal bowing of tall walls,
especially walls of (or containing) masonry
should be considered since standard fire
resistance tests are conducted on walls of
only 3 m high.        Such consideration is
particularly necessary when the failure of
one or more major structural elements subject
to fire can cause collapse remote from the
fire, where people have not yet had time
to escape.

The period for which stability is required
for life safety purposes must allow time for
evacuation to commence and the area to
be vacated to a place of safety. Protection
of elements to meet the half-hour standard
fire resistance test will achieve this, provided
that the deformation effects are also
considered.




                    23
*

4   FIRE AND FIRE SAFETY
    Safety from fire is achieved by measures that restrict               Guide to safety at
    initiation, rate of early growth and later spread of fire; provide   sports grounds
    and protect escape routes; segregate higher fire risk areas;
    provide warning (and where necessary detection) of fire;
    and assist with fire-fighting operations. The fire officer
    should always be consulted on m atters of fire safety.

    The type of accommodation that can present the greatest hazard
    in the event of fire is the existing covered stand where
    spectators sit or stand, where the level of combustibility
    may be high and the resistance to propagation and spread
    of fire is low. Such a combination of properties can endanger
    life, and because these are many combinations of
    accommodation fire engineering guidance should be obtained.
     Poor housekeeping, combustible structures, poor stewarding,
    no evacuation procedures, a lack of firefighting appliances
    or these not in the appropriate places, creates a great potential
_   danger from fire. Before the granting of a safety certificate
B   these hazards will need to be remedied.

    It is essential that in the event of fire, people in a stand have
    ample time to be able to make their way to safety by use
    of protected exit routes without having to endure smoke
    and toxic gases, heat radiation, etc. The means provided
    for escape depend on the rate at which the fire may develop,
    the number of people involved, as well as the size and geometry
    of the structure.

    4.1    FIRE SAFETY APPRAISAL STRATEGY
          The age of existing structures, their construction and
          resistance to spread of fire will vary considerably
          along with the chances of safe escape. It is therefore
          not considered practical or viable to produce a definitive
          set of rules from which a judgment can be made.
          Therefore an approach based on the experience of
          fire-prevention officers, licencing authorities and
          club management working within a set of defined
          parameters should be adopted. The assessment of
          the fire performance of an existing stand is dependent
          primarily on:

           . the layout

           . the materials and detailing of construction

           . the management of the facility

          all of which must independently comply with a minimum
          standard.

          However, it is important that the assessors, the club
          management and the local authority recognize that
          a performance of one aspect that is below minimum
          acceptable levels must result in severe restriction
          to the use of that element or improvement to the
          minimum level.



                                        29
In order to enable a relatively reliable means of assessing
the large number of parameters that influence fire
safety, the sports facilities are grouped into two risk
categories depending on construction materials and
contents. Tables 4.1 'Category 1 stands' and 4.2
'Category 2 stands' define this interaction and provide
the data defined in Fig. 4.1. Tables 4.1 and 4.2 set
out how additional escape time may be gained by the
provision of additional management and other system
features.


(1) Maximum capacity of stand based on the defined
    minimum fire protection measures



(2) The means of escape time as a function of the
    fire capacity can then be calculated from Section
    5.



(3) Stand capacity is defined and certified as the
    smaller of (1) and (2) above.

Fig. 4.1 Concept of appraisal strategy to determine
capacity of stand or ground

4.1.1    Allocation of stands to two categories
         Provided that there is compliance with the
         minimum standard,       the most significant
         features of       any    enclosure   are   the
         combustibility, spread of fire and smoke
         characteristics of the cladding and lining
         systems. These are therefore used as the
         criteria for allocation of a sports facility
         to one of the two categories given in clause
         4.1.2. The assessment is a function of the            BS 476: Part 6;
         spread of flame performance (i.e. Class               Definitions surface
         0 or Class 1 - Building Regulations, Part             spread of flame
         B) and the risk of lateral spread of fire. For
         'non-traditional' materials such as coated            Building Regulations
         textiles the assessment is more appropriately         Approved Document
         based on large scale ad hoc testing or a              B2/3/4 for Class 0
         manufacturers fire test certificate.                  definition

         Research into behaviour in fire shows that
         untrained people do not easily receive a warning
         of fire from the frequently ambiguous clues
         it gives when they are engaged on absorbing
         tasks such as eating, making a purchase or
         in this case watching a sporting event.
         Centralized control of the situation is therefore
         of importance.

         There is no basic awareness of the extremely         Canter, D.: Studies of
         rapid fire growth due to roofs and ceilings,         human behaviour in
         since experience of fire is, by and large,           fire; empiricalresults
         derived from cooking and bonfires. There             and their implications
         is a strong tendency therefore to stand and          for education and
         watch a fire, even in large rooms. A stand           design, BRE, Garston
         is an extreme case, where very hot gases             1985
                                30
            collect and rapidly migrate down its length.
            These radiate intense heat, which accelerates
            the fire growth and bums the occupants
            directly. Central management must be aware
            of this weakness in perception and have
            measures capable of overcoming it.

            All formal provisions for escape are directly
            related to the time at which escape
            commences, typically rather late in the
            development of an emergency. The ability
            to initiate early movement is a major factor
            in the economics of providing safety.

            The maximum and minimum escape times               Guide to safety at
            for the two categories are defined in Fig.         sports grounds, HMSO
            4.2.


            category              minimum         maximum
                                  exit time
#                                 min
                                                  exit time
                                                  min
            (1) Category 1        2.5             4.0


            (2) Category 2        4.0             8.0



            Fig. 4.2   Exit times for different categories

            Emergency evacuation time is the notional
            time taken by all people occupying a zone
            directly affected by the outbreak of a fire
            to reach a place of relative safety away from
            that fire.

            Calculated evacuation times should not exceed      National Fire Protection
            8 min, as longer times can lead to restiveness     Agency 101 (1988)
            in the crowd and the build-up of physical          Appendix D Life safety
            pressure that can also endanger life.              code 102 Appendix A
                                                               3-3 2.2
    4.1.2   Category 1 stands
            EITHER
            A stand consisting of walls and roof with
            a Class 1 spread of flame rating (BS 476:
            Part 7). The seating area to have minimum
            Class 2, or Class 0 if cushions are used. Where
            the linings consist of a composite of a number
            of materials the class rating is to be supported
            by a test for the composite construction.
            OR
            A stand consisting of combustible materials
            where it is possible to justify that the lateral
            spread of fire will not inhibit escape or fire
            fighting operations. For fire and flame spread
            assessment see subsection 4.4.

                                  31
4.1.3    Category 2 stands
        A stand consisting of walls and roof with
        a Class 0 spread of flame rating (BS 476: Parts
        6 and 7). The seating area to consist of Class
        1 surfaces, or Class 0 if cushions are used
        and all means of escape are adequately smoke
        protected.

4.1.4   Circulation areas
        In all categories, circulation areas, stairways
        and exit routes leading away from the stand
        should have Class 0 surfaces.

GUIDANCE FOR ASSESSING MINIMUM STANDARD
OF CONSTRUCTION AND PLANNING
4.2.1   General
        Generally, the appraisal should be guided
        by Building Regulations and appropriate
        legislation (see subsection 2.1). However,
        specific items that relate particularly to
        sports grounds must be considered in addition
        to the basic planning and structural aspects
        defined in this report and in the Guide to
        safety at sports grounds. Tables 4.1, 4.2
        and Fig. 4.3 should be referred to assist in
        the appraisal.

4.2.2   Compartmentation/protection of tiers
        Fire-resisting and fire stopping construction
        is required to separate high fire risk areas
        and voids. Floors separating stand tiers should
        also     have     appropriate      fire-resistant
        construction (see minimum requirements
        defined in Tables 4.1 and 4.2). Fire engineering
        guidance should be sought in these instances.

        Automatic sprinklers could be considered
        as an alternative to a lesser standard of
        compartmentation, although in the majority
        of cases compartmentation is the better
        option. If sprinklers are used in outside stands,
        a dry system may be necessary because of
        the problem of freezing.

4.2.3   Influence of fire and smoke on escape routes
        Escape routes should be planned to keep people
        well clear of the smoke from a fire. The
        hot buoyant smoky gases produced by a fire
        will flow upwards and will collect under and
        flow along roof spaces, balconies, etc. and
        be adversely affected by wind.

        The escape routes should be planned with
        these factors in mind so that people can
        generally move downwards and away from
        the smoke and be protected from radiation.
                                                                                                 ta b le     4 ,1   c a t e g < 3r /    i     S ta n d s
                           k a f t




                                                                             Surfaces to comply with       Pire and smoke hazard u u i u c n t is required unless                    SO » "» M
                                                                             Class 1 standard. Fire                                                                              n u r x
                                                                                                           surfaces comply with Class 1 standard.                                •n cn > o
                                               --------------------------




                                                                                                                                                                                 • wx *
 T H E




                                                                             and smoke assessment                                                                                _ www
                                                                                                                                                                                 nm
                                                                             required.                                                                                           rxu>
                                                                                                                                                                                 • W •<»Z
                                                                                                                                                                                 •• SBSOO
                           p




                                                                                                                                                                                 H>
                                                                                                                                                                                      w
                                                                                                                                                                                      >

                                                                                                                                                                                 »              °
 F O L L O W IN G




                                                                                                                                                                               * SO O O X
                                                                            Quality Assurance              A written submission from        No written submission from
                                                                                                                                                                               • w•» > >
                                                                            procedures are recommended     management is required           management essential, but
                               oh




                                                                            Ref cl. 4.3.1.                 for justification of their       recommended. Appointing              ssss
                                                                                                           proposals to approving           authorities to be satisfied          HZ mr
                                                                                                           authorities.                     with proposals. Ref. 4.3.            HOHJ
                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                 z *0
                           p i s c u js M h ttg
                                             ,




                                                                            Determinate                    Determinate                      Determinate                          99 Gt 98
                                                                                               1 Hour                          1 Hour                                            W          WH
                                                                            Structure                      Structure                        Structure         i Hour             *n » m»
                                                                                                                                                                                 *

                                                                                                                                                                                 o33
                                                                                                                                                                                 ra>
                                                                            Indeterminate                                                                                        • »*
 B E T. R U S V IS E T P




                                                                                               1 Hour      Indeterminate                    Indeterminate                        o tinw
                                                                            Structure                      Structure           } Hour       Structure         i Hour
                                                                                                                                                                                 fs>
                              1—




                                                                                                                                                                                 U
                                                                                                                                                                                 £ ”1 °
                                                                                                                                                                          ia» so "S > h n
                                                                            Pire resistance to be 1        Pire resistance to be $                                         ZM> ZHO
                                                                                                                                            Minimum i hour. Sprinklers o n o o x
                                                                            hour or as superstructure      hour or as superstructure        may be used to offset          • H  *>0
                                                                            whichever is greater.                                                                        > r o >
                                                                                                           whichever is greater.            shortfall. Voids under         qhho*
                                                                            Voids under s'eating not       Voids under seating not                                      nrh s h
                           s u b c o m m i t t e e ' s




                                                                                                                                            under seating acceptable   I* • H R X
                                                                            acceptable.                    acceptable.                      if cavity barriers and     l^i a so < r
                                                                                                                                                                           • H O Z
                                                                                                                                            detection provided.           •M N oH >
                                                                                                                                                                                  h[
                                                                                                                                                                                           MI
                                                i




                                                                                                                                                                          In "» » n > n
                                                                                                                                                                          O H 2 O Z >
 TO




                                                                            To be agreed with approving authorities.     Ref cl. 4.3.3., 4.3.4., 4.3.8.                   oaoiex
                                                                                                                                                                          hb          x         r
                                                                                                                                                                          re-** i e             x
                                                                            Details to be included in operating plan.                                                      iw w z
                                                                                                                                                                           IaX no
                                                                                                                                                                               !0 H
                                                                                                                                                                           1          H£        »
 YET




                                                                                                                                                                                                Z
                                                n
 6




                                                                            As 300 to 800, but allow     Additional systems and trained personnel above that
                                                ~




                                                                            $ minute maximum escape      defined in operating plan, if the measures are
                                                                            time only.                   considered to be affpctive and appropriate.
 HA
                           f i r e
                                                i
 T A B L E




                                                                       As 300 to 800, but allow          Additional facilities above that defined in operating
                                                                       J minute maximum escape           plan if appropriate.
                                                                       time only.
 TT-H S

                                                I




                                                                                                                                                                                     » wo
                                                                                                                                                                                     o nr
                                                                   Section 5.0 determines capacity by calculation procedure. If the escape route is very                             G O>
                                                                   clear, short and easily identified, additional escape time is appropriate.                                        H > 73
                                                                                                                                                                                     n      h
                                                                                                                                                                                           *0
                                                                                                                                                                                           nH
                                                                                                                                                                                                K


                                                                                                                                                                                     M”J >
                                                                                                                                                                                     •< h n
                                                                 Additional fire fighting systems above that defined in the operating plan if                                        MOH
                                                                 appropriate, allows additional escape time. cl. 4.3.8.                                                              *3 X H
                                                                                                                                                                                     WH <
                                                                                                                                                                                     x h n
                                                                                                                                                                                     mz
                                                                                                                                                                                         a •v

33
                                                   T A B L E 4 .2        C A T E C O R y 2. S T A M P S
                                     O
                                     <                                                             ui r
                                     n
                                     59                                                           oo MuR                                nO* ocXzneso«HuN
                                                                    ►J                                                               *0 a H C M
                                                                    o                                                                r n 55 55
                                                                                                                                     w 59 n a o
                                                                                                                                           mo            *■
                                                                                                                                           o a
                                                                                                                                              •<

                     Surfaces and' fixed seating    Sttrfacu and fixed seating                                                     Qh o 2 «#
                     to coaply with Class *0*                                        Surfaces to coaply with                       o n s r t
                                                    to coaply with Class •0 *        Class 'O' standard.                           Z M > > 59
                     standard. Pire and smoke       standard.                                                                      2 - 5 * w
    U1               spread assessment is

    ft               required.
                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                   ►J
                                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                   Z
                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                            59
                                                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                            ►*
                                                                                                                                                    O


                                                                                                                                            I
    o           u    Quality Assurance              A written submission froa       No written submission froa
    'z          ^    procedures are recoaaended
                     Ref. d . 4.3.1.
                                                    aanagement is required          Management essential, but
                                                                                                                                   Crt *0 O O Z
                                                                                                                                   n r *0 > >
                                                                                                                                   n » R*QZ
                                                    for justification of their      recoaaended. Appointing                        h z » »->
                                                    proposals to approving-                                                        H • >ma
                                                                                                                                       HH«
                                                                                    authorities to be satisfied                    o
                                                    authorities.                    with proposals. Ref. 4.3.                      z
                                                                                                                                     »
    o to                                                                                                                           • 1°3 2
    d           z    Determinate                    Deterainate                                                                            M » xg
                                          1 Hour                                    Deterainate
                0    Structure                      Structure            1 Hour
                                                                                    Structure              } Hour
    £                                                                                                                                         H H

                z    Indeterminate
                0                         1 Hour    Indeterminate                   Indeterminate
                     Structure                      Structure            } Hour                            } Hour
                                                                                                                                                             Z !
                                                                                    Structure

                    Pire resistance to be 1        Fire resistance to be J                                                      > 99"»>Hn
                                                                                                                                Z N >
                                                                                                                                                         S. I
                                                                                    Minimum f hour. Sprinklers                         MO
                    hour or as superstructure
                    whichever is greater.
                                                   hour or as superstructure        aay be used to offset
                                                                                                                                a «• o
                                                                                                                                  • H     S
                                                                                                                                        O Z
                                                                                                                                        Z *0
                                                   whichever is greater.            shortfall. Voids under                            s   >
    111 <tf)        Voids under seating not        Velds under seatng not                                                       • O H
                                                                                                                                NTH
                    acceptable.                                                     seating acceptable if                       • * H
                                                   acceptable.                      cavity barriers and                                   Z
                                                                                                                                        < n
                                                                                    detection provided.                         • ♦M M
                                                                                                                                             83
                                                                                                                                             01 I




                                                                                                                                EQO
                                                                                                                                PIG
                                                                                                                                AND
                                                                                                                                COM
                                                                                                                                AND
                                                                                                                                                    1 %




                                                                                                                                fiAK
                    TO be agreed with approving authorities.        Ref. cl. 4.3.3., 4.3.4., 4.3.8.                                         i g
®U1                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                              H X
                                                                                                                              2 H i a
                                                                                                                                       X  C• *
                                                                                                                                          m■
                    Details to be included in operating plan.
  m                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                              Z MMZ
                                                                                                                              ®9 Z 9 9 M  *I
                                                                                                                        I     9s o w n    >
                                                                                                                        I     H1       >  X
                                                                                                                                       H  Z
                                                                                                                                       H  H
                                                                                                                                       o  z
                                                                                                                                = ^= = = = ■ "
        >   <:      As 500 to 2000, but allow      Additional systeas and trained personnel above that                                    z
                    i ainute maximum escape                                                                                 »♦*           >
AZ                  time only.                     defined in operating plan, if the aeasures are
                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                   considered to be affective and appropriate by the                                             0 L
                                                   iittfforte                                                               8
                                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                                 n O
                                                                                                                                                 z o
  3                                                                                                                                              H HI
                                                                                                                        1*                       Z *
< CO                                                                                                                    1H
                                                                                                                        Iz
                                                                                                                                                 H H
                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                    z
                                                                                                                                                    >
                                                                                                                                                    r
* §                 As 500 to 2000, but allow
                                                                                                                    _       _

                                                                                                                                        n > w
                    t ainute aaxiaua escape                   f*Cilitiea above that defined in operating                                o z >
                    tiae only.                     plan if the aeasures are considered to be affective                                  Z O 99 Z
                                                                                                                                        z    r
                                                   and appropriate by the assessors.                                                            »
                                                                                                                                        C    K
                                                                                                                                        Z
rf>                                                                                                                     8               H
                                                                                                                                                >>
                                                                                                                                             « r*
                                                                                                                    1H                  o    > p"
                                                                                                                                        >    99 5
                                                                                                                    Iz                  H    Z
                                                                                                                    1H                  H   H
f           E                                                                                                       1Z                  o
                                                                                                                                        Z
                                                                                                                                            z z
                                                                                                                                            Q o
                                                                                                                    1+                          n
                                                                                                                                          > 01
                                                                                                                                          M Z **B
                                                                                                                    IH                    MO o
                                                                                                                    1                     n x 9BI
                                                                                                                                          w n
                                                                                                                                          M     n
                                                                                                                    I3                    Z X K
                                                                                                                     IS*                  n > 1-3
                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                        X                            >
                                                                                                                        H                      99
                                                                                                                     *                         O     •a
                                                                                                                    1                               9i
                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                        3 w o       <•
                                                                                                                                     o w r          HI
                                                                                                                                     c o >          OB
                                                                                                                        +            H > 99         H
                                                                                                                                     n *0 h         Q
                                                                                                                        M                  n H      Z
                                                                                                                                              K     a
                                                                                                                        Z
                                                                                                                        H                     O
                                                                                                                        z                     'n
                                                                                                                                                    z
                                                                                                                                                    HI
                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                    M         > z
                                                                                                                                    K H O
                                                                                                                    +               MO        H *c
                                                                                                                                    H Z       H
                                                                                                                    M               n H      <
                                                                                                                                    z h
34                                                                                                                  Z
                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                                    z
                                                                                                                                    MZ
                                                                                                                                      CJ
                                                                                                                                             n

                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                    §t
                                                                                                                    •                         99
                                                  Obtain drawings and a p p n U w w*la Ling
                                                  construction and allocate to riak
                                                  category
    up   qrnan
   C v n u tru e lio n




                                                                           DOOO t h e
   Stand                                                              s t a n d c o m p ly
                         NO (OPTION 2)                     w i t h m in im u m s t a n d a r d o f
                                                      c o n s tr u c tio n f o r th a t c a te g o ry




                                                                        yen the
   Cloon                 NO                                        atand comply
   Stand                                                       th minima* standard Tor
                                                      active lire measures and manage
                                              m eat   c a n a h im -v         eh a r» «   A .- }   a   a




calculate capacity                                                Is there
                         NO
of stand baaed un                                            ragairemBnt to excawh-
minlnum escape time                                         the minimus eseape time
using appendix                                                (see Flo 4-11.______

                                                                               rss



                                              Inoroaoc tho ocoapo time using Charts
                                              Pigs 4.3, 4.4, 4.S, Table 4.1 and
                                              general guidance in text.




                                              C«Li:ul«<W i.'<ti>Ai?lly oT                   b*o*i3 oa
                                              tftia time using section               $.



                                                                Does exit
                                                             Capacity exceed
                                                         the capacity of atand



                                                                                      'BS

                                         /tledufin          \
                                         { capacity off
                                         a la n d lo itia
                                          bnnnrt on
                                         V oaoapo              j
F X O i m za        at                   \.    time        y
        The influence of the geometry and the form
        of the roof influence the lateral spread of
        fire and smoke and therefore should be
        considered when planning means of escape.
        Proposals for means of escape and smoke
        assessments should be referred to the fire
        and licensing authorities. No routes that
        can readily be smoke logged should be
        permitted.

4.2.4   Measures to prevent or retard early fire growth
        It is absolutely crucial to restrict fire growth
        rate to manageable proportions because of
        the impact of fire growth rate on escape.

        There is a need to break the interaction
        between fire spreading in cavities, wooden
        seating and flooring. This can be done by:

            maintaining clean cavities (or filling
            voids with non-combustible material

            providing adequate compartmentation

            replacing combustible materials in floors
            and seating.

4.2.5   Fire resistance of structure and supporting
        stands
        The fire-resistance period of the structure
        supporting the stands should be compatible
        with the compartmentation (see clause 4.2.2)
        and usage and also sufficient to prevent
        premature collapse or progressive failure
        of a facility (indeterminate structures are
        an advantage in this respect).

        General requirements for fire-resistance
        periods are defined in the charts (Tables
        4.1, 4.2 and Fig. 4.3). However, these values
        are not definite, and careful consideration
        is required in appraising the consequences
        of failure of a particular element and its
        implications on means of escape and subsequent
        fire-fighting.

4.2.6   Fire-resistance appraisal
        Where specific test data, BRE guidelines
        and other sources are not available, an
        alternative fire-engineering approach may
        be adopted to make an assessment. This
        approach recognizes the influence of fire
        load, ventilation, location of structural
        members and their working stresses.

        The stability of structural members during
        a fire is controlled by the rise of temperatures
        and corresponding reduction in the strength
        of the material and the nature and magnitude
        of    loading     in    the    members.      The

                          3 a
         fire-engineering method of design can quantify
         the conditions to which structural members
         will be subjected in the event of a fire.

         Different approaches can be made when
         implementing fire-engineering, many being
         simple, while others are complicated, costly
         and time-consuming. For concrete structures,
         guidance for appraisal of fire resistance is
         given in the joint report of the Institution
         and the Concrete Society Design and detailing
         of concrete structures for fire resistance.
         In view of the cost implications involved
         in the length of a study, the level of potential
         cost savings should be evaluated to establish
         whether the application of fire engineering
         is worth while.

GUIDANCE FOR ASSESSING MINIMUM STANDARD
FOR MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES AND RELATED
ACTIVE FIRE PRECAUTIONS
In both existing sports grounds and in those of new
design, the way management organize the ground,
their stewards and supporting equipment is fundamental
to the safety of the spectators in the event of a fire.
Staff training, particularly for stewards, in carrying
out their normal duties and seeing that they are aware
of their role in an emergency situation should be given
the highest priority. It is the responsibility of the
management who should have the best knowledge of
their particular situation to produce the documented
evidence (operating plan) that they have considered
the total problem and that the stand/ground is safe
for the certified occupancy. It is important th at the
licence holder be a person with authority to implement
decisions made either in ground improvements and/or
during the use of the ground.

4.3.1   Quality assurance for larger facilities
        For     larger   facilities,  quality-assurance
        techniques can be used beneficially to provide
        the documentary evidence and give an effective
        means of monitoring the application of the
        management intent.        The following steps
        are a simple resume of the process:

             produce an operating manual to cover
             all aspects relating to crowd management,
             emergency situations and equipment

            verify and monitor the manual for, say,
            one year to show that it is adequate
            and consistent and that it forms a basis
            for certification

            adjust and update the manual as necessary

            continue monitoring the process, based
            on the operating manual.
            include in the manual itself details as
            to how these procedures are to be
            monitored on a regular basis for
            effectiveness.

4.3.2   Emergency procedures and staff training
        It is essential that plans should be made for
        dealing with emergencies including fire. The
        onus to do this lies with the management
        of the facility. Joint consultation between
        management, police, fire, local authority
        ambulance and other emergency services
        should take place in order to produce agreed
        plans of action for all foreseeable types of
        emergency. While the public are in the ground,
        the number of staff on duty should be sufficient
        to cover entrances, exits and other strategic
        points and to fulfil other essential duties.
        As well as fire stewards, other staff should
        be trained in the use of firefighting equipment,
        and in the action they should take in the
        event of fire.

        It is necessary for management to make
        provision for the collection of information
        of a quality that will convey real conviction
        at a sufficiently early stage for it to activate
        plans for dealing with emergencies. This
        will almost certainly involve a control centre
        with authority to collate and act on information
        and means of communication with individuals
        on the ground staff, police and the public.
        In many instances of major life-loss fires,
        the transmission of information through normal
        organizational hierarchies has been too slow
        to be effective. Persons such as referees,
        gatekeepers, caterers and sales staff (implied
        by the additional facilities noted in clause
        3.3.3) must be included to remove the conflict
        of interest noted in clause 4.1.1.

        Organization of stewards and their training
        to respond appropriately in an emergency
        is the management's responsibility, but the
        advice of the local fire and police authorities
        should be sought on the content of their training
        programme and channelled through the club's
        licence holder/safety officer.

        It is recommended that each steward/attendant
        is issued with a written set of basic operating
        instructions appropriate to the particular
        location and responsibility (see Appendix
        A2).
4.3.3   Public-address system
        In dealing with any emergency situation it          Canter, D. (ed): Fires
        is important to recognize the way people            and human behaviour,
        behave. The seriousness and extent of effect        2nd edit., David Futton,
        has been found to depend considerably on            1989

                           3$
        the reactions and patterns of activity of
        people associated with the emergency or
        fire situation.

        It is especially important that appraisers
        and designers recognize the need to minimize
        any delay to the start of the evacuation. In
        this context, clear authoritative and planned
        instructions that tell people simply and directly
        that there is a need to evacuate the area
        and giving them direct instructions on how
        to do this are needed. It is important to
        identify exit routes and gates (see clause
        2. 2. 6).

         It is extremely important that these are given
         on a reliable and audible address system. At
         no stage should the term 'panic' be mentioned,
         especially not in the form of 'don't panic'
         or even implicitly in the form of 'please keep
         calm'. There should be no reference to actual
        or potential emotional state, simply directions
        telling people what to do. In a complex
        building, this may require different instructions
        to be given to people in different parts, but
        everyone should be kept informed of the
        procedures being put in motion. Staff should
        be made aware of the situation. A prearranged
        set of code words is one way of keeping staff
        informed. The capability to arrive at an
        early decision to evacuate an area will assist
        the announcers considerably in making such
        low-key messages. Experience of past fatal
        fires has revealed attem pts to delay
        announcements of a developing fire in case
        'panic' should occur.

4.3.4   Fire detection (fire alarm systems)
        A monitored automatic fire-detection system
        is needed to enable reliable early detection
        and start on evacuation procedures. This
        must register in the control centre/room
        where the public-address system is situated,
        and to prevent potentially dangerous confusion,
        should not be audible to the general public.

        When considering the specification of a new
        system, BS 5839 should be used. Attention           BS 5839: 1988
        is drawn to the provisions for life safety.
        The     modem     computer    based    analogue
        addressable systems are more easily maintained
        and have considerable self-checking ability.
        They have an inherent capability to provide
        information giving the precise location of
        the device that detected the fire and at many
        locations remote from their control equipments.
        This is an essential for safe first aid, fire­
        fighting, rapid discovery of false alarms or
        to convey sufficient information for the control
        centre to activate the most suitable strategy
        to deal with the problem.

                         39
4.3.5    Video surveillance
         There are financial penalties associated with
         suspension of activities and, by inference,
         the pressure on control centre staff to avoid
         implementing emergency plans. On Football
         League grounds police video surveillance
         of crowds is already provided. Consideration
         should be given to using those facilities so
         that control centre staff receive sufficiently
         positive information at first hand so that
         they can make decisions quickly. Colour
         equipment is necessary to make judgments
         on fires. It will be borne in mind that a
         correctly handled event will have caused
         a disruption apparently for nothing, since
         neither death nor even casualty will occur.
4.3.6    Fire loading
         Seating, partitioning and any other fixed
         or movable contents including seat cushions,
         hired or sold, should possess a good performance
         in fire. Cushions and seating should comply
         with current furniture legislation.

4.3.7    Contents
         Contents should not be easy to dismantle
         and used maliciously as projectiles or to start
         a fire.

4.3.8    Litter
         Accumulation of litte r should be scrupulously
         avoided; easily accessible non-combustible
         litter bins should be provided with provision
         for collectionprior to each activity.
4.3.9    Provision of fire-fighting equipment
         Advice will need to be sought from the local
         fire authority. At least the following should
         be considered and should form part of the
         safety certificate:

              provision of adequate water supply and
              hydrants

              hose reels to BS 5306: Part 1, of sufficient   BS 5306: Part 1
              length to reach the whole area

              provision of portable fire extinguishers,
              properly maintained and protected from
               vandalism to BS 5423 and sited and            BS 5423
               maintained according to BS 5305: Part              BS 5303: Part 3
               3.
4.3.10   Measures to restrict the extent of fire spread
         in later stages
         Restricting the extent and speed of fire spread
         in the later stages of fire will reduce the
         possibility of people's escape being further
         threatened, assist the operations of the fire

                              4o
        brigade, and reduce the ultimate size of fire
        and extent of damage. Most measures that
        reduce the rate of fire growth in the early
        stages will help to restrict fire spread in
        later stages.

FIRE AND SMOKE ASSESSMENT
4.4.1   Smoke assessment
        Where the roof geometry is not in itself capable   Thomas, P. H., &
        of ejecting smoky gases, then reservoirs to        Hinkley, P. L.: Design
        contain them together with roof venting            of roof venting systems
        to cause them to flow to the outside may           for single-storey
        be advisable. The design of such systems           buildings, HMSO, London
        is normally made for still-air conditions. With    1964
        an open building of this kind, the effectiveness
        of the venting can be strongly influenced
        by the wind because over-pressures generated
        above a roof and/or sections underneath it
        can oppose the flow of smoky gases out of
        a vent and even cause a complete reversal
        of flow so that air from above the roof flows
        down through the vent. Thus roof venting
        cannot be a universal solution.

        As the gases rise, they entrain air strongly
        which increases their volume and lowers
        their temperature. Further cooling takes
        place by radiation and convection heat transfer
        as the gases flow under roofs etc., and
        eventually they may have lost enough buoyancy
        for them to follow air movements created
        by any wind. This could mean that, within
        a stand, smoke is brought down to ground
        level. Expert assessment and possibly wind-
        tunnel testing may be required.

4.4.2   Smoke control measures
        It is vital to keep smoke away from escape
        routes by restricting its travel and even making
        it flow out of the building altogether.

        Geometries of some roofs, e.g. transverse
        open-ended barrel vaults, can promote the
        rapid ejection of smoky gases from a stand
        and inhibit their spread along it. Conversely,
        longitudinally vaulted roofs favour the rapid
        spread of smoky gases along a stand. Expert
        assessment and possibly wind-tunnel testing
        may be required.

4.4.3   Restriction of flame travel under roofs
        Flames from a large fire that impinge on
        the underside of a roof or balcony, even one
        made of inert material, will elongate very
        considerably as they flow along under the
        roof and, radiating downwards, can put people
        below in great danger and greatly enhance
        the spread of fire horizontally at floor level.
        As with smoke spread the geometry of the
        roof can inhibit or favour spread of flame
        along a stand and should be carefully
        considered.
               A stand consisting of combustible materials
               where it is possible to justify that the lateral
               spread of fire and smoke will not inhibit escape
               or fire-fighting operations may be acceptable.

               The desirability of preventing undue flame
               travel under roofs, even those made of inert
               material, is important. Where this cannot
               be prevented by the intrinsic form of the
               roof, then it may be possible to restrict the
               travel of flame along the underside of a roof
               by installing deep roof screens, combined
               with substantial areas of venting in the roof
               to allow the flame to pass to the outside.
               The reservoirs so formed should generally
               be much smaller than are needed for smoke
               ventilation in order to reduce the area of
               stand exposed to unacceptably high levels
               of heat radiation. Much larger areas of venting
               would be required than are needed for smoke
               venting. However, with the greater buoyancy
               of the flames, the effect of wind is likely
               to be less important. The roof screens together
               with their fixings must be able to resist attack
               by flame and very hot gases for a period
               commensurate with escape and fire-fighting
               operations.

               Where the roofs of stands are so connected
               that smoke and flames could travel along
               essentially two or more sides of a pitch, a
               wide break in the roof should be made to
               separate each side, unless flame travel could
               be eliminated by the measures above.

               In very difficult cases, removal of the roof
               altogether should be considered.

4.5   PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL FIRE PRECAUTIONS
      TO EXTEND MEANS OF ESCAPE TIME
      If the exit capacity of the stand is less than actual
      capacity of the stand, it is feasible (subject to the
      limitations of Fig. 4.2 and guided by Tables 4.1 and
      4.2) to increase the escape capacity by the addition
      of further safety provisions. The methodology of the
      approach is defined in the flow chart of Fig. 4.3.

      Additional     management       activities      or active
      fire-protection measures must be justified by the
      management and supported by a sound technical
      submission, and agreed by the licencing authority.
      It should be clear that the additional provisions will,
      in reality, improve the safety of the facility.
4.6   COVERED GROUNDS
      Although completely covered grounds in which both
      the sporting activity and spectators are covered by
      one single enclosure do not come under the Safety
      at sports grounds Act, many of the criteria and
      recommendations concerning category 2 stands are
      appropriate to covered grounds.

                                 42
NEW STANDS AND COVERED GROUNDS
The recommendations defined in this section are
appropriate for both new stands and covered grounds
and can be used as a basis for developing and approving
new designs that are 'smoke-protected places of
assembly'.

To be described as a 'smoke-protected place of assembly'   NFPA 102: Assembly
all surfaces must generally have low combustibility        seating, tents and
of Class 0, means of egress must be direct, and the        membrane structures
roof must be at least 5 m above the highest seating.       1986
Further, a smoke ventilation system should be engineered
to maintain the level of smoke generated by any possible
fire within the area or adjacent compartments at a
minimum of 2.5 m above the highest seating or walking
levels.

However where occupied areas open to the space are
over 5 m above potential fire load then the clear height
from the highest occupied level to the calculated smoke
base should be at least 3.0 m.
CROWD SAFETY AND COMFORT

5.1   GENERAL
      The Guide to safety at sports grounds contains procedures       Guide to safety at
      for evaluating the capacity of different parts of sports        sports grounds. Home
      grounds. Chapter 16 of that Guide gives examples for            Office/Scottish
      the estimation of safe ground capacity.                         Office, 1986
      Assessment must be made of:

                the holding capacity of a terrace or viewing
                slope or seated area

                the capacity of a given exit routes from a terrace
                or stand in combination or singly.             Full
                consideration has to be given to the effects
                of potential obstructions that could occur

                the location of crush barriers to minimize
                pressures associated with crowd movements.

      The number of people that can be safely accommodated
      on a terrace or in a stand (or other covered
      accommodation) is either its holding capacity, or the
      capacity of the exit system to be used in normal
      circumstances at the end of an event, or the emergency
      exit system, whichever is the least.

5.2   PASSAGEWAY BLOCKAGES
      With a crowd moving along a passageway, physical blockage
      can occur once a critical density is reached. In these
      conditions crowd pressures can escalate to a dangerous
      level, and if a person stumbles or falls the crowd cannot
      adapt to avoid him or to stop to help.

      The blockage may be 'spontaneous' and does not require
      an obstruction such as people forming a 'comprehensive
      arch' against the onward stream between the 'abutments'
      of the passage boundaries. Any obstruction such as people
      falling will of course aggravate the effect.

      Once a blockage occurs, the build-up of pressure and
      resultant injury and asphyxiation may be rapid if the
      following crowd is not halted and is unaware of the
      obstruction ahead.

      Since this type of danger arises from crowd pressures
      its remedy lies in their removal or restraint within safe
      limits.

      The essential limits are:

               the means of controlling the crowd density
               along the route by limiting the rate of access
               into the route such that the rate does not exceed
               the capacity of the route itself

               the design of the passageway to eliminate
               obstructions to flow and other hazards
          provision of sufficient barriers on terraces
          to restrain surges in 'peak' or 'other' viewing
          areas without incurring pressures on the human
          body that cannot be 'tolerated'.
FLOW RATES
The recommended flow rates given in Chapter 17 of
the Guide to safety at sports grounds are:

         From stands and stairways, a flow rate of 40
         persons per minute per unit of exit width (i.e.
         550 mm) should be used. From terraces (including
         covered terraces) and the ground generally
         a flow rate of 60 persons per minute per unit
         of exit width should be used.

The design of each passageway            section against these
flow rates should be for those           flows expected in an
emergency and where necessary             take account of the
possible loss of availability of other   exits in an emergency.

It should be noted that all rates may be reduced where
spectators may be less physically able, after consultation
with both the licensing and building authorities. For
such conditions Appendix B gives the derivation behind
the currently accepted rates of flow for crowds.
SEQUENCE OF CALCULATION
The capacity of an element is the product of the flow
rate, the available width and the emergency evacuation
time, as defined in Section 4.

The sequence of calculations for each element in the
ground is illustrated in Fig. 5.1. It recognizes that should
a particular element fail to reach the required capacity
the options are generally to improve the element or
to reduce the overall capacity (see Fig. 4.3).

CONTROL OF CROWD FLOW IN AN EMERGENCY
The need to control the flow of crowds in emergency
situations is recognized. In an emergency, reactions
may not be logical, and clear concise directions must
be given. It is important that exit passageways are
identified, signed and sized, and allowance should be
made for the emergency situation when other exits may
be unusable. Care should be taken in the planning of
exit systems so that, in the event of an emergency that
blocks any of the usual exit routes, alternative routes
will be available. Management and stewards must be
familiar with both the layout and organization of the
ground and the plans for emergency evacuation.
Arrangements for entry and exit and those for seated
or standing accommodation can conveniently be considered
separately. Disasters at Ibrox (1972) and Birmingham
(1984) occurred during egress, while those a t Bolton
(1946), Oxford and Carlisle (1973) happened on the terraces
because of collapse of barriers or insufficient barriers.
   |      DEFINE ENCLOSURES , TERRACES AND STANDS



          CALCULATE ENCLOSURE CAPICITY


                                                        NOT        REDUCE CAPACITY
          CHECK ENCLOSURE EXITS                         ----- *
                                                        O.K.       ^IMPROVE EXITS

                      O.K.



  I_____ CALCULATE TERRACE CAPACITY

 r -             I                                      NOT
 |       CHECK TERRACE EXITS                                       REDUCE CAPACITY
                                                        O.K.        IMPROVE EXITS


                     O.K.


        CALCULATE STAND CAPACITY


                                                       NOT         REDUCE CAPACITY
        CHECK STAND EXITS                              ------»
                                                       O.K.         IMPROVE EXITS


                    O.K.


       DEFINE EXIT ROUTES


       CALCULATE CAPACITY OF EACH
       ELEMENT ON EXIT ROUTE



          CHECK FLOW AGAINST CAPACITY                              IMPROVE ROUTE
1--------------------------- ,— — ------------------       1O.K.


                    O.K.




FIGURE 5.1         S E Q U E N C E O F EV E N TS IN A S S E S S IN G C A P A C ITY
5.5.1   Entry control
        Spectators generally arrive over an extended
        period and are 'filtered' by the turnstiles, which
        assist control. Entry should be controlled both
        into and within the ground. Crowd pressure
        can however occur outside the ground, because
        of late arrivals or under 'house full' conditions
        after the turnstiles have been closed. An
        important provision is means of automatically
        recording the numbers admitted at each point.
        This information should be continuously available
        at a central control point.           This allows
        management to control the total number of
        spectators to an area or section but will not
        necessarily prevent surge pressures that can
        even occur in partially filled pens if the crowd
        concentrates in a favoured area as is common.

        Procedures should be developed to manage
        situations where excessive crowds gather outside
        the entrance to a ground. These procedures
        will depend on local knowledge, police advice
        and available options, such as opening additional
        entrances.

        So that queuing is not normally excessive,
        sufficient turnstiles should be provided to allow
        full terrace/stand capacity to be reached in
        approximately 45 minutes at the rate of 750            What is the basis for
        persons per turnstile per hour.                        using 45 min? Reference
                                                               required.
        Ideally, each turnstile/entry gate should feed
        a specific viewing area, choice being decided
        before entry. Where this is not possible, once
        through the turnstile /entry gate, spectators
        should be clearly directed, by the use of
        channelled routes to the appropriate viewing
        area. In the latter case, adequate stewarding
        will be required.
5.5.2   Exit control
        Where problems occur as in the event of an
        exit passageway blockage for whatever reason,
        it is essential that the entry to that passageway
        is closed quickly. The public-address system
        should be used to reinforce, and even inform,
        stewards. However, such communication cannot
        be achieved unless the public-address system
        is aimed at the specific passageway or the
        passageway itself is clearly identified in some
        manner for example, alphabetic or numeric.
        The labelling of each of the passageways/exit
        routes at regular intervals such that, for instance,
        it could be announced that passageway R was
        closed and passageway T should be used as an
        alternative would be of benefit. The ability
        to redirect crowd movements by such clear
        identification of exit routes is of major
        importance.



                            47
         Protection provided to stairs, landings and
         passageway should be enclosed to a standard
         such as not to pass a 100 mm diam eter ball
         through the protection.

         Splitter barriers are those that are arranged
         parallel with the flow and split it into separate
         lanes. They have a regulatory effect, help
         to reduce surge pressures and provide a desirable
         hand support on one side. Some reduction of
         flow occurs with lanes less than 1.1 m wide,
         and such lanes should be excluded from flow
         calculations.
CRUSH BARRIERS
It is important that crowd pressures cannot be generated
so as to cause injury to those spectators pressed against
the barrier, and it is of paramount importance that collapse
of barriers under crowd pressure does not occur. It should
be recognized, however, that on terraces, viewing slopes
and elsewhere maximum pressures will occur when all
spectators contribute simultaneously to the build-up
of pressure. Although this seldom occurs it is likely
to cause gross discomfort rather than actual injury. It
is important therefore that no undersized crush barriers
are permitted.

The Guide to safety at sports grounds contains guidance
on the reduced spacing of barriers in areas where
spectators may crowd together, for example behind
football goals.

For some events, such as 'pop' concerts, barriers may
need to be provided in front of the audience to create
a 'sterile' zone between audience and the stage, race
track, etc. Care is needed in the design of such barriers
that they are both adequate elements in themselves
and properly founded and that they do not cause injury
from excess pressure on individuals against the barriers.
Padding out may be necessary to prevent this.
Consideration should also be given to curved barriers,
with areas for overspill at each end.

Appendix C has been included to provide professional
engineers, architects, surveyors, etc. with the scientific
background to barrier design and which may in certain
instances be necessary for a proper appraisal.

Where barriers are substandard either by strength, height
or in any other way do not comply with the Guide they
should be excluded from capacity calculations. Where
any barriers are so substandard as to offer a positive
risk to safety they should be removed or such areas taken
out of use.
6.   STRUCTURAL APPRAISAL

     6.1 GENERAL APPROACH
        In carrying out an appraisal of an existing ground or
        individual stand it is important that the survey of
        conditions of both the overall structure and all its
        individual details is methodically and meticulously carried
        out so that as complete a 'picture' of its existing condition
        and likely structural performance can be identified.

        Any remedial measures that may be required to provide
        structural adequacy can then be more precisely targeted.
        Although the process of appraisal inevitably leaves less
        scope for choice of strengthening necessary than does
        the process of designing a new structure, it is nevertheless
        important that measures should be as clean lined, simple
        and attractive as possible. The imagery of such basic
        structures has been shown to play a significant part in
        how the facility is viewed by the public.

     6.2 EXISTING SURVEY DRAWINGS
        Original drawings should be sought. If not available,
        a survey should be undertaken to identify the construction
        and provide base drawings for use and annotation during
        appraisal (see subsection 6.3).

        For all new works (and old if possible), stadia should
        retain original as-built records on the premises, preferably
        in negative form so that they can be readily reproduced.

     6.3 SURVEY OF CONDITION & RECORD OF FINDINGS

        Determination of the physical condition of the structure        Appraisal of existing
        is important. The task of determining the condition             structures, IStructE,
        of a structure should be approached with an open mind           London 1980
        without prejudging the cause of any apparent defects.
        There is always the danger that new defects that are
        outside of previous experience will be missed, and much
        effort may go into trying to find a well known type of
        defect that is not present. It is necessary to describe
        the conditions adequately so that the situation can be
        reviewed objectively. However, previous experience
        of defects should be borne in mind and checks made
        for them. Reference to similar age and types of building
        should be made.

        The engineer should trust only the evidence of his own eyes.
        Members and connections that the engineer judges may
        contain defects will need exposure. Additional labour
        is needed to facilitate necessary exposure and help close
        elements up again after inspection. Clear notes, together       (Fig.6.1 to be based on
        with sketches and photographs should be kept; a possible        Appendices in Appraisal
        form is shown in Fig. 6.1.                                      of Existing Structures
        The report Appraisal of existing structures should be
        consulted for guidance on surveying the condition of
        a structure.




                                     49
6.4 POTENTIALLY     DANGEROUS.            DEGRADED         OR
    SUBSTANDARD FABRIC
    6.4.1  Drawings
           Such drawings as exist of the structure should
           be examined with the view to identifying potential
           problem areas and details in the construction.

               Water traps in metal construction are
               particularly notorious, for example:
               a channel on its side
               roof hook bolt fixings
               eaves and gable framing members
               column head connections, and other similar
                  details where rust can develop freely.

               loose' terrace units resting on supports
               which could move sideways and fall off
               under sway loading should be noted. Thick
               packers under units can be potentially
               hazardous. Poor-quality in situ concrete
               terracing can create a tripping hazard.

               Attention should be paid to block/brick
               walls enclosing public corridors, perim eter
               walls and those forming entry/egress
               gateways especially if not adequately
               restrained, since they may be subject to
               significant lateral loads from        crowd
               pressures.

               All parapets, barriers, etc.

               In the case of slender structures with long
               cantilevers   and    long-span   structures,
               attention should be paid to the effects
               of    fatigue   resulting   from    possible
               fluctuations. Principal welds should be
               inspected on a regular basis for evidence
               of cracks.

   6.4.2   Inspection
           What needs to be inspected must be safely and         Appraisal of existing
           easily accessible. Temporary staging may have         structures, IStructE
           to be erected to make this possible.                  July 1980
           There is always a temptation to view from             Structural renovation of
           a distance, especially in bad weather, and reliance   existing buildings.
           must not be attached to impressions gained            CIRIA report III 1986
           from distant viewing.

           Gutters/downpipes should be included in a             Historical structural
           'structural fabric' inspection to see whether         steelwork Handbook
           leaking water is getting to metal structure           BCSA Publication
           (especially) not protected against its effects.       No 11/84




                                50
        Early grandstands may be 'light' on stability,        Use of redundant
        e.g. Victorian iron sheds are often dependent         buildings -
        on their corrugated iron for frame bracing.           sheets 19, 20, 21 and 22.
        The engineer must therefore beware of removing
        cladding, without prior appraisal. He should          Architects Journal,
        consider whether permanent extra bracing is           March 21 and 4 April
        desirable.                                            1979.
        Checks should include identification of deleterious
        or hazardous materials. These will include:

            high-alumina cement in structural elements

            woodwool slabs used as permanent form work

            calcium chloride in admixtures in reinforced
            concrete

           sea-dredged aggregates (inadequately washed,
           so containing residual chlorides)
           asbestos products

           concrete subject to alkali-silica reaction

        Toilet areas, designated or otherwise,           or
        structures below toilets are particularly        at
        risk from acids etc. and should be checked.

        Pre-World War II concrete may contain clinker
        or otherwise sulphate/nitrate rich aggregates.
        Leaks through these can highly corrode existing
        embedded filler joists or supporting steelwork.
        Embedded details may require sampling or
        widespread opening up.

        The services of an expert are recommended
        to inspect timber elements for rot, insect attack,
        and to identify or warn of conditions that could
        encourage these. (Damp unventilated areas
        are notorious for dry rot.)

        Details that contain junctions of steel and
        concrete should be checked for corrosion, e.g.
        precast terrace or seating units on steel frames.
        Anything fixed by chemical or expanding anchors
        should be regarded as potentially suspect.

        GRC is a material that will bum and become
        brittle, and its presence should be identified.
6.4.3   Recording of results of condition
        Specific comments should be meticulously marked
        on a 'proforma' checklist as per Fig. 6.2. Ideally
        the locations of any particular defects should
        be cross referenced to the survey plans, and
        photographs should be taken.




                            6-1
LOCATION     ITEM                            CONDITION   COMMENTS

Structure/   Columns     Cast/wrought iron
Buildings    & w a lls   Steel
                         Concrete
                         Timber
                         Brickwork
             Beams       Cast/wrought iron
                         Steel
                         Concrete
                         Timber
                         Other
             Decking     Wrought iron
                         Steel
                         Concrete,
                           in situ
                         Concrete,
                           precast
                         Timber
                         Other
             Roof       Wrought iron
                           beams/trusses
                        S te el, beams
                        Steel trusses
                        Concrete,
                           in situ
                        Concrete,
                           precast
                        Timber, beams
                        Timber,
                           trusses
                        Other
             Advertising hoardings,
             Roof claddings
                       Material
                       Fixing and
                         fastenings
             Wall claddings
                       Material
                       Fixings
             Brickwork/bl ockwork
                         Internal
                         External
             Lintels
             Fire separation and
             compartmentation
             Retaining w alls
             External envelope
             Foundations




                                    52.
LOCATION         ITEM                         CONDITION   COMMENTS

Structure/      Crush barriers
terrace         Segregation fences
                Lateral fences
                Pitch perimeter fence
                Associated boundary fence
                Associated boundary w a lls
                Retaining w alls
                Ground terrace
                Suspended terrace
                Column supports
                  Beam supports
                Ancilliaries
                  fastening and fixings

Structure/    Brickwork/blockwork
boundary wallsConcrete     reinforced
                           plain
              Steel
              Fences
              Exit gates
              Turnstiles
              Retaining w alls
Structure/      O verall structure
floodlight      Platform s
towers          Ladders and rails
                Fastenings and fixings
Structure/      Gangways
exits           Stairways
                Handrails
                Balustrades
                Fire protection
                Crush barriers

Structure/      Advertising hoardings
others          Toilet blocks
                A ncillary buildings
                TV camera positions
Temporary       Anchorages
structures      Handrails
                Guy wires

Fig. 6.2




                                   5*3
6.5 POTENTIALLY     COMBUSTIBLE          MATERIALS       AND
    BUILDING FABRIC
   Guidance on m atters concerned with fire appraisal has
   been given in Section 4.

6.6 TESTING OF MATERIALS & ELEMENTS

   Where the survey provides sufficient information to
   enable the engineer to complete the appraisal and reach
   conclusions and make recommendations with confidence
   there will be no need to test. Requirements for testing
   will arise where, for example,

         there is lack of information on what materials
         are present in the structure

         the presence of deteriorated or deleterious m aterial
         or substandard material is suspected
   Such requirements, whether they be for materials testing
   or for load testing are described in Appraisal of existing
   structures                                                                    *

6.7 TESTING OF CRUSH BARRIERS/HANDRAILS
   Crush barriers should be tested in accordance with the        (Fig. 6.3 Testing of
   Guide to safety at sports grounds using an approved testing   barriers at Bradford)
   machine (see Fig. 6.3 and Appendix D).

   Where testing is carried out on isolated members, as
   opposed to complete barriers, then the loading on the
   member should take account of any loading transfer
   due to fixity of components.

   The results of each individual test must be recorded          Ref Guide to safety
   and kept in a log. Copies should be available to both         at sports grounds
   the licence holder and the local authority. Tests should      § Annex C
   be carried out either on a five year cycle or totally at
   least every fifth year. This information should be noted
   on a 1:200 plan of the ground, and should be incorporated
   into an annual report for inspection by the licensing
   authority.

   Adequacy of barriers should be to the criteria laid down
   in the Guide.

   All failures should be repaired or renewed prior to the
   next activity taking place, or the areas in question taken
   out of use until made safe.

   Any works of strengthening and refurbishment carried
   out as a result of a failure must be retested and logged
   before being opened to the public.

   All new or renewed work should be designed to comply
   with the Guide for loading capabilities and to the relevant
   structural codes of practice and, if supervised, by a
   chartered civil/structural engineer, need not be tested
   on completion.

   The incorporation into a testing schedule of all new or
   renewed barriers/handrails should be determined by the
   engineer.
                                *4
6.8 APPRAISAL OF EFFECTS OF WIND

    .
   6 8.1   Wind tunnel tests
           If during the process of appraisal, doubts are raised
           as to the effects of the wind regime on the structure
           or    on    smoke      venting,   investigations   by
           representative wind tunnel tests may be necessary.

           Sports ground structures tend to dominate their
           environment and can make major changes to the
           original airflow pattern. Sports grounds are seldom
           built on level sites free from obstructions, so
           that the topography and all structures in close
           proximity will need to be included in any wind
           tunnel test. Care must be taken that this does
           not reduce the scale of the model so much, in
           order to fit the wind tunnel, that the model is
           too small to reproduce the dynamic effects
           accurately. Suitable wind tunnels are specially
           built to reproduce the gusty nature of the wind
           to the same scale as the structural model and
           are available in specialist laboratories. Tests
           in the smooth and uniform flow of aeronautical
           wind tunnels give inaccurate and misleading results
           since they are directed merely to the determination
           of quasi-static wind pressures and forces. Special
           attention needs to be paid to dynamic effects
           if these are to be measured with any accuracy.
           Guidelines for wind tunnel tests are given in
           Appendix K of CP 3: Chapter V: Part 2, and Part         CP 3: Chapter V:
           2 of The designer's guide.                              Part 2, Appendix K
    .
   6 8.2   Analysis of effects of dynamic loading
           The two main sources of dynamic load are wind           Bolton, A.: 'Natural
           loads and spectator activities, and damaging effects    frequencies of
           will follow only if these can excite resonance          structures for
           of a part, or the whole, of a structure.                designers', Struct.
                                                                   Eng., no. 9, 56A,
                                                                   Sept. 1978
           For existing structures the amplitude of any
           vibration that arises can be directly measured.
           For structures subject to upgrading, calculations
           should be made to determine the natural frequency,
           the amplitude of vibration and the dynamic stress.

           Approach to the assessment of wind loadings is
           covered in clause 3.6.4 and of other dynamic loading
           effects in clauses 3.6.5 and 3.6.6. It is unlikely
           that the majority of structures will have natural
           frequencies within the bands that can be excited
           by either source and so can be analysed for response
           under quasi-static allowable values.

           Gust loading excites vibration over a wide range        IP19/84 Table 1
           of frequencies however, which may cause problems        Fatigue assessments
           of fatigue. Data on the loading cycle for fatigue       ECCS report no. 52
           assessments are given in Table 1 of IP19/84 and         Fig. 24
           in Fig. 24 in ECCS report no. 52.




                                  5 5
6.8.3 Resonant wind loading
      Flexible stadia structures, especially those including
      slender cantilevers, tall flag poles and lighting
      masts, may display excessive dynamic effects
      because of vortex shedding. Lattice structures
      and typical stand enclosures are not usually subject
      to this problem.

      If investigation, for instance using the classification   Cook, N, J-;
      procedure in BS 6399: Part 2, or Chapter 10 of            'Designers guide to
      The designer's guide, shows that natural frequencies      wind loading of
      of the structure exist close to the bands of possible     building structures',
      vortex excitation, care should be taken to consider       Ch. 10.
      these aspects. Further studies investigating the
      interaction of the structure and the air flowing
      over it, the determination of the forces that this
      causes and the response of the structure itself
      to these periodic forces may be necessary.

      It is unlikely there will be need to assess the
      complex behaviour of large amplitude responses,
      since the engineer is required only to avoid such
      an occurrence. This can be achieved by altering
      the form of the structure to eliminate periodic
      aerodynamic forces altogether by changing the
      member stiffness to move the natural frequencies
      away from any aerodynamic forces that cannot
      be avoided, or by increasing the damping to reduce
      vibrations to negligible proportions.

      Even relatively simple arithm etic calculations
      as in BS 6399: Part 2 and ECCS report no. 52
      will be sufficient as long as they can demonstrate
      that there is no danger to the structure from
      wind loading or any feasible behaviour of the
      spectators.

6.8.4 Spectator loading
      Spectators usually act independently, but at
      moments of excitement the crowd may surge.
      This is best dealt with by normal quasi-static
      analysis using loading considerations of clause
      3.6.8. Concerted swaying in time or dancing may,
      however, cause forces of up to two or three times
      the total weight of the spectators vertically with
      a considerable horizontal component. Neither
      of these effects will distress a normal structure
      unless there is a natural frequency that the crowd
      can excite, but it should be realized that the
      presence of any such natural frequency will bias
      the spectators towards it. The maximum frequency
      that this concerted action can affect is about
      4 Hz, and any natural frequency of the structure
      below this value is best removed by increasing
      the stiffness of members or by changing the
      construction to incorporate more damping.

      Section 7 deals with the effects of spectator loading
      on light demountable stands.



                                5 a
   6.8.5   Regular inspection of slender structures
           Occasionally, appraisal will reveal a structure
           that is sufficiently light, slender or ill-conditioned
           that possible exciting frequencies approach the
           natural frequency, and resonance is possible with
           an amplitude considerably greater than in statically
           loaded conditions.

           Such a condition may cause some fatigue damage
           over the years, which coupled to the effect of
           imperfections in the construction, corrosion, etc.
           can lead to reduction in reserves of strength in
           the structure, and eventually to a dangerous state.

           In consequence, it is extremely important that
           any 'long-span' structure, receives 'resident
           supervision' during initial construction from the
           design consultant, so that construction follows
           the designer's intentions, and that sufficient regular
           and thorough annual checks are made on key
           elements for damage, corrosion, etc. A full record
           of the initial construction supervision and all
           subsequent inspections, remedial works, etc. must
           be kept.

           Should possible resonance of a structure be
           established, then specialist advice must be taken,
           possibly using techniques of structural appraisal
           from the aircraft industry to establish the possibility
           of cumulative damage. It may be necessary to
           alter the characteristics of the structure to suppress
           resonance.

6 9 APPRAISAL     OF     STRUCTURES                    AGAINST
    DISPORPORTIONATE COLLAPSE

   With so many people collected in one area, it is necessary
   to check that sports ground structures would not collapse
   disproportionately to the cause.

   A graphic example of such a condition is shown in Fig.
   6.3, where without any secondary action between adjacent
   principal beams, collapse of the front column would
   lead to collapse of that section of the roof. Such a
   potential condition could be aggravated by a roof form
   that enabled the build-up of considerable snow drifts.

   The engineer must therefore consider in his appraisal
   the degree of redundancy of the structure and the potential
   for redistribution of loads, possibly using 'membrane'
   action from two-way structural continuity.               Such
   consideration may be especially important in the
   assessment of the adequacy of early 'structurally light'
   constructions, or on structures where degradation of
   initial strength is evident from corrosion or other effects.

6.10 REPLACEMENT OR STRENGTHENING OF DOUBTFUL
     ELEMENTS
   Where either the survey or subsequent testing or appraisal
   shows an element to be unsatisfactory, it should either
   be replaced or be suitably strengthened.

                                 57
        *p   "j*                                     ’?
                                        i   11   TfT
                                                 a




                             U e n e fa e c la * d fiU t* f
                   fukkCfh, yvu, cctUfC Aa&t- a^i^c-
                           if& A'f' CtfC6t&&44r&d*
                                j/n c tc -U tc ^ & ttru*A fa
                               -,       /•» *» ^      Ca+upty


   F IG . (3.3                              ”h *               ^
                                                          s/9 tc M ifc iLS   .
Such considerations may well require the installation
of temporary support until such time as the permanent
remedial work can be undertaken. All such temporary
works should be designed and constructed with the location
and nature of usage in mind and be reasonably proof
against vandalism.

Adequate access will need to be provided to undertake
these measures, so that they can be correctly effected
and inspected prior to commissioning.
7   TEMPORARY STANDS, FLOODLIGHT/PYLONS, ETC.

    7.1 Temporary stands
        While many of the aspects are common to the design               Safety considerations
        of permanent stands, there are a number of items that            for the design and
        are likely to be of greater importance for those classified      erection of
        as temporary, or demountable, or used for special public         demountable
        events such as pop concerts and golf tournaments.                grandstand, IStructE,
                                                                         May 1989
        These features include:

               overall stability                                         'Demountable grand­
               disproportionate collapse in the event of the             stands', J. F. Dickie &
               removal of a component                                    G. R. Tomlinson,
               dynamic response                                          Struct. Eng. Review
               effects of repeated use
               lack of fit
               effects of added loadings from fabric structures,
               flagpoles,    scoreboards,   attached guy   wires
               supporting other structures
               presence of adjacent high fire loads.

        In such circumatances it is necessary to check that the
        original design is capable of providing the public with
        an adequate margin of safety.

        Inspection should be made for effects of corrosion on            BS 5973: Access
        all elements of the structure, and that the fire separation      working scaffolds &
        of the construction from other structures is sufficient.         special scaffold
                                                                         structures in steel
        Fixings and handrails for all platforms, stairways, etc.
        must be adequate.

        Means of escape from such temporary stands on evacuation
        must be direct to a sufficient place of safety outside.
        Special care needs to be taken so that in providing
        sufficient means of egress from the temporary stand
        or place of assembly that the capacity of means of egress
        from existing or adjacent structures is not impaired
        (and vice versa).

    7.2 Other structures
        Particular events in sports grounds and other places
        of assembly will require in addition to temporary stands,
        the provision of temporary structures such as tents,
        fabric structures, flagpoles, e tc ., additional floodlighting
        pylons, lighting trusses, protection barriers and additional
        means of escape. All such structures used in the presence
        of the public need to be properly designed to resist the
        loads to which they might be subjected.

        An occasional licence for such an event may well be
        needed from the local council. This licence will be
        comprehensive and will need to cover most of those
        elements referred to in the specimen of Appendix G.
        This will require a prior appraisal under the direction
        of an experienced professional engineer of all m atters
        mentioned earlier in this report for sports grounds in
        normal operation. In particular:



                                        5 3
       Crowd capacities section by section in relation
       to adequate means of managed ingress and egress.

       Additional exit routes, bridges, zones should be
       sized as in the Guide to safety at sports grounds,
       and appropriately signed and taken directly to
       an outside place of safety, without surpassing
       the capacity of existing or other exit routes.

       Crowd barriers and their anchorages will need           NFPA 102, Assembly
       to be designed to resist the loads from crowds          seating, tents and
       to which they are subject (see Section 9 of the         membrane structures,
       Guide). In other cases these horizontal barriers        1986
       will need to be designed on the basis of the purpose
       for which they are needed and detailed to prevent
       crushing. Additional padding may be required.

For instance, the barrier between the front of the audience
and the performance should provide a sterile area, and
the barrier and its foundation or anchorage should be
designed for 3.0 kN/m.

All tents, pylons and protection barriers should be properly
anchored to resist the loads from snow, wind and people
on them. It is appropriate to amend the wind and snow
loads to account for the temporary duration, season
of the year, and likelihood of the event proceeding in
the circumstance of bad weather. A service load of
20 kg/m8 in addition to self-weight and consideration
of 1 in 10 year wind loading condition for the location
are then appropriate, unless higher snow loadings are
specifically required.

      The back guys to temporary structures should
      not be lower than 2.5 m above any means of escape,
      and no anchorages should lie within any escape
      route to provide a possible trip hazard.

      Appraisal should be made of any existing elements
      of the grounds to which such facilities are tied
      back so that the combined loading does not impair
      the integrity of either structure.

      Materials used for fabric structures should be           BS 3199/3120
      durably flame proofed and inherently resistant
      to flame spread to BS 3119/3120 (or B1/B2 of             DIN 4102: Flame spread
      DIN 4102).                                               resistance of membrane
      Lighting bridges should be adequately designed           BS 6399: Part 1 1984
      for the access required of them and for the loads        Loadings for buildings
      of lighting etc. to be carried by them. Wind loading     Table 7
      is often a critical element in the design of such
      structures. Handrails and safety harnesses should
      be provided. They should be designed so as to
      prevent access by unauthorized personnel and,
      in particular, by the audience.

      Unless specifically approved and properly designed,
      equipment, lighting trusses should not be suspended
      over areas occupied by the public.



                             &0
Any electrical installations should comply with
the relevant British Standards and IEE Wiring
regulations, and their installation should be to
the satisfaction of a professionally qualified
electrical engineer of appropriate experience
(see also Section 8).




                      ai
ELECTRICAL LAYOUTS

(To be developed in consultation with IEE/chartered electrical
engineers.)
    APPENDIX A l       DAY-TO-DAY RESPONSIBILITIES OF MANAGEMENT

    A list of the ’day-to-day’ routine responsibilities of the club
    includes:
    1.     Maintain certificate in force
    2.    Keep Local Authority informed of alterations
    3.    Provide and maintain crush barriers
    4.     Provide police control room
    5.    Provide and maintain emergency lighting
    6.    Provide and maintain fire-fighting equipment
    7.    Provide and maintain communication and warning system
    8.    Provide and maintain first aid room
    9.     Carry out crowd control measures deemed necessary by
           police
    10.    Provide and maintain notices re fire-fighting equipment
    11.    Provide and maintain fencing
    12.    Provide and maintain wind measuring equipment (if required)
    13.    Provide and maintain general fabric of stadium
    14.    Provide annual inspection (before 1 August of each year
    15.   Before each specific activity, test exit doors and gates,

*
          emergency lighting and communication systems etc.
     6.   After each specific activity, check condition of terraces,
          staircases, stand seats, crush barriers, perimeter fences,
          penfences, gates and balustrades
    17.   Record inspections 15 and 16 in log book and log work
          requiring remedial works and take steps to carry out that
          work
    18.   Have responsible person in attendance
    19.   Provide first aid staff
    20.   Arrange adequate policing
    21.   Arrange adequate stewarding
    22.   Arrange attendance of electrician
    23.   Make sure all escape gates are easily openable, except
          that certain gates may be locked, provided that steward
          is in attendance with key
    24.   Open all gates to evacuate stadium, as directed by police
    25.   Maintain ingress and egress routes clear from obstruction
    26.   Maintain self-closing doors
    27.   Provide and maintain non-slip surfaces to exits
    28.   Provide and maintain exit signs
    29.   Provide and maintain escape routes in perimeter fencing
    30.   Record crowd attendance figures
    31.   Record inspections
    32.   Record training and instruction to staff
    33.   Give each member of staff and steward a copy of emergency
          procedures
    34.   Train staff and steward in emergency procedures
    35.   Give means of I/D to people (e.g. press) having free access
    36.   Only store flammable gases and liquids to Local Authority
          approval
    37.   Clear all combustible rubbish
    38.   Park vehicles only in an approved manner
    39.   Provide record drawings




                                                Al
APPENDIX A2      DRAFT RULES                FOR    INSTRUCTION
OF STEWARDS ON EVENT DAYS

INSTRUCTIONS FOR SAFETY STEWARDS

1   Safety Stewards to report to Cash Office a t ... two hours before specified activity.
2   Holder to allocate responsibilities.

    ResponsibiMtfes
    (a)   Door stewards, stands and ground:
              Each door steward to collect standard keys and distinctive surcoat
              Report to allocated area. Check exit door(s) for egress
              Remain in position to monitor exit door(s) during all of specified activity
              Unlock exit door(s) ten minutes prior to end ofmatch         or on instructions of
              a police officer or public address message.
    IN EVENT OF FIRE*
          -   Operate nearest fire alarm point
          -   Unlock exit door(s)
          -   Await instructions of fire picket

    ON HEARING EMERGENCY PA MESSAGE*
        - Unlock exit door(s)
          -   Assist in evacuation if required
          -   Secure exit door(s) at end of specified activity, or on instructions of a police
              officer or responsible person
          -   Return standard key and surcoat

    (b) Door stewards - Stand B area
    BEFORE EVENT
    Report to stadium Administrator two hours before the event starting time

    Collect distinctive bib and emergency exit keys from stadium Administrator. Receive
    instructions as to allocated areas etc.

    Report to allocated area. Check the exit door(s), remove lock and securing bar and
    place in Stewards room adjacent invalids tunnel. Open doors fully to ensure easily open
    obstructions. Inform Stadium Administrator of any problems encountered.

    Check position of fire alarm call point and position of nearest fire and door stewards.
    DURING EVENT
    Remain in close proximity to exit door(s) throughout the event.

    Open exit door(s) ten minutes prior, to the end of the event or on instructions of a police
    officer or public address message i.e. 'Stewards Operate Code 1'.
    AFTER THE EVENT
    After the event the spectators have left the stadium or on instruction from the police
    or stadium administrator, secure the exit doors.

    * Coded by Stand Area

                                           A2.
Return bib and keys to stadium administrator.

Note: Replace security bars only a fter the public have left the premises.
(c)   Fire stewards:
      East fire steward to collect standard key and surcoat.       Each fire picket team
      leader to collect emergency communications radio.

      Carry out prematch inspections and tests:
      - Radio
      - Fire alarm
      - Fire fighting equipment
      - Housekeeping

      Fire picket team leader to deploy fire pickets
ON HEARING FIRE ALARM
Check the location of fire on the fire alarm indicator panel

Team leader report affected zone to control via radio

Proceed to affected zone. Team leader to assess the incident and decide on the action
to be taken.

Team leader to report circumstances or incident to control, and advise on evacuation
etc.

Team leader to liaise with fire brigade on arrival.

AT END OF SPECIFIED ACTIVITY
Check stand/ground and ensure all patrons have left. Check all fire fighting equipment
is in place, and report any deficiencies to the holder.
Return all equipment.
(d)   Police control room:

ON HEARING FIRE ALARM OR BEING INFORMED OF FIRE
Call the fire brigade by telephone immediately (999)

Ensure all exit door(s) in affected zone are unlocked by making the following
announcement over the PA system: ’Stewards Stand A/Stand B etc. Code 1’.

Await information from fire picket. If required by fire picket team leader announce
evacuation message over PA system for affected zone.

Note: the word 'FIRE' should not be used over the PA system.
APPENDIX B       GROUND FLOW RATES


 OUTLINE OF CONTENTS

 INTRODUCTION
    Ages

    Gender

    Density

    Level of service

    Directions

    Topography
    Light and visual

    Physical fitness/speed relationship

 PREFERRED RATE

 ANALYTICAL MODELLING OF FLOW RATE
    Ramp

   Stairways

   Doorways

   Static crowd/circulating crowd
   Emergency situations


REFERENCES




This Appendix will be drafted taking into account the 'systems' approach to such
problems as indicated J Fruin's article 'Crowd dynamics and auditorium management1
APPENDIX C PERFORMANCE OF CRUSH BARRIERS

 OUTLINE OF CONTENTS

   GENERAL

   CROWD PRESSURES
      Lean

      Push

      Slope

   MEDICINE

   STRENGTH
      (See also Appendix D)
  NUMBER OF ROWS

  HEIGHT & WIDTH

  GRADIENT & SPACING

  REFERENCES
APPENDIX D    TESTING OF CRUSH BARRIERS

      (To be developed)




                                A6
%




    APPENDIX E       SIGHTLINES AND VIEW DISTANCES


The maximum distance a t which an object is just recognizable        Bbbrowski, J., Bardhan-Roy
to a spectator's eye is given by the relationship                    B.K., & Maciag, T.: 'The
                                                                     design and analysis of
            d    =     0.86 s                                        grandstand structures',
                                                                     Structural Engineer, 52,
where       d    =     distance in m                                 no. 2, Feb. 1974, p.37
and         s    =     size of the object in mm
                                                                     Reed, J.: 'The layout and
Table Al shows the maximum distance against different sizes          construction of sports
(s) of the object, while Fig. Al illustrates this point.             grounds and grandstands',
                                                                     Structural Engineer, Feb.
Table Al - The maximum distance (d) against different sizes          1933, p.74
(s) of the object
                                                                     Serby, M.: 'The good-view
                                                                     factor in stadium design',
s                      d                s                d           Engineering news-record,
(size of                                 (size of                    103, 11 July 1929
object)                                 object
pim (in)               m        (ft)      mm (in)        m    (ft)

 40    (1.557)        35    (115)      160   (6.299)   138   (453)
 60    (2.362)        52    (171)      180   (7.087)   155   (508)
 80    (3.150)        69    (226)      200   (7.874)   172   (564)
100    (3.937)        86    (282)      222   (8.740)   190   (623)
120    (4.724)       103    (338)      240   (9.449)   206   (676)
140    (5.512)       120    (394)


As the diameter of a football is 220 mm, it follows that the
maximum distance between a spectator and the furthest point
on the football playing area should not exceed 190 m. It should
be borne in mind that a t this distance the object is barely
recognizable and does not in fact provide a good and unstrained
visibility. The maximum distance therefore should, where
possible, be reduced by 20-40% of that calculated by the above,
i.e. for a football ground the furthest point of the field to
a spectator should be limited to, say, 150m. In a football (and
also in a rugby) ground this will correspond roughly to a circle
of 90m radius from the centre spot as shown in Fig. Al.

Figs. A2 and A3 show the optimum viewing circle and the
maximum distance in two existing grounds - in St James' Park,
Newcastle, and Wembley Stadium. It is clear in the case of
Wembley Stadium that a section of the spectators will remain
outside the optimum sight distance or even the maximum sight
distance of the full arena.

This consideration sometimes is most crucial in deciding whether
the stand should have a single rake or multi-tiered ones.




                                             A7
Another aspect inter-related to good viewing is the sightline.
The slope of the rakers should be such that the lines of sight
from the eyes of spectators in each row to the focal point
should be clear of or at least tangential to, the top of the
head (together with the head cover) of the spectator in the
row in front. The focal point is taken as the near edge of
the playing field or the centre-line of the nearest line of the
nearest lane of the athletic track. The profile of the raker
can be determined graphically and by calculation. Simplified
formulae can be obtained from references listed in the              Handbook of sports and
Handbook.                                                           recreation buildings design
There are three main categories of raker:

1.   straight rakers of constant slope

2.   series of straight rakers of different slopes, and
3.   curved rakers.

The curved arrangement is theoretically ideal but cumbersome
in practice, and apart from the high cost, there can be a safety
hazard where crowd movement is involved. Orientation of
the stand as well as positioning of the first row with respect
to the arena (touchline, for example) is important to allow
a good view of the whole of the touchline by all viewers.

Depending on the nature of the performance there appear
to be three borad patterns of crowd circulation in stands:

(a) Static crowd: which exists where the show is continuous
    or even interm ittent such as football, rugby and some
    athletics, but without any interrelated diverse activities
    during the interval.

(b) Circulating crowd: which exists where the show consists
    of several consecutive events with interrelated extra
    activities during the interval between them, and generally
    associated with betting, such as horse racing, dog racing
    etc.

(c) A combination of (a) and (b), where one part of the stand
    could have a static crowd while the other parts have
    circulating spectators.

Compared with (a) crowds are smaller and more leisurely in
the other two categories, especially in (b). The design criteria,
of necessity, will be different and the facilities provided by
the designer will, of course, have to be compatible with the
requirements of the patrons in each relevant category. A
relevant numerical comparison of the three categories is given
in Table A l.




                                            AS
Table Al

category    name of stand                 space per spectator

(a)         Typical football stand -                  0.68 m 2
            Manchester United, Old
            Trafford

            Typical athletics stand -               0.835 m 2
            Meadowbank, Edinburgh
(b)         *Ascot Racecourse                        2.04 m 2
            Grandstand
            **Sandown Park Racecourse                2.60 m 2
            Grandstand
            Doncaster Racecourse                     2.96 m 2
            Grandstand

           Calgary 'G reatest Outdoor                1.42 m 2
           Show on Earth' Stampede
           Grandstand

* Ascot Racecourse Grandstand does not have the same amount
of built in facilities for multi-purpose use of the buildings
as doe the Doncaster and Sandown Park Grandstands.

** The area of 2.60 m2 per spectator was calculated with
regard only to the seating and standing capacity of the rakes.
Durking major races a crowd of 30 000 could actually use all
the facilities and then space per spectator would come down
to 0.69 m2 only, thus comparable to category (a).




                                         A9
                                                                                           o IV


                                                                                                                    2iapian 000SI MS >3v4spuv sivis
                                                                                            000SL 9amim«>. ‘ptdofwp Kjptftmfia ‘qjvj suuyJJipivj
                                                                                               '00009 JV9S°JptuStstpsvaivnpy^ lojfSpug piofiurn^
                                                                                                   •Smpuvjs 000PE ¥ » » 00091 >D3SlW1prfojiaapKjjnf
                                         9J3M3Sutauta                                       tuifia(pnmfi 9\nvoaafijoJ)ifwj ,muv£ i$ fjqvsMdsiput
                           9jomSuuq pjnoca wuaiuvuv
   mnmtjdo 9tfj oim s j o w h h Js                                                                9Ut039q UV3 UOlWpOUlUlODJDjvumnppv 9tfJ‘SIUIDUSUOJ
tnr,     w-W* SutddojMaouy U0U39S uav-ijSutsv moul                                             fDUOtSU9Uttp9U90SUVM IfltaI‘9JISUOpuv p9StfV9JU99q SVlf
  Jfi puvVU3JV uv»2mj001 t/mtusvy uimpvis        1                                            iomoj Sutsnfompa 9yj •ipmoaotf ‘yu>d,s9wv£ JS'£y




                                                                                             6q8ru
                                            puvjpqiooJqioqjoJ lods9ii\ao9ifi iuojf wq(, iv ptmnssv
                                           9quvo9pjp Suiautaumutudouy uiq^j moqvsi wnumio
                                          *H1 'm06I s! 11D9100JMJ >3uvmpSuiauiamnmixviu9yj jy
                                                                to d s ajiuao                      , —. ^
                                          u jo j)   sth d b j   u jo 6   a o jto           - ' '        " ' ~ ^
                                       6uim» a Lunajiido paujnsse                  \ , '




                                                       jauxx} Lpea \
                                      ujoj)   snpei ui09i M ugap
                                         Quumsia unuiao K>
                                     jbujootpeo tuojj snpei wo©
                                      aoueisp GutMaiA tununeuj




                                                                                  aAo s,jojtio o d s a t/j
                             p u t & »fq o 6fq n tu 6 o 9 *J u a o w q e a u tjstp um tupctw j y B y
APPENDIX F    SPECIMEN DRAWINGS REQUIRED FOR APPRAISAL
   Specimen drawings to be provided for
   (a)   large ground
   (b)   small ground


APPENDIX G     SPECIMEN LICENCE CERTIFICATE
   To be compiled


APPENDIX H     BIBLIOGRAPHY
   To be compiled


ILLUSTRATIONS FOR REPORT
   To be provided




                                 All
