        Mr Goddard                           cc   Miss P Edwards
        F8 Division                               Mr Addison
                                                  Mr Bolton
                                                  Miss A Edwards
                                                  Mr Cogbill
                                                  Mrs Lee
                                                  Mr Fulton
                                                  Miss Goose
                                                  Mr Crawley     SHHD
                                                  Mr McClelland NIO




        TAYLOR REPORT
        Thank you for your note of 22 June.  I attach draft contributions
        to the submission on electronically monitored curfews as
        requested, subject to any comments from Cl Division who have
        policy responsibility for their use as a sentence.



                                              evrt,
        28 June 1990                      E A GRANT
                                          C2 Division




29 JUN 90
4-4-S
USE OF ELECTRONIC MONITORING


The Taylor report recommends that consideration should be given to

the use of electronic monitoring in the sentencing of offenders

convicted of football-related offences.



ACPO view



Majority view was that monitoring could be helpful, subject to

assurance that the technology works and the caveat that the task

of checking on curfew violations could involve additional work for

the police.



CPS view



The CPS had few comments;   as in the case of attendance centre

orders they thought a condition of reporting to a police station

at the time of a match might be equally effective at less cost.



Assessment



Ministers have already indicated their wish that the Criminal

Justice Bill should include provision for courts to make curfew

orders as a penalty following conviction which could (subject to

the outcome of the electronic monitoring trials) be enforced by

monitoring.   If the courts have curfew powers then they will be

able to apply them in cases of football-related offences.   The CPS

are correct in suggesting that in most cases, if what is desired

is to keep offenders away from the opportunity of creating trouble
at a match and, as a punishment, deprive them of seeing a game on

Saturday afternoon, then a requirement to visit the police station

when the match would be on is probably a more cost effective way

of achieving it.   If it is felt that a stronger punishment is

merited then a curfew order perhaps generally restricting the

offender's weekend social activities might be imposed and

electronic monitoring could be used to enforce the curfew.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS



Subject to the evaluation of the cost effectiveness of electronic

monitoring (on which a submission reporting the outcome of the

field trials will be coming forward shortly), courts will be able

to support curfew orders with electronic monitoring.   It will then

be for the court to decide whether the imposition of a curfew

order as a penalty for a football-related offence would be

justified or whether other means of keeping an offender away from

football matches is sufficient.
