From: Sarah Clifford
Communication Directorate
X2284

28 January 1998


                                                              cc: Mr Michael
                                                                  Mr O’Brien
                                                                    Mr Pugh
                                                              Mr Edmundson
                                                                    Mr Bone
                                                                  Mr Warner
                                                                   Mr Owen
1. Mr Butler

2. Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH REPORT: MEDIA HANDLING FOR THE HANDOVER

Issue

Media handling for tomorrow’s “handover” by Lord Justice Stuart Smith of the
Scrutiny report.

Timing

Pressing - 1understand the report is now due to be handed over to the Home
Office tomorrow, rather than Friday.

Recommendation

That you agree the attached draft press statement is issued to Merseyside,
Sheffield and national media tomorrow, as soon as the report is given to the
Home Office. The media are awaiting news of the “handover” and this upfront
approach will forestall the news leaking out via the families and make your
position clear. Mr Owen agrees with this approach.

Are you content with the statement and the handling arrangements?
28 January 1998                                          0171 273 4610

     HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY: HOME SECRETARY CONSIDERS
                     JUDGE’S REPORT


Home Secretary Jack Straw today received the report of the Hillsborough
Scrutiny from Lord Justice Stuart Smith.

Mr Straw said:

       “I am grateful to Lord Justice Stuart Smith for the enormous amount of
       work he has done carrying out the Scrutiny.

       “I will now carefully consider his report. I hope to be able to publish
       both the report and my response to it shortly .”

Notes to Editors

1. The Scrutiny was announced by the Home Secretary on 30 June 1997.

2. Its terms of reference are:

       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
       Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

       (a)           To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

       (b)           To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
                     General for the purpose of discharging their respective
                     statutory responsibilities; or

       (c)           To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in
                     relation to police disciplinary matters;

       And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
       available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the
       Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry;
       and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not
       previously considered by them which may be relevant to their
       respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
       which should be taken in the public interest.
