 r— >
                                                                 *8HWI1      ^
                                                  IfcdflW^
ft.          ^
                                        M k \.
                           HOUSE OF COMMONS                       to * » \
                               L O N D O N SW1A OAA
             ilW
           5th November 1991

           Rt Hon Kenneth Baker M.P.
           Home Secretary                             ■■ -


           50 Queen Anne's Gate
           London SWIH 9AT

           Dear Home Secretary                                      /

           RE:- HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


          r ^ - aam writAng to protest at the way in which South
      4   \Lan
           Lancashire Pblice have effectively side-stepped the
              posed -disciplinary investigation into Chief
           Superintendent Duckenfield for his part in the
           Hillsborough tragedy.
           As you are aware, the policing of the Hillsborough
           tragedy has consistently been a subject of criticism,
           not least in the Taylor report. However, to date, no
           detailed investigation around the responsibilities of
           those concerned has yet been undertaken or published.
           This means, in effect, that specific responsibility
           for certain decisions will never, unless you
           intervene, be fully pinned down.

           Let me say that I am not seeking to hound Chief
           Superintendent Duckenfield, or question the fact that
           he was allowed to take early retirement on the basis
           of his ill-health, which, I understand, has been the
           subject of a proper medical examination. However,
           if the families of those sadly killed at that event,
           or, indeed, any of the survivors, are to b e ‘satisfied
           that the justice they were promised by the then Prime
           Minister has been obtained, then surely the policing
           of the event, irrespective of the medical circumstances
           of anybody at this time, must be subject to a detailed
           investigation. Whether this is achieved by a
           disciplinary process or some other means, does not, it
           seems to me, really matter.


                                                             (continued)
                            -   2   -


Having met a large group of the families# I can assure
you that they are far from happy at the whole process
which has so far taken place up to and including the
Coronor's Inquest and this latest decision, which
incidentally they predicted several weeks ago to me and
my colleague, Peter Kilfoyle, only adds to their sense
of frustration and injustice.
I have written separately to the Attorney General, arising
out of a letter from the Prime Minister's office to one of
the families and hope to meet him in the near_future.
However, I do believe it is within your pow^rsTl
very closely at the inplications of South j^ncashire*s^
Police decision to effectively evade an inveStigati-oiTinto
the role of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
Although I have copied this letter quite widely to a
number of interested parties, it has not been written with
a view to publication.
There is, however, a very serious issue at stake here,
namely the fact that at the time of the Hillsborough tragedy,
the families were given very clear assurances by not least
a person than the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, that
everything would be fully investigated and that no stone
would be left unturned.
Whilst I realise that it might be convenient to leave this
matter as it stands, I am painfully aware that all of these
people are left feeling that every promise they were made
has not been honoured, either in the spirit or the letter.

It is in this part that I seek your intervention in finding
some way of properly investigating in detail the role of
South Lancashire Police in general and the role of the
officers' responsible specifically, in the policing of
that day of that event.

Yours sincerely



               rth M.P.


c.c. Mr     Peter Joynes
     Mr     P Hammond, Hillsborough Family Support Group
     Mr     Peter Kilfoyle M.P.
     Mr     Eddie O'Hara M.P.
     Mr     Eddie Loyden M.P.
     Mr     Eob Parry M.P.
     Ilr    Bob Wareing M.P.
     Mr     Frank Field M.P.
     Mr     Joe Benton M.P.
     i-lr   John Evans M.P.
     Mr     Gerry Bermingham M.P.
