CHAPTER 4


Alleged improper interference with witnesses



1.    During the course of my scrutiny I have heard allegations that the evidence of
      witnesses to the disaster was tampered with. There are two types of allegation
      of this sort.

2.    The first is that the West Midlands Police, who investigated what happened at
      Hillsborough on behalf of Lord Taylor, the Coroner, and the Director of Public
      Prosecutions put pressure on three named witnesses - Derek Bruder, Debra
      Martin, and Paul Taylor - to change their evidence in various ways. I
      consider these allegations in the first part of this Chapter.

3.    The second concerns the way in which the South Yorkshire Police obtained
      evidence about the disaster from their own officers. I consider this in the
      second part of this Chapter.


Part 1 - allegations against the West MidlandS-Police

4.    In their written submissions to me Counsel for the Hillsborough Family
       support Group stated (para 103) that:

              “Evidence has come to light which tends to show that some witnesses
              were pressured into changing their evidence (or prevented from
              adding to their evidence) by officers from the West Midlands Police.
              In the main, this pressure was brought to bear in order to prevent
              evidence being put before the jury which tended to contradict the
              theory that all the deceased were dead by 3 .15pm. This evidence
              demonstrates the biased and incomplete nature o f the investigation,
              and the desire on the part o f those investigating the disaster to keep
              to a minimum the scrutiny o f South Yorkshire Police’s reaction to the
              disaster. ”

5.     Counsel cited three witnesses who they said had been pressured in this way.
       Two of them - Derek Bruder and Debra Martin - made written statements
       relating to the death of Kevin Williams. The other, Paul Taylor, had
       evidence about the death of Victoria Hicks.


The Kevin Williams case

6.     Kevin Williams’ case was one of the six that the Divisional Court considered
       in 1993 during the application for judicial review (see Chapter 1, para 66
(c)) in connection with the seventh ground of the application, namely that
there was evidence available to show that the Coroner and his jury were not
given the full picture in the summaries at the mini-inquests and the omission
of certain relevant facts vitiated those proceedings. The factual issue in
Kevin Williams’ case was whether he was dead when recovered from the
pen or whether he died a little later, at some time after 15.32 or possibly as
late as 15.55.

At the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams on 2 May 1990 Dr Slater, the
pathologist, said that in his opinion his death had occurred very quickly.
Kevin’s case was unusual because there were four fractures of the larynx,
and it was in Dr Slater’s view a case of very severe traumatic asphyxia due
to crushing of the neck and chest.

Dr Slater’s view that Kevin had died quickly was at variance with the
evidence of two witnesses. The first was an off-duty Liverpool policeman,
Derek Bruder, who had been sitting in the stand watching the match but
came down to the pitch to help in the rescue operation. The second was
Debra Martin, a South Yorkshire Police Special Constable who was on duty
at the ground.

In a statement dated 27 April 1989 PC Bruder said that he had seen a man,
who was later identified as Kevin Williams, lying on the pitch near the Kop
End of the stadium. As Mr Bruder approached him the man had
convulsions and his head moved as if he was being sick. Together with a St
John Ambulance man, Mr Bruder attempted to resuscitate him with mouth-
to-mouth ventilation and cardiac massage. He could feel a slight pulse in his
neck.

Attempts were made to stop an ambulance, but it continued down the pitch.
PC Bruder and the St John man continued to attempt to revive Kevin
Williams without success. They were then joined by a St John Ambulance
woman and shortly after this the ambulance man said the patient was dead.
Mr Bruder agreed that he was.

Kevin’s body was then taken to the gymnasium, which was being used as a
temporary mortuary, by a number of other people. One of these was
Special Constable Debra Martin. In a statement dated 8 May 1989, she said
that Kevin had stopped breathing while he was in the gymnasium. She gave
him the kiss of life and heart massage and a doctor helped. Kevin started
breathing, opened his eyes and said “Mom” and then died.

A doctor confirmed Kevin Williams as being dead at 16.06.

During the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams on 2 May 1990 Dr Slater was
asked about these matters. He said he thought Mr Bruder may have been
mistaken in believing he found a slight pulse. So far as WPC Martin’s
statement was concerned, there was no way in which someone with the
severe injury to his voice box which Kevin had could have said “Mom” .

The Coroner caused further enquiries to be made. Inspector Sawers of the
West Midlands Police took a further statement from PC Bruder on the 3rd
May 1990. In it he said that since Hillsborough he had had further training
in first aid. In relation to his earlier statement when he described Kevin
Williams as having convulsions, he said:

        “I have thought about this carefully today and with the added benefit
       o f my training I can say that this was not a process that lasted fo r
       any time. It certainly wasn ’t anything similar to an epileptic fit, fo r
       example. It was an impression that I had which I originally
       associated with the lad vomiting. I will say that I did not see the
       casualty vomit nor did I see any sick on the body or grassed area
       around him. I will correct further references to vomit as they occur
       in my original statement.

       I refer to feeling fo r a carotid pulse in the neck and said originally
       that I thought I could detect a slight pulse, however, I now feel that I
       am able to correct this. I fe lt fo r the pulse with my first two fingers
       o f my left hand, I believe, to the carotid artery. I cannot say
       absolutely that I fe lt fo r the pulse before I started mouth-to-mouth or
       after; nor indeed whether I did both simultaneously. Whilst I would
       now have much more skill, on the day I cannot say with absolute
       certainly that I went accurately straight to the carotid artery.

       For all those reasons, I can say that I fe lt fo r a pulse in the region o f
       the carotid artery, but I may have also touched the area o f the
        ‘Adams Apple ’ or felt something in the neck region which I originally
       thought was a pulse but may have been mistaken. ”

Inspector Sawers also asked Mr Bruder about the reference in his previous
statement to trying to stop an ambulance. Mr Bruder maintained that the
ambulance in question was on its way into the ground and going to the
Leppings Lane end.

WPC Martin had been seen on 17th March 1990 by WPS Appleton of the
West Midlands Police, who took a further statement from her. In this
further statement Miss Martin described how upset she had been on the day
and that her recollection of events was vague and confused. By the time she
came to deal with Kevin Williams’ body, which she was told to stay with in
the gymnasium, she was in a state of shock and felt like a ‘zombie’. She
said:

       “I didn’t know what to do. I didn’t want to believe the boy was dead.
       I didn’t know if he was dead or not but I decided that I had got to
       attempt to revive him. I started to give him mouth-to-mouth but
       someone, I don’t know who, touched me on the shoulder and told me
       he was dead. By this time my head had gone, I wasn’t aware o f what
       I was doing or what was realty happening. ”

The Coroner resumed the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams on 4 May 1990.
Sergeant Killock told the jury the substance of Mr Bruder’s first statement.
Inspector Sawers then told the jury about Mr Bruder’s second statement. He
said that he had pointed out to Mr Bruder that there appeared to be a
discrepancy between what he was saying about the ambulance which they
had tried to stop, and the known times of the first two ambulances on the
pitch. At that point it seems to have been overlooked by everyone that in
fact a third ambulance - driven by Mr Edwards - had come onto the pitch.

The Coroner recalled Dr Slater. He affirmed his opinion that Kevin was
brain dead at the time when he was removed from the pen, but accepted that
his body was not dead until later, when Mr Bruder was trying to resuscitate
him. He said (transcript, page 13 B-D):

       Q. “In the light o f what you heard and what we have heard now, do
       you feel that this lad died, if you like, in the totality sense, I d on’t
       mean that his skin was dead, but in lay terms at the point in time
       when M r Bruder was with him?

       A. “Yes, sir, I am quite confident o f that. When one speaks to lay
       people who have experienced people dying, a word which is recurrent
       in these descriptions o f death is the way that individuals turn 'grey ’,
       recurring several times. To me as a doctor that implied that that was
       the point o f whole body death. In fact I feel that that it was probably
       around that time that Kevin’s whole body died. His brain had died
       twenty/twenty-five minutes before that at the time o f the crushing, but
       his whole body died at the time PC Bruder was with him. ’’

Dr Gumpert, a Consultant Clinical Neurophysiologist and Neurologist, was
also called. He agreed with Dr Slater’s opinion. He accepted the possibility
that Mr Bruder might have felt a carotid pulse (pl7A).

In his judgement in the Divisional Court, Lord Justice McCowan reviewed
this evidence at considerable length. He said (page 28G of the judgement):

       “We were told that some while after, Mrs Williams, the deceased’s
       mother, made contact with Police Constable Bruder and Woman
       Police Constable Martin, and they alleged that they had been
       pressurised into changing stories and that they now stuck by their
       original versions. Where does the truth lie? I see no fault in the
       Coroner in this matter. He made fu ll inquiry. He was not asked by
       the applicant’s representative to do more. There was overwhelming
       medical evidence that the deceased was in fact dead by 3 .15pm. In
       my judgement it would not be right to quash the verdicts and order a
               new inquest on the strength o f these allegations made against the
               investigating police officers. ”

22.   The Divisional Court did not find it necessary to investigate the allegation
      that the West Midlands police investigators had put Mr Bruder or Miss
      Martin under improper pressure.      The proceedings before the Court
      concerned the conduct of the Coroner, not the police. No criticism could be
      made of the Coroner, who had investigated Kevin Williams’ case with great
      thoroughness.

23.   I have investigated the allegation of improper pressure. This is not because
       it could affect the verdict of accidental death on Kevin Williams. It plainly
       could not alter that. Nor could it affect the 3.15 cut-off point. The
       Coroner had sound reasons for making his decision about that and these
       would not have been affected by the question of whether Kevin Williams
       died before then as Dr Slater originally thought, or afterwards as PC Bruder
       and WPC Martin thought.

24.   I have looked into this in great detail because an allegation of improper
       pressure against a police officer to persuade a witness to change his or her
       evidence contrary to that witness’s recollection and belief, is a very serious
       matter. But there is all the difference in the world between such conduct
       and seeking to reconcile, if one can, apparent inconsistencies between
       witnesses.


Derek Bruder

25.   I interviewed Mr Bruder on 6 October 1997. He told me how he came to
      make his second statement on 3 May 1990. He said Inspector Sawers came
      to see him on that day because he (Sawers) wanted to clarify certain medical
      issues which had been brought up in Mr Bruder’s first statement. Mr
      Bruder told me that because they were both having difficulty understanding
      points, Inspector Sawers telephoned the Coroner’s office and spoke to
      someone there and explained the difficulty. The telephone was handed to
      Mr Bruder who discussed what he had seen with the person on the
      telephone, who must have been Dr Slater. There was a discussion about the
      movement of the body which Mr Bruder had described as a convulsion, the
      question of vomit and the possibility of mistaking the pulse. But he said that
      there was still some confusion in his mind about the medical points.

26.    He then said that Inspector Sawers suggested he might have been mistaken
       about the ambulance, because the video footage did not show it at that time.
       But he, Mr Bruder, insisted that he was right about that.

27.    I took Mr Bruder through his second (3 May 1990) statement. He
       confirmed to me that everything in it was correct, save for where he said
      that he may have been mistaken about the pulse. He said (transcript page
      10, line 5):

               “What I am saying is: I went to the lad, fe lt a pulse and o f that I am
              not mistaken. I t ’s as simple as that. As I say, I hope you don’t think
              I ’m being forward but that was the case.

             Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: You are an experienced police officer
             and, I have no doubt, you have taken statements from people in the
             past and you know how these things are taken, and sometimes things
             are put to a witness: are you sure about that or may you have been
             mistaken about that because o f something else. What I am at getting
             is that in this statement you actually say: ‘But I may have been
             mistaken about that’.

              M r Bruder: Yes, I may have been mistaken as to the region I took
              the pulse from, i.e. within an inch or two o f an Adam ’s apple is the
              carotid artery on the neck.

              Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: But you did not mean that you were
              mistaken about feeling a pulse?

              M r Bruder: Most definitely not. ”

28.   Mr Bruder said that he was quite satisfied that Kevin was dead when he gave
      up trying to resuscitate him. He also made it perfectly plain to me that he
      was not put under any pressure to change his statement. At page 15, line 15
      of my interview with him he said:

              Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: So fa r as the alteration or so fa r as the
              amendment o f your statement is concerned, correct me if I am wrong,
              I do not get the impression that you are suggesting that you were
              subjected to any improper pressure to alter your statement?

              M r Bruder: L et’s say I wouldn ’t say I was bullied or cajoled
              certainly because I ’m not that type o f chap, I would have shown him
              the door had that been the case to be quite honest. The fact that he
              was an Inspector didn’t really mean anything to me, he was here to
              do a job, to take a statement.

29.   And later:

              Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: I am concerned, you see, because there
              have been suggestions that you were subjected to improper pressure
              to change the statement.

              M r Bruder: I disagree that I was put under pressure to change the
              statement.
My conclusions about Mr Bruder’s evidence are these: I did not find his
explanation as to why he had said in his second statement that he might have
made a mistake about the pulse, entirely convincing. I doubt whether he
really meant that he might have been mistaken as to the precise region where
he took the pulse. However, I am satisfied that he now genuinely believes
that he did feel a slight pulse and so believed at the time of his first
statement. This was accepted by Dr Slater, who said that Kevin’s whole
body died when Mr Bruder was with him. (inquest transcript 4 May 1990,
page 13 B-D). It was also accepted by Dr Gumpert (page 17 A).

Having seen Mr Bruder I am quite satisfied that he was not subjected to any
improper pressure in making his second statement, which in every respect
save one he confirmed was correct. As he himself said, he is not the sort of
person to be bullied or cajoled.

For this reason I have not thought it necessary to take the matter further with
Mr Sawers or Dr Slater. Dr Slater wrote to me. He said he had spoken to
Mr Bruder with the full knowledge and approval of the Coroner. The object
was to enable him to assess the strength of his own evidence, in relation to
Mr Bruder’s, having regard to the difficulty in deciding when a person is
alive or dead, particularly the distinction between somatic and brain stem
death. Although it may be somewhat unusual for a pathologist to speak to a
witness about his evidence I see nothing improper about it, especially if, as
Mr Bruder says, he and Inspectors Sawers were having difficulty in
understanding the medical point involved.

There is nothing whatever wrong in the Coroner attempting to reconcile the
evidence of Dr Slater with that of PC Bruder and WPC Martin. Indeed he
would probably have been criticised if he had not. If the witness adheres to
his or her original statement, then the conflict cannot be resolved without the
decision maker hearing the evidence. But if the witness expresses doubt, or
gives an explanation as to why they may have been mistaken, or if he or she
says that they were confused at the time or may have been, any conflict is
likely to have been resolved. Mr Bruder told me he thought he should have
been called as a witness. This was entirely a matter for the Coroner. In the
light of Mr Bruder’s second signed statement, as the Divisional Court said,
no possible criticism can be made of the Coroner.

 It is unfortunate that Inspector Sawers appears to have overlooked the fact
 that there was a third ambulance on the pitch as Mr Bruder had said.
 Indeed this seems to have been overlooked by the Coroner and the legal
 representatives who were in Court, including Mr Fraser who was
 representing the families.

 There is in fact a problem reconciling the times involved. There is a timed
 photograph of Kevin Williams being carried across the pitch, through the
 centre circle, at 15.32. This is plainly before Mr Bruder’s attempt to
        resuscitate him, which took place further down the pitch, between the
        centre circle and the gymnasium. The timings given in PC Bruder’s
        statements suggest that it was not until about 15.43 that he saw the
        ambulance coming onto the pitch and attempts were made to stop it. Yet
        there is video evidence that Mr Edwards’ ambulance was on the pitch at
        15.36.

        I think there cannot be any doubt that the ambulance Mr Bruder is referring
        to is Mr Edwards’. But this confusion about timings perhaps goes some
        way to explain why the connection was not made during the Inquest. In
        any event no one has ever doubted that Mr Bruder attempted to resuscitate
        Kevin Williams. The only question was whether in truth he felt a pulse. It
        is quite wrong to suggest that PC Bruder’s evidence at the Inquest was
        discredited. It was not and I see no evidence of any attempt to discredit it
        - merely to clarify it.


D ebra Martin.

        I interviewed Miss Martin on 18 November 1997. She made a statement
        dated 27 February 1995 in the presence of Miss Adlington, the
        Hillsborough Family Support Group’s Solicitor. In this she said that WPS
        Appleton came to see her on 17 March 1990 and tried to convince her that
        her original statement of 8 May 1989 was untrue. After exerting
        considerable pressure on her, WPS Appleton produced a dictionary which
        she referred to while she, WPS Appleton, compiled the second statement.
        Miss Martin was unable to read this because of her distress. She said she
        signed it because of the pressure exerted on her and because she wanted to
        put Hillsborough behind her.

        In her interview with me I asked Miss Martin about the pressure exerted on
        her. She said WPS Appleton had harassed her with telephone calls at her
        work and when she couldn’t get through, at her home. She visited her
        three or four times, sometimes accompanied by male officers - Miss Martin
        said she was literally brow beaten. When WPS Appleton came to her home
        on 17 March she accused her (Miss Martin) of lies and said she had never
        been at Hillsborough.

        Debra Martin told me WPS Appleton kept on calling her a complete liar
        and that she needed to take a second statement. She didn’t read this
        statement because she was in such a state she had to go and speak to her
        parents. Miss Martin said that although she had taken statements from
        witnesses in her work as a Special Constable, and knew there was a caution
        at the beginning of the statement, she had not signed this. Her signature
        there must be a forgery. She agreed that she had signed the statement at the
        bottom of each page and at the end.
I took her through the statement which she was said to have given to WPS
Appleton. Much of it she agreed she had said. But in every case where
the statement records that she was confused, did not have a clear
recollection and was like a “zombie”, she said that was untrue and that
WPS Appleton had made it up, though she accepted that she had used the
phrase that ‘she was acting on auto-pilot’.

Miss Martin insisted to me that she had a clear recollection of the events
on 15 April 1989. She told me that she had never read the statement she
gave to WPS Appleton. When I pointed out that this appeared to be
inconsistent with her statement of 22 February 1995 to Miss Adlington, she
accepted that she must have read it on that occasion but had no recollection
of it. She told me that she was very distressed and upset by the events of
the day of the disaster and had made a claim against the South Yorkshire
Police in respect of her post traumatic stress, but had been pressurised to
drop the claim.

Mrs Martin, Debra’s mother, also gave evidence to me. She too said that
WPS Appleton had been to the house three or four times previously. She
was not present during the interview on 17 March 1990 - but had been in
the next room with her husband. They could hear raised voices but not
what was said. She said there came a time when her daughter came and
spoke to them and said, “I can’t take any more, she is bullying me all the
time, she is calling me a liar” . Both she and her husband told Debra not to
sign anything, but in spite of this she went back into the lounge and signed
the statement. She told me that Debra had been deeply disturbed by
Hillsborough and still was. She agreed with me that her daughter was very
emotional.

In my judgement Debra Martin cannot be regarded as a reliable witness.
Her first statement (8 May 1989) is very confused and in conflict with all
the other evidence relating to events at Hillsborough. In it she said that at
about 2.50 p.m. she was on duty at the Penistone Road end (that is, the
other end of the ground from Leppings Lane where the Liverpool fans were
arriving). She said that there was a great deal of trouble at that end with
drunken Nottingham Forest fans so that mounted police were forced against
the wall. A large blue gate (which she told me was somewhere near the
entrance from Penistone Road by the gymnasium) was opened and the large
majority of the crowd pushed their way into the ground. She was carried
along by the crowd and pushed to the floor.

She found herself inside the ground at the bottom of the Spion Kop, with
the gates closed behind her. She managed to get out into the road again,
where she found herself surrounded by drunken fans screaming abuse. She
then made her way to the Leppings Lane end (she told me she had gone
round the North side of the ground and along Vere Road). Ambulances and
police cars were rushing to that end of the ground (the first ambulance
arrived at that end at 15.13). There was, she said, a vast crowd of about
4,000 fans trying to get into the ground. Next thing she got into the
ground, apparently through a blue gate and found herself on the pitch, she
could not remember how.

Miss Martin is the only witness who speaks of a crowd of disorderly
Nottingham Forest fans surging through a blue gate at the Penistone Road
end. Her mother told me that when Debra had given her an account of
what had happened, she understood that this had happened at the Liverpool
end. I found Miss Martin to be highly emotional; she was obviously deeply
upset by her experiences that day. She told me in her interview that she
had felt Kevin Williams’ pulse and felt a faint one. I can find no trace of
her ever having said that before.

In fact her two statements of 8 May 1989 and 17 March 1990 are not
contradictory. But the second one explains why the first may not be
reliable. I am satisfied that her statement that Kevin Williams was alive
and said ‘Mom’ to her in the gymnasium cannot be relied upon. It is
contrary to the evidence of PC Bruder and also contrary to the medical
evidence, both of Dr Slater and the pathologist Dr Iain West (who advised
Mrs Williams and said that it was unlikely that with the injuries to his
throat Kevin could have said ‘Mom’).

I am also confident that Miss Martin signed the caution at the beginning of
the second statement.

By contrast I found WPS Appleton a most impressive witness. She told me
that she had been-asked by the Coroner to see Miss Martin because he
found her account of Kevin Williams dying in her arms difficult to
reconcile with the other evidence and he wished to make sure that she was
correct about it. She telephoned and made an appointment. She had only
been once to the house - she remembered this as she had difficulty finding
it. She said other officers may have been previously with a view to tracing
the movements of deceased supporters from photographic material; but she
had not done so. (In fact this is correct - there are two statements by Debra
Martin, dated 12 July and 5 September 1989, taken by police officers other
than WPS Appleton, dealing with identification of victims).

So far from being anxious to discredit Miss Martin, she would have liked to
be able to confirm what she said in relation to Kevin, because she realised
that it might be of some comfort to Mrs Williams. The interview was
perfectly amicable though like many people involved with Hillsborough
Miss Martin was upset, particularly when talking about Kevin. WPS
Appleton said she explained the problem about the inconsistency with other
evidence in relation to Kevin. She had not appreciated that the earlier
account of the entry of a crowd at Penistone Road was inconsistent with all
the other evidence, and she did not ask about it. She did not call Miss
Martin a liar and did not bully or browbeat her. Miss Martin dictated the
       fresh statement and she, WPS Appleton, took it down. Miss Martin signed
       the caution at the head of the statement and initialled two corrections in it.

50.    WPS Appleton told me that she was shocked when she heard for the first
       time the allegations made by Miss Martin in the 'Cook Report’ television
       programme in 1994. I accept the evidence of WPS Appleton and prefer her
       account to that of Miss Martin, or that of Mrs Martin to the extent that she
       supports her daughter.

51.    I deal further with the case of Kevin Williams in Appendix 9 .


Paul Taylor

52.   The third witness who I was told had been pressurised into changing his
       evidence is Paul Taylor. Mr Taylor, a Liverpool supporter, was near the
       centre of the crush in pen 3 of the Leppings Lane terrace. Although badly
       affected by the crush himself he helped or tried to help a number of other
       people who were caught in the pen.

53.   The allegation is that there was an attempt to prevent Mr Taylor from adding
       to his original statement relevant matters concerning the death of Victoria
       Hicks.

54.   I have interviewed Mr Taylor. He made three statements in writing. The
      first is undated, which he told me was made on 4 May 1989 because he had
      been asked by the survivors’ group to record his recollections. The second
       was to West Midlands Police dated 8 May 1989, and the third is dated 23
       September 1997. He also gave oral evidence at the Inquest.

55.    In his first statement (4 May 1989) he described dealing with a girl in pen 3.
       He said

               “I then spotted a girl with her legs trapped and lying over
               backwards so I pulled her out and carried her to one side. I put her
               down and went to give her the kiss o f life and then smelt the odour
               coming from her mouth. I realised then she was dead but I still did
               it out o f instinct. I then pulled her arm out o f her cardigan and
               pulled it over her face and left her, and went to help anyone else I
               could”.

56.   His next statement, of 8 May 1989, is substantially the same, but also
      includes a description of the girl and her clothing. It appears that Mr and
      Mrs Hicks were told of this description and thought it was their daughter
      Victoria. As a result, Mr Taylor told me that he had a telephone call from
      Mr and Mrs Hicks four to six weeks after the disaster, when he described
      how he had found their daughter and what he had done. In his statement of
      23 September 1997 he said
          “I told M r and Mrs Hicks that when I lay the young boy next to
         Victoria a young police officer wearing gloves came along. He fe lt
        fo r a pulse in both Victoria and the boy. He told me to leave both
         bodies as they were dead ... Mr and Mrs Hicks were keen that I
         added this information to my earlier statement. I therefore received
         a visit at home from DC McCombie, the West Midlands Police
         Officer assigned to the Hicks ’ case. I explained what I wanted to
         add to my earlier statement. He told me that unless I knew the name
         and number o f the police officer that I would be committing perjury
         if I made another statement. He told me I could go to ja il fo r
         committing perjury. A t the time my wife had ju st had a baby. I was
        frightened by what DC McCombie was saying to me and agreed that
         I would not make another statement. I did not want to put my fam ily
         at risk. I did not refer to any o f this when I gave evidence at the
         Inquest. ”

In fact when he gave evidence at the Inquest he did refer to the incident; but
he did not mention that the person who said Victoria was dead was a
policeman or was wearing gloves. He said (transcript, day 32, p74E):

        A.       “I saw she had bits o f rust in her mouth when I slightly
         opened her mouth and I realised then it was from the pole o ff the
         barrier when it had been thrown over. I had seen all the stuff
         earlier and it must have gone on her and it was around her eyes and
         speckled on her face, and I ju st took a few bits o ff her lips and then
        ju st tried to blow into her mouth, and then someone said, ‘Leave
         her, sh e’s dead’. ”

        Q.      “You thought she was dead. She looked dead to you, did she
        not, or did she?”.

        A.      “Her lips were rolled back and her eyes were really wide
        open ”.

In cross examination, Mr Fraser who was acting for the Hicks family,
brought out that the girl Mr Taylor was referring to was Victoria Hicks.
But no further question was asked as to who the ‘someone’ was, or how they
knew she was dead. This is hardly surprising. In a letter, dated 13
November 1990, a copy of which was sent to the Coroner, Mr Hicks
records the meeting between himself, his wife and Mr Taylor, and what Mr
Taylor had told him. So far as is material this is as follows:

        ‘He went on to describe how Victoria was pinned by her legs and
        was bent over backwards on the top o f the pile o f bodies and how
        she was removed in a semi-conscious state. He went on to say how
        she was laid on her back on the terraces; he/others removed her
        blue cardigan when he had been told she was beyond help. He
        claimed he did not know how to do mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, he
        was put o ff by the smell o f vomit from her mouth and rust from the
        barrier on her face and the fa ct “she was only a young school kid ”.
        He described how he sat and cuddled her fo r some minutes before
        she was passed on to the pitch - this six minutes could have been
        vital to Victoria’s survival had she received proper attention at that
        time. ’

It is noticeable that in this account there is no reference to a policeman. The
account is also inconsistent with Mr Taylor’s first written statement and
recollections where he says that he thought Victoria was dead, not semi­
conscious, and there is no reference to cuddling her.

In his evidence to me, (transcript page 7, lines 10-26), Mr Taylor said that
Detective Sergeant McCombie

        “asked me if I could describe the police officer, and I said, like, I
        knew he was a young police officer and not an old man. He said,
        “well, did you recognise his badge number or anything like that?” I
        said, “well, I can’t recollect because everything was hectic at the
        time ”. It was ju st a case o f trying to get on with what you were
        trying to do. He said then, “have you ever heard o f the word
         ‘p erjury ’ I said, “Well, I think so. I don’t really understand what
        it means ”. He explained if you say something and put it down in the
        statements and then it ’s found not to be true you can actually go to
        prison fo r committing perjury. He said, “I ’d have a think about
        this ” and then he went, and I spoke to my wife after he went because
        he said on the lines that you ’re a young family. Our Michael was
        only about 12 weeks old at the time, and he was emphasising about
        perjury and you could actually go to prison. ”

Mr Taylor did not mention that the police officer was wearing gloves when
he took the pulse until he was specifically asked this. I am not so much
concerned with whether Mr Taylor’s recollection about the policeman
wearing gloves is correct, but with whether he was actually threatened in the
way he describes.

I interviewed Detective Sergeant McCombie on 2 December 1997 and he
sent me a further written statement, dated 17 December 1997, elaborating
certain matters. He told me that he had been contacted by the Liverpool
Social Services. Mr Taylor had been in touch with the Hicks family and it
was established that one of the people he had dealt with was Victoria Hicks.
Mr Taylor had told them that while he was giving Victoria Hicks the kiss of
life a policeman said, “Leave her alone, she’s gone”, without feeling her
pulse. This had caused upset to Mr and Mrs Hicks.

DS McCombie went to see Paul Taylor on 31 May 1989. He said that Mr
Taylor was confused, upset and emotional, and said he’d been suffering
from the stress syndrome. He went through Mr Taylor’s original statement
with him and what he had apparently told Mr and Mrs Hicks. He said that
M r Taylor retracted what he had said to the Hicks family about the
policeman. DS McCombie said that he would try and check his involvement
through the photographic evidence. To this end he filed an ‘Action’ dated 1
June 1989, asking if there was any identification of Mr Taylor in the crowd,
for his involvement to be assessed and whether his continuity to Victoria
Hicks could be established. The ‘Action’ recorded the above account of
what Mr Taylor was supposed to have told Mr and Mrs Hicks, that he had
retracted it and was suffering from the stress syndrome.

West Midlands Police pursued the matter. They found two photographs
which showed Mr Taylor in pen 3, but these did not show him in any
involvement with Victoria Hicks. When I spoke to him DS McCombie
could not recall whether he had visited Mr Taylor again or spoken to him on
the telephone to tell him the result of the further enquiries.

Mr McCombie told me that at no time did he threaten Mr Taylor with any
question of perjury. He did not bully or intimidate him. He was very well
aware of the trauma M r Taylor had been through. He was anxious that
things should not be said which might upset the Hicks family unless they
were correct. But it did not matter to him whether a South Yorkshire
policeman behaved as Mr Taylor had told Mr Hicks.

After more than eight years it is impossible to be sure precisely what
happened. On balance of probability I would conclude as follows. Mr
Taylor was undoubtedly very upset and emotionally disturbed following
Hillsborough. This is confirmed in his original recollections of the
treatment he received. DS McCombie was anxious that things which might
upset Mr and Mrs Hicks should not be put forward unless it was reasonably
certain that they were correct. To this end I have no doubt that he went
through Mr Taylor’s original statements, and pointed out that there was no
reference to a policeman saying Victoria was dead without taking her pulse,
and pressed him as to whether he was sure of this. He also said that he
would have a check made to see if any photographic evidence could link him
with Victoria. I am satisfied that Mr Taylor said he was not sure, and DS
McCombie took this as a retraction. I am certainly not satisfied that DS
McCombie in any way bullied or intimidated Mr Taylor or threatened him
with a charge of perjury if he insisted on adding to his statement anything
about the matter.

I think the most likely explanation of Mr Taylor’s belief that there was a
reference to perjury is that made by DS McCombie in his statement to me of
17 December 1997. This is that when the police took from Mr Taylor his
statement of 8 May 1989, they may have explained the formal caution at the
top of the statement to him in terms of a prosecution for perjury if the
witness making the statement wilfully says in it which he believes to be false
or does not believe to be true. Alternatively, in going through this statement
with DS McCombie, Mr Taylor may have asked what the caution meant,
and DS McCombie explained it to him in that way.

It should be noted that Mr Taylor’s account of his conversation with the
policeman in pen 3 has varied over the years. In his original very full
recollections and statement, there is no mention of it. His account, as
recorded by Mr Hicks in his letter of 13 November 1990, also makes no
mention of a policeman. The next account, at least as recorded near the
time by DS McCombie, is that the policeman said, “She’s gone”, without
taking Victoria’s pulse. This account however appears to be hearsay on
hearsay. At the inquest he said, ‘Someone said’, “Leave her, she’s dead”
with no mention of a policeman or of a pulse being taken.

In his statement of 23 September 1997 Mr Taylor said the policeman took
Victoria’s pulse. It is not clear whether he means that the policeman was
wearing gloves at that time. In his evidence to me he did not initially
mention him wearing gloves when he took the pulse, but in answer to a
direct question at the end of his interview said that he was.

It is quite plain that despite the situation which he himself was in Mr Taylor
did his best to help other spectators who were trapped and in some cases
dying in pen 3. I intend no criticism of him - very much the reverse. But
in the light of the inconsistent statements he has made over the years I
cannot regard his evidence as reliable. I can see no reason why I should not
accept DS McCombie’s account, supported as it is by the contemporary
documents. No complaint has, so far as I am aware, ever been officially
made about DS McCombie’s conduct to the Police Complaints Authority and
the first time it appears to have been raised is very recently in 1997. In my
view the evidence is wholly insufficient to justify any action being taken
against this officer.

Neither WPS Appleton nor DS McCombie had any reason or motive to try
to bring pressure to bear on Miss Martin or Mr Taylor. The suggestion that
they did so as part of a biased and incomplete investigation and ‘fo r the
purpose o f keeping to a minimum the scrutiny o f South Yorkshire Police’s
reaction to the disaster’ (see para 4 above) is clearly untenable.

Miss M artin’s evidence about the last moments of Kevin Williams has
nothing to do with South Yorkshire Police. West Midlands Police gathered
and presented to Lord Taylor and the Coroner extensive evidence critical of
South Yorkshire Police. Even if DS McCombie had done what is alleged,
which he did not, it is difficult to see how omitting to mention questionable
conduct (taking a pulse with gloves on) by one police officer in the terrible
circumstances of the epicentre of the disaster could amount to an attempt by
its investigators to minimise the faults in the South Yorkshire Police reaction
to it. Nor is there any indication here of an incomplete investigation. On
the contrary, when the point about the policeman saying Victoria Hicks was
dead was raised DS McCombie very properly looked into it.
Part 2


Collection of evidence from South Yorkshire Police Officers


73.      In his written submissions to me Professor Scraton stated that there was a
         ‘range of claims that witnesses were subjected to pressure in giving their
         statements’. When he came to make oral submissions to me I asked him to
         tell me what these claims were. In addition to the three cases which I have
         dealt with in the first part of this chapter he invited me to consider the
         evidence of Mr David Frost, whom he brought to see me.


David Frost

74.      Mr Frost was a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police on duty at
         Hillsborough. He was in Serial 21, which was at the Penistone Road End.
         He assisted in arresting a drunken fan and taking him to the charge room.
         He returned to the Penistone Road End. At 2.55 his serial was called inside
         the ground and sent to the Leppings Lane Terraces where he assisted with
         the rescue operation. Like other officers Mr Frost was asked to write out
         his recollections. He did so in his own handwriting and this appears to have
         been typed up into the form of a statement dated 9 May 1989. It was
         submitted to the South Yorkshire Police solicitors, as a result of which a
         number of deletions and some alterations were made. (Appendix 6 is the
         amended version, showing the alterations).

75.      I can see nothing to take exception to in these amendments save possibly in
         three instances. The reference in the third page to the radio being garbled
         and frantic might be considered both factual and material, though other
         officers had also spoken of the difficulties with the radio. On the fifth page
         the word ‘bottleneck’ possibly amplified the sentence that follows. A
         reference on this page to the late arrival of certain officers to organise the
         rescue might be regarded as factual, though the language is not appropriate.
         But none of the deletions or alterations in my view alter the substance of the
         statement.

76.      Mr Frost was asked to sign the amended statement. He told me he refused
         to do so. He said that other officers also refused to sign their amended
         statements, though he was unable to name any. He said he would let me
         know their names, but he has not done so.      He also told me that others
         were ‘asked/impelled to sign things that they didn’t want to that had been
         changed’. I asked him if he had witnessed any one being impelled to sign.
         He said that he personally had not, but he knew officers who had. Again I
         have not been supplied with their names. He accepted that his original
         statement was not in a suitable form to be a witness statement. He said that
       he himself was not put under any pressure to sign, he was left alone. He
       told me:

                ‘This was an attempt by senior management to sanitise and protect
               themselves; and any honour that the South Yorkshire Police, which I
               thought at the time was considerable, disappeared fo r me.

               That is why I left the force. I was medically pensioned off. I
               couldn’t wear a uniform after this sort o f thing took p la ce’
               (transcript page 14, lines 13-19).

77.    He suggested to me that the reason why officers were asked to submit
       statements on plain paper as opposed to writing up their notebooks or
       making statements on Criminal Justice Act forms was so that they could be
       doctored.

78.     On the strength of this evidence and that which I have dealt with in part 1 of
       this Chapter, Professor Scraton submitted to me that officers’ statements had
       been taken in a manner which was

               “highly irregular and leaves itself open to accusations o f widespread
              and institutional malpractice; it does smack o f ‘getting our stories
              right before they go to the investigation fo rc e’ and pressure, no
              pressure, but people are expected to make changes in their statements
              to their recollections ”.


Collection o f police evidence

79.    I have investigated the facts surrounding the obtaining of statements from
        South Yorkshire Police officers. At a meeting of senior officers including
        the Chief Constable at South Yorkshire Police HQ on the 17 April 1989 it
        was decided that the officers principally involved should set down their
        recollections of events in writing. On the 25 April Assistant Chief
        Constable Mervyn Jones, who was in charge of the Inquiry on behalf of
        West Midlands Police and the Taylor Inquiry was told that the South
        Yorkshire Police were obtaining ‘self-serving’ (ie self-written) statements by
        police officers down to Inspector level, and also from all officers at
        Leppings Lane End of the ground.

80.    At a meeting on the morning of 26 April 1989 Chief Superintendent Wain
       told a group of South Yorkshire Police officers who were concerned with the
        inquiry that it was necessary to obtain self-written statements from the
       relevant officers. These would be on plain paper and not taken under
        Criminal Justice Act rules. It was said that “our job is merely to collate
        what evidence South Yorkshire Police officers can provide to their Chief
        Constable in order that we can present a suitable case, on behalf o f the
       force, to subsequent inquiries ”. An aide memoire produced by Chief
       Superintendent Wain setting out the matters to be dealt with appears to have
       been distributed. These included the time of coming on duty, to whom the
       officer was responsible, and where they were deployed and what they said
       and did. It appears to call for a factual account.

81.    At 2pm that day there was a conference between senior South Yorkshire
       Police, the solicitors acting for the South Yorkshire Police, Messrs
       Hammond Suddards, and leading and junior counsel. A note of the meeting
       made by the solicitors records that in the course of it Mr Woodward QC
       advised that the operation undertaken by South Yorkshire Police should be
       regarded as an evidence gathering operation for the information of the legal
       advisers. He said that any statements taken for this purpose would be
       privileged, and that writs were expected. He suggested that some officers
       might “want to put all their thoughts and expressions of that day down on
       paper, as a sort of catharsis” . The process was a confidential one and the
        legal advisers would choose what they wanted to leave in or leave out.

82.    In a letter dated 7 May 1989 ACC Jones told the Chief Constable of South
        Yorkshire that he had been asked by Counsel for Lord Taylor’s inquiry to
        request statements from a selected number of officers of their recollections
        of the day. This was in addition to the statements of senior officers which
        had already been sought. In a telephone conversation referred to in an
        attendance note dated the 9 May this request was discussed between Mr
        Metcalf, a partner of Hammond Suddards and Chief Superintendent Denton
        of the South Yorkshire Police. Statements from some 120 officers were
        being sought by the West Midlands Police; of these about 100 had already
        written their accounts. It was agreed that many of these might be suitable to
        be handed over as they were, but some might include comment and
        speculation and might have to be redone. The solicitors were to consider
        them. Mr Denton sent a number of statements under cover of a letter of the
        same date. He said “no doubt you will advise me on the propriety of
        supplying these documents to the West Midlands Police.”

83.    Over the next 5 weeks in excess of 400 statements written by South
        Yorkshire officers were submitted to the solicitors. Of these, 253 attracted
        no comment at all. In 60 cases the comment was confined to pointing out
        some minor error or ambiguity.

84.    As the work of supplying material to the West Midlands inquiry continued,
        South Yorkshire Police themselves suggested alterations to some officers’
        statements, adopting the same basis for amendments as the solicitors had
        recommended to statements that had been sent to them previously.


 Pnlicp statements amended pursuant to recommendations fry solicitors

 85.    At that time no official guidance appears to have been given by the Law
        Society or the Bar Council as to the preparation of witness statements to be
disclosed to other parties. Guidance has subsequently been given by the Bar
Council in 1997. In his submission to me Mr Metcalf summarised what he
considered were the appropriate principles to be applied. I accept these,
though I have made some alteration to para. 4 which I have underlined:

       (1)    The statement must accurately reflect a witness’s evidence, but
              exclude inadmissible hearsay, comment and argument.

       (2)    It should be succinct, exclude irrelevant material and
              unnecessary elaboration, and should not serve as a
              commentary on documents.

       (3)    It should contain all witness’s evidence in chief; it should not
              be edited so that it no longer fairly reflects the answers which
              the witness would be expected to give in response to viva voce
              examination in chief.

       (4)    Great care should he exercised in the exclusion o f material that
              is unhelpful to the parties case. No material should be
              excluded which might render a statement anything other than
              the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, e.g. by
              leaving in fa ct A while excluding fa ct B in such a way as to
              render untrue or misleading anything which remains in the
              statement. The overriding duty is to assist the Court or
              Tribunal in the administration o f justice.

       (5)    The exclusion o f unfavourable material, other than in such
              manner as to amount to a failure to comply with guideline 4, is
              a matter o f judgement.

        (6)   It is permitted and appropriate to draw a witness' attention
               that what he proposes to say appears in conflict with other
               evidence, or may be found by a court difficult to accept, but i f
               the witness maintains the evidence, then the guidelines 1-5
               above apply.

I have examined approximately 100 amended statements where on the face
of the comments by the solicitors something of substance might have been
referred to. In 74 instances the amendment is of no consequence. Of these,
there are some cases in which the solicitor’s recommendation was not
adopted and the suggested amendments were not made. In others, adverse
comment on fans’ behaviour, intemperate language, personal feelings or
hearsay have been removed or the statement has been made clearer or
ambiguities or inconsistencies put right.

In the remaining 26 cases comment and opinion are excluded. These are
generally criticisms of the police operation and in the main fall under three
heads: complaints about lack of radios, lack of information on the radio and
difficulty of communication by radio due to interference; apparent shortage
of police on foot at Leppings Lane; and lack of organisation by senior
officers in the rescue operation. Not infrequently the factual matters
underlying the criticism are apparent from the rest of the statement. In a
factual statement these comments and opinions would not normally occur
and the solicitors cannot be criticised for recommending their removal.

Of the 26 amended statements which I mentioned in the last paragraph there
is a total of ten on which I should make specific comment, and I do that in
Appendix 7. In five of these cases - Creaser, Crawford, Eustis, Powell and
Huckstepp - factual matters were excluded which arguably should not have
been. (The amendments which they appear to have suggested to PC
Huckstepp’s statement were not in fact made, apparently due to administrative
error - see Appendix 7).

In four others - Brookes, Ramsden, Walpole and White - although what is
excluded is comment, factual matters are implicit in the comment and it might
have been better to elucidate these rather than simply exclude the comment. I
also comment in Appendix 7 on the alterations to a statement by PC Groome
which, other than the statement by PC Frost, has more changes made to it than
any other I have examined.

The solicitors were under severe time constraints in giving their advice since
the statements were urgently required for Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. In no case
does what is excluded render the rest of the statement misleading. In those
cases where factual matter has been excluded I accept that the solicitors had to
exercise judgement as to whether material unhelpful to the police case should
be excluded. I have indicated in Appendix 7 that at least in some cases it
would have been better if it had not been. But I would categorise this at worst
as an error of judgement. I certainly do not think the solicitors were guilty of
anything that could be regarded as unprofessional conduct.

 A number of officers had expressed concern over the alterations to Mr
 Denton and those officers under him who were responsible for obtaining
 amended statements.. With the approval of the solicitors an explanation was
 circulated on about 23 May 1989. I exhibit a copy at Appendix 8, p i .
 The recipients are identified in the document and I have no doubt that the
 explanation was passed on to those who had expressed concern.

 It appears that in some cases, because of the short timescale before the Lord
 Taylor’s Inquiry got underway (it started on 15 May 1989), some
 statements were sent to the inquiry team and circulated by them to
 representatives of the parties before they had been vetted by the solicitors.
 As a result one police officer was cross-examined at the Inquiry (day 16) on
 the basis of a criticism contained in his original statement but later excluded.
 This was a matter of concern to ACC Jones, because it was contrary to an
 arrangement which he had made with the Chief Constable of South
       Yorkshire. The matter was taken up with the Treasury Solicitor, who
       replied on the 7 June. A copy of this reply is in Appendix 8, p2.

93.   This letter shows that Counsel to the Inquiry and the Treasury Solicitor were
      well aware that self-written statements were being vetted by Hammond
      Suddards. Mr Justice Collins, who was Leading Counsel to the Inquiry,
      and Mr Whitehurst, Assistant Treasury Solicitor and part of the Inquiry
      Team have both confirmed to me that that was the case. So also has Chief
      Superintendent Foster who was in charge of the investigation by the West
      Midlands Police.


Privilege

94.    I do not think statements which came into existence prior to 26 April 1989
        were subject to legal professional privilege. There is no evidence that they
        were obtained so that the legal advisers to the Chief Constable could advise,
        as opposed to the officers being asked to record their recollections while
        matters were fresh in their minds. Those that came into existence following
        the conference with Counsel may well have been privileged, though there
        may have been difficult questions relating to the dominant purpose for which
        the statement was obtained.

95.    In the event I do not think the point is of any consequence since the question
        of legal professional privilege only relates to the non-production of
        documents in litigation. Nor do I think there was anything improper about
        asking officers to record their recollections in their own words on ordinary
        paper, rather than in their notebooks. The occasion was wholly exceptional
        and a notebook is not a convenient form in which to write what, in many
        cases, was likely to be a very long statement.


Timescale

96.    While it might have been preferable for statements to be taken in the usual
       Criminal Justice Act form, I doubt whether this was practicable having
       regard to the time constraints. Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was working to a very
       tight timescale in order to allow the Home Secretary to have a report by the
       beginning of the next football season in August.

97.    It would probably have been difficult for South Yorkshire Police to take
        these statements from their colleagues in the time available. It is quite clear
        to me that the West Midlands Police could not possibly have taken such
        statements in time for them to be available for consideration by the Inquiry
        team. The Inquiry team, including Lord Taylor, were clearly well aware
        that original self-written statements were being vetted by the solicitors and in
        some cases altered. I have no doubt that they either knew or suspected that
       criticisms of the police operation or conduct of senior police officers were
       being excluded on the basis that such criticisms were comment or opinion.

98.    These alterations were made on the advice of the solicitors, though in many
       cases they simply advised that the passage in question be reviewed. This
       process of submitting statements to solicitors before they were sent to the
       Inquiry did not materially differ from that adopted by the Club and the
       Ambulance Service. In their cases the respective solicitors took the
       statements and forwarded them to the Inquiry team.


Statements which were amended without reference to the solicitors

99.    There were also a large number of statements which South Yorkshire Police
       obtained from their officers which they did not send to their solicitors for
       comment. The reason for this seems to have been that they were not
       available until the latter part of May 1989. The force examined these
       statements but suggested no alteration to most of them.

100.   I have examined 51 of these statements where some alteration was made. In
       many of these the alteration is quite trivial and of no consequence whatever.
       In others, comments have been excluded, for the most part of the same kind
       as those I have referred to in paragraph 87, that is to say criticism of the
       shortage of radios and information, and of the lack of organisation of the
       rescue. In my opinion these comments were properly excluded and I have
       not found any instance in which the factual content of the statement has been
       altered so as to render it misleading.


Cover-up?

101.   Having regard to Mr Duckenfield’s disgraceful lie about Gate C being
       forced open by fans and the fact that some shocking stories about the
       behaviour of fans, said to have emanated from some police officers, were
       reported in the press (see Lord Taylor’s Interim Report, para 257), I have
       considered this matter critically because of the allegation of a cover-up. I
       have no doubt that in the days following Hillsborough the South Yorkshire
       police perceived themselves to be on the defensive. This was also the
       perception of their legal advisers. There was an understandable desire not to
       give anything away.

102.   For the most part the suggestions for amendments by the solicitors are not
       open to criticism. In a few cases however I think it would have been
       preferable if the deletion had not been made. The amendments which South
       Yorkshire Police suggested themselves, without reference to the solicitors,
       are in my view unexceptionable. What was happening was well known to
       Lord Taylor’s the Inquiry team, though not the detail of the amendments,
       except in those cases where the unamended version was forwarded due to
       pressure of time.

103.   I have made enquiries of a number of the officers whose statements I refer to
       in Appendix 7 to see if they were subjected to improper pressure as Mr
       Frost suggested. One, PC Groome, told me that he had been told that unless
       the alterations were made his evidence would not be forwarded to the
       Inquiry, and so, reluctantly, he agreed. He might perhaps have sent his
       unamended version in to the Inquiry of his own accord if he had really
       wanted to, but in any event the alterations to his statement - though
       extensive - are in my view unexceptionable (see Appendix 7). Otherwise
       any reluctance the officers may have had seems to have been allayed by the
       explanation to which I referred earlier (see Appendix 8).       I have not come
       across any statement that is not signed by the officer, and that includes Mr
       Frost’s.

104.   In fact I think the whole effort may have been counter productive. Had
       more attention been paid to the comments and opinions of the junior ranks,
       the Force might have avoided the stinging rebuke which they received from
       Lord Taylor. At para 285 of his Interim Report he said:

               ‘It is a matter o f regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions,
              the South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in
               any respect at fault in what occurred. M r Duckenfield, under
              pressure o f cross-examination, apologised fo r blaming the Liverpool
              fans fo r causing the deaths. But, that apart, the police case was to
               blame the fans fo r being late and drunk, and to blame the Club fo r
              failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal crush was
               not caused by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a
               being defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause fo r anxiety
               as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would have been more
               seemly and encouraging fo r the future if responsibility had been
              faced. ’

105.   I am quite satisfied that Lord Taylor’s Inquiry Team were in no way
       inhibited or impeded by the exclusion of material from the original
       statements. They were well aware of the criticisms that were being raised
       by junior officers. All the questions on which comments were made and
       excluded were matters which Lord Taylor investigated and made findings -
       on the basis of the facts - which were adverse to the police. This applies to
       all the cases I have commented on in Appendix 7. Mr Justice Collins has
       confirmed to me that this was so.

106.   I have not found anything in the material excluded in this way that might
       have influenced the jury at the Inquests to bring in a different verdict. The
       legal representatives of the families at the Inquest were well aware of Lord
       Taylor’s conclusions on the points at issue. Equally I am quite satisfied that
       the exclusion of these comments could not possibly have affected the
4




           Director of Public Prosecutions. As I have already stated, Counsel advising
           the Director proceeded on the basis that the evidence before them supported
           Lord Taylor’s findings.

    107.   In my opinion the allegation made by Professor Scraton of irregularity and
           malpractice (paragraph 78 above) is not substantiated.
