                                                           3S
                                        "    -            2 MAR 1990
h s .3.2/hillsb4.peb


From:   P E Bolton                          cc     Ms Dent
        G2 Division                                 Ms Craig
        x3322                                       Mr Moriarty
                                                   Mr Chi1cot
        2 March 1990                                Mr Turney
                                                   Mr Boys Smith
                                                   Mr^Mower
                                                 yjtfr Goddard
                                                   Mrs Reisz
                                                   Mr- Godfrey

Miss Nicholson



HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP

Ms   Dent asked    for advice on the attached letter from
Robert Hughes MP to Mr Brandon-Bravo covering a letter from
Trevor Hicks, the Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support
Group.     The Home Secretary has had a similar- letter: from:
Mr David Alton M P .

2.   My submission of 22 February to. Ms Dent proposed a reply by
Mr Brandon-Bravo, but he does not wish to respond himself . I now
propose that Lord Ferrers should reply to both letters.

3.    The letter from Mr Hicks is concerned primarily with remarks
made by Mr Peter Wright the Chief: Constable of South Yorkshire
quoted in the "Sheffield Star" (a copy of which is annexed to
Mr: Alton's letter) about drunkenness among football fans on the
day of the Hillsborough tragedy.       Mr Wright's views in the
article are more measured than those attributed to members of the
South Yorkshire Police in an article in "Police" magazine which
appeared in November 1989.    Mr Eric Heffer MP drew this to the
attention of the Home Secretary and the draft reply which r have
provided draws on the reply to Mr Heffer which was sent by
Lord Ferrers on 19 February.

4.   Mr Hicks takes particular exception to Mr Wright's statement
that he found it a little difficult to come to terms with
Lord Justice Taylor's finding that though there was drinking
among a percentage of fans at Hillsborough, it had no effect on
events.   The article says that the Chief Constable accepted
Lord Justice Taylor's findings, but believed that the inquest,
which would have evidence presented to it which was not presented
at the Inquiry, would "reveal a different picture" and "put a
different complexion on the end product".
5.   I have spoken with the Chief Constable who says he was
correctly quoted in the article.      He tells me that he was
reflecting the views and opinions of his officers who were
present at the match and considers that it was his duty to do so.
He emphasised that he does not disagree with the principal
conclusions of the Taylor report.

6.   I do not think that Lord Ferrers will wish to be drawn into
the argument and I have tried to steer a neutral course in the
draft reply which has been prepared in consultation with
Mrs Reisz and Mr Goddard in the Police Department.

7.   The other issues raised by M r Hughes is the possibility of
a meeting for Mr Hicks with one of the Home Office Ministers,
preferably the Home Secretary.

8.    I cannot see that there would be any practical advantage for
the Home Office from such a meeting.          The Minister would
doubtless have to explain to Mr Hicks why we are unable to
prevent Mr Wright or members of the South Yorkshire Police
holding or expressing the views which have been attributed to
them.

9.   Nevertheless Mr Hicks is a responsible individual who lost
2 daughters in the tragedy.     The Hillsborough Family Support
Group has already had one meeting with a "cross party" group of
MPs and a second was arranged for 2.7 February.    M r Patten was
invited but said he was unable to attend.      Mr Hicks is often
interviewed by the media and there may therefore be a strong
presentational case for granting: him an interview - which should
perhaps be with Lord Ferrers.   (Lord Ferrers will recall that he
has agreed to meet, at their request, representatives of the
Football Supporters Association and the Federation of Football
Supporters Clubs.)

10. However as the draft letter suggests, the Home Office is
already committed to meeting the 3 specific objectives of the
support group which are in the Home Office area of responsibility
and if a meeting with Lord Ferrers is difficult to arrange and
Mr Hicks would be content with a meeting with an official,
I shall be very happy to see him myself.

11. If Lord Ferrers agrees, I think a hidden copy of his letter
should be sent to Mr Wright.




                                          P E BOLTON


Encs
                     FROM: ROBERT G. HUGHES MP (Harrow West)         9 FE8 1990 U ^ ^



                                                           (1^^—LC\ bvc*

                                                              vJM~UL

                              H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                                            cc    A/is
                                 LONDON    SW1A OAA
                                                                 IW . 6 c r i j / ^
13 February 1990                                                  Ia j \   /1/u M -CT

Martin Brandon-Bravo Esq MP
House of Commons
LONDON SW1A OAA




/-6 * o r   *   v t /v   ,
R e : Hillsborough Family Support Group



Trevor Hicks, who is the Chairman of the above Group, is one of my
constituents and he lost two teenage daughters in the Hillsborough
disaster.

Mr Hicks and the other members of the Hillsborough Family Support Group
recently met with the Leader of the Opposition, Neil Kinnock MP.. Mr
Hicks has now approached me with the possibility of meeting with one of
the Home Office Ministers, preferable the Home Secretary the Rt Hon
David Waddington QC MP.

The Group are very concerned to obtain justice and they are keen to put
forward their views about the disaster. Nevertheless, their overriding
interest is to ensure that such a disaster never happens again.   I have
met with Mr Hicks on several occasions and although his circumstances
are very close to the issues, his comments are thoroughly thought
through and he can and does discuss the Group's objectives logically.

I strongly believe that the Hillsborough Family Support Group should be
afforded an interview by the Home Office and indeed the Party.  For your
information I am enclosing some details regarding their objectives which
I have been passed by the Group.

With best wishes
House Of Commons,
uondon,
3W1A OAA.

f.a.o: Robert Hughes MP (Harrow West)                           7th February 1990.


Dear

                            re: Peter Wright Article

further  to our   discussions   I enclose   copies of the "Sheffield Star"
newspaper that carried the interview with Peter Wright.

         You will see that despite Taylor and all      the conflicting evidence to
the contrary            he   insists on claiming drink was a major factor in the
d ^ ^ s t e r . T h e families find this outrageous and offensive to the memories of
o 4 ^ loved ones .

   A e   also  claims that   "additional evidence, particularily about the
effect of alcohol on fans will present a different picture at the Coroners
Inquest." This is alarming families and again is most offensive.

It is wrong that Mr, Wright should infer/ use confidential information (if
indeed he has it i) to deflect the critiscsym that he justly was subjected
to.He is abusing his priviledged position.    His comments beg two further
questions

1)why was all the evidence not given to Taylor /West Midlands Police?

2)It could be argued that this-apt of "disclosure" could well
prejudice the Coroners Inquest/ Jurors.

At the Inquiry, Andrew Collins QC became so vexed at the Police Barrister's
( M r .Woodward QC) attempts to use this smear tactic that he released blood
alcohol levels of the victims in an attempt     to stop  it. Now here we go
again.

I would welcome your views on how we    can stop  it once  and for ail and
obviously a statement from Mr. Waddington  supporting Taylor would be one
way .
     M XL L S B Q R O U G H               FAM I                    SUPPORT              GROUP




                                      O B OFE O T I V E S



I)     To support and assist each other.



2)      To seek justice.



3)      To press for a National Body to standardise and supervise the Safety
        Certification process.



4)      To    improve       safety   at   all   sports        stadia      by   revision    of    "The Green
        Guide"    and       the   introduction          of    such     other     recommendations         from
        Lord Justice Taylors Reports as are necessary.



5)      To     press        Parliament      for     the        introduction        of     the     necessary
        legislation to ensure (4) above becomes mandatory.



6)      Press    for    immediate         improvement         of    the   Administration         of   Justice
        Act     1982    (    incorporating        the       Fatal    Accident     Act     1976   ) and    for
        the introduction of ’’non - liability" compensation legislation.




                                                        4
h s .3.1/hillsbl.peb                                  FILE NUMBER
DRAFT LETTER

ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE




TO                               ENCLOSURES             COPIES TO BE SENT TO

                                                      David Alton Esq MP
Robert G Hughes Esq MP
House of Commons                                      hidden copy:
LONDON    SW1A OAA                                    Mr Peter Wright
                                                      Chief Constable, South
                                                        Yorkshire Constabulary

                                                  (FULL ADDRESSES, IF
(FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                             NECESSARY)


                   LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY ..Lord Ferrers...... .
                                                       (NAME OF SIGNATORY)



                  You wrote to Martin Brandon-Bravo, the Home Secretary's
                  Parliamentary Private Secretary on 13 February enclosing
                  a letter from Mr Hicks about comments attributed to the
                  Chief Constable of South Yorkshire in the Sheffield Star.
                  The Home Secretary has had a similar letter from David
                  Alton and he has asked me to reply to both.                I think you
                  know    that        my   responsibilities      at   the   Home   Office
                  encompass both police issues and the safety of sports
                  grounds.


                  I have assumed that in writing to you rather than to the
                  South Yorkshire Police Authority Mr Hicks was not seeking
                  to make a complaint about the Chief Constable's conduct
                  to be investigated under the police complaints procedure.
                  That avenue is of course open to him.


                  I have       read    carefully the     comments     attributed to the
                  Chief Constable of South Yorkshire in the Sheffield Star.
                  It seems to me that in the article, the Chief Constable
                  has    not    questioned     Lord    Justice   Taylor's    conclusions
about the immediate cause of the incident.                   But he has
said that he finds it difficult to come to terms with the
view that     the    drinking by     fans had no         effect on the
events.


I do not want to add to the controversy about the part
that drink played at Hillsborough.                I think it is proper
to point out that Lord Justice Taylor’s interim report,
at    paragraph      196,    considered      particularly         whether
drunkenness among fans was a major factor in the crisis
at the turnstiles and that his conclusions on the causes
of the tragedy        are    summarised     in     Chapter   16    of   the
report.


I have no doubt that there will be some people who were
at Hillsborough on the day of the tragedy, whether fans
or policemen, whose individual perception of the events
does not accord with Lord Justice Taylor’s conclusions.
Mr Wright’s views are based on the views of the police
officers who were present on that day.                    X think that
those of us who were not there, or who did not hear all
the   evidence,     really    have   no    basis    to   question       Lord
Justice Taylor’s analysis or to comment on the genuinely
held views of those who were directly involved.                   I do not
propose to do so.


If additional evidence is produced at the inquest, I am
sure that thecoroner will consider it objectively.


I    have   read     with    interest     the 6    objectives of         the
Hillsborough        Family    Support     Group.         Only     3     come
specifically        within the area of responsibility of the
Home Office.         I am sure that Mr Hicks and his friends
will already have seen that the Government has announced
that it intends to act on each of them.
The Football Licensing Authority, which the Government
expects to appoint within the next few months under the
Football Spectators Act, will be given the responsibility
of reviewing the way in which local authorities carry out
their responsibilities for safety at sports grounds under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.


The Home Office already has in hand the revision of the
"Green Guide" on safety at sports grounds to incorporate
recommendations       made      by   the Taylor         Inquiry,         and    some
other changes, and will shortly be setting up a working
group to consider the revised guide before it is sent out
for wider     circulation and          comment.          We    shall      also be
considering an order under Section 15A of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 which will have the effect of
requiring local authorities to include specific terms or
conditions in safety certificates.


The question of "no fault" compensation is for the Lord
Chancellor’s Department, rather than for the Home Office.


You   said   that H r Hicks had             approached         you    about the
possibility     of    meeting        with   one    of    the       Home    Office
Ministers.       If   Mr     Hicks     would      like    to       see    me   with
representatives       of     the     Support      Group,       I     suggest      he
contacts my Private Secretary on 273 2468 to arrange a
date and time.


If    that   proves   difficult        to    arrange,         and     since      the
particular objectives of the support group are already
being    addressed,        he    might      find    it        helpful      as     an
alternative to have a detailed discussion with the Head
of    the    Division      within      the     Home       Office         who     has
responsibility for taking these issues forward.                           His name
is Mr Peter Bolton and his telephone number is 273 3322.


I am sending a copy of this letter to David Alton.
