                         SI/   -M.Vdufr<



             BONE Chris                           bacy?             u b u
                                                                            * * * * *
                                                                                                      S ' Kou A.


             From:                 BONE Chris
             To:                   PUGH Paul
             Cc:                   BUTLER Brian; CATHERALL Graham; CLIFFORD Sarah; ED M UN D SO N Peter; PYNE
                                   M atth e w ; W A R D Michael
             Subject:              HILLSBOROUGH
             Date:                 Monday, 10. November 1 9 9 7 1 1 ,5 6
             Priority:             High



             Paul

             I had a telephone call at home on Saturday night from Ann Adlington, solicitor to the Family Support
             Group.

             She said that Trevor Hicks was going to fax the Home Secretary. He would complain that the South
             Yorkshire police w ere obstructing families in their efforts to find out w h a t had happened to those who
             died - and present evidence about it to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith - by delaying the release from their
             archive of documents which families had every right to see.

             Hicks's fax would go on to complain that Sheffield hospitals were similarly obstructing families who
             wanted to obtain medical records.

             It *\/ould also contain a complicated story about a Liverpool solicitor called Doug Fraser and the
             Inquests. Mr Fraser represented some of the families at the time of Lord Taylor's Inquiry and the
             Inquests. The Inquest on each of the 95 victims was divided into tw o halves - a 'mini-inquest' about
             each one of the deceased, to determine who they were and when & where they died, and a main
             inquest in respect of all (then) 9 5 of them which determined how they died and resulted in the verdict,
             bitterly contested by the families, of accidental death.   Dividing an inquest into tw o in this w a y is
             unusual and the families claim it denied them the chance to get to the truth.     The allegation which will
             be made against Mr Fraser is that he agreed to this w a y of proceeding on behalf of all the families
             when he only represented some of them.        Adlington also said that Hicks was concerned about how
             the Coroner applied rule 2 2 of the Coroners Rules at the Inquest (which say that he must tip witnesses
             off if they have been asked an incriminating question and tell them they can refuse to answer).

             Adlington told me that Hicks would send a copy of his fax to his press contacts.      They would splash it
             big on Sunday or Monday.

             She also told me that Hicks would be writing separately to the Home Secretary - not copied to the
             press this time - to say that the Judge's terms of reference are too narrow.
fie* * * .
             I do not see w h a t w e as the scrutiny can do about any of this. If Hicks writes, the HS will no doubt
             wish to reply and will ask OPPU for advice. I stand ready to help with that if my help is needed but the
             draft should go up from OPPU, not us.        I did not think the press would run with this rather obscure
             story and so did not trouble you over the weekend.          But I might be wrong about that.

             COULD CD CHECK FOR A N Y PRESS COVERAGE PLEASE?

             Adlington told me that fuss resulting from all of this would mean that LJ S-S would not be able to
             complete his report by the end of the year. She said in a peevish sort of w a y that the Judge would
             not like this at all.  I do not see that w hat she told me in her less than coherent fashion on Saturday
             night will affect the timing or content of the judge's report, but w h a t I think it does point to is the
             unpleasantness OPPU can expect if the families are disappointed with his verdict.          They expect to be
             let down and they are getting some of their retaliation in first.

             Ready to discuss if you wish - w e were going to talk about the disclosure of South Yorkshire records
             anyway.


             C B




                                                                Page 1
                                +01535-610052   ENGLAND WORTHS IDE                        866 P02           10. 11.97




                  S[j ppQ^                                                                                SUppQ^
                                         Hillsborough Family Support Group

                  Rt. Hon Jack Straw MP
                  Home Secretary
                  Home Office
                  50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                  London
                  SW1H 9 AT
                                                                                             9<hNovember 1997
                                                                                           BY FAX AND POST

                  Dear Mr Straw,

                  re ; Hillsborough Scrutiny

                It is with deep regret that we feel we have no alternative but to write to you to seek your
                intervention in the timetable for the scrutiny. Since your announcement o f the scrutiny on the
                30"' June the problems o f slo w or non-disclosure o f information by South Yorkshire Police
                and others have continued unabated. . It is o f such scale and regularity as to render any
                arguments o f mistake, oversight or pressure o f work totally untenable. We believe it is a
                deliberate tactic to disadvantage the families and is clearly a cynical attempt to influence the
                outcome o f the scrutiny.

               We have already made direct representation and ensured the problems were known to Lord
               Justice Stuart Smith’s team / the Home Office but despite small temporary improvements, all
               our attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation o f our case are being thwarted.

               You will recall from our meeting at the Commons that families expressed concern that custody
               (and apparently control!!) o f the evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
               Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster is central to the scrutiny.
               Rather than the spirit o f “openness” so vigorously espoused by New Labour the continuation
               of the problems o f the last eight and a half years is realising our worst fears.

                They appear to have absolute power to determine what we see and when, if ever, we see it.
               It cannot be right, fair or just that they have the scope to manipulate the proceedings by denial
               or delay of information.

               Examples o f the problems we are encountering are:-

              1) As late as the 6th November we received four important photographs - they were requested
              over three months ago!!!


CH A IRM A N
                                                        VICE-CHAIRMAN/SKCKlilAKV                  turasurer
T. Hu;k\                                                P. H ontm ond
Fern Hill 13uin                                                                                   Mrs. J T r ay n o r
                                                        21 R^senK'nt Koiitl                       43 O orwfeKt Road
N^wlu-u^                      Ptcsiun                   Liverpool
           m;>21 4Qi;                                                                             Uii'kerthoad
                                                        L I 7 fcijx
                                                                                                  Merseyside
Tel0l729-840#40                                         Tel/Fax: 0151-724 5771
MuhiU:: iW 7 t.il I 111*; I                                                                       Tel: 0 15 1-#>52 750.1
                                                        Mobile; n589-"<24! 2 1
        +01535-610052      ENGLAND WORTHS IDE                                 866 P03       10.11.97   13:24




2) Several families are still waiting to receive all or parts o f their loved ones “bodyfiles”

3)On the 24th September our solicitor was denied access to medical records despite having
written authority from the relatives concerned. Access is still being denied!!

4)Medical records o f the late Phillip Hammond have apparently been made available to Lord
Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such records did not exist.

The initial “deadline” for submissions was 1st September but this had to be relaxed when it
became clear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with requests for
information until late August. The HFSG made preliminary submissions mid-September and
lodged others on the 25* September. Both o f those documents made it clear that our efforts
were being hampered by the painfully slow information release by South Yorkshire Police.

Clearly if the scrutiny attempts to report “at the turn o f the year” full consideration o f newly
disclosed evidence cannot take place and hence it could not form part o f any deliberation or
conclusion.

It is our belief that Lord Justice Stuart Smith should take possession and control o f all the
documents/evidence to safeguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely disclosure to all
parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim to the truth than the families o f the deceased.

We further submit that it is now imperative that you extend the timescale for submissions and
their proper consideration by the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the families and the
public as fair and exhaustive.

All o f us want this matter concluded, but having waited for so many years the families implore
you to introduce a one or two month extension to the timescale to ensure all our concerns can
be properly investigated and “scrutinised” . It is the families view that this is our last chance
for justice to be done and clearly it must be “seen to be done properly” if faith in the judicial
process is to be regained by the many thousands o f voters who wrote to you, attended the
justice concert, and wrote/telephoned the media in support o f our cause.

We shall be writing under separate confidential cover regarding deep concerns relating to the
Terms o f Reference you have set down for Lord Justice Stuart Smith and these may also give
rise for revision o f the scrutiny programme.

Yours sincerely,




Trevor Hicks
Chairman. - HFSG
