    x $ \
A

                                                           Q U E E N A N N E ’ S G AT E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT


                                                                                               0 4
                                                             c C M-v H'K
            Richard Wells Esq QPM MA (Oxon) CIMgt
            Chief Constable
                                                                  P<2j Xe-4
            South Yorkshire Police
            Police Headquarters                                   V** i
            Snig Hill
            Sheffield
            S3 8LY                                                \k s
                                                                  Vvr O L liW ^ i Co

                                                                  |/y &£XjJjL*3
                                                                  I V U jw 4 /
                                                                   (Lv




                                       /
            HILLSBOROUGH

            Thank you for your letter of 12 November commenting on the issues raised by
            the Hillsborough Family Support Group about access to information held by your
            force. It was very helpful to have your views on the issues raised by the Family
            Support Group.

            I enclose a copy of the reply which I have sent today to Trevor Hicks, Chairman
            of the Family Support Group. As you will see, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
            confirmed to me that he has not experienced any difficulties with access to
            information required for his scrutiny and that he expects to complete his report
            by the end of the year.




                                                             J




                                             JACK STRAW
                                               Q U E E N A N N E ’ S G A T E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9AT

                                                                                 0 4 DEC WV

Trevor Hicks Esq
Chairman
Hillsborough Family Support Group




Thank you for your letter of 9 November about the difficulties which you say
have been experienced in obtaining material from South Yorkshire Police and
others and the need, therefore, to extend the timescale for Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith's scrutiny.

As you know, I asked for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's advice on the issues which
you raised. Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, has also
written to me after the contents of your letter were disclosed to him by the
media.

I should make it clear that, having appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to
conduct this scrutiny, the management of the scrutiny is entirely a matter for the
Judge. Although I indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we hoped it
would be possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale
is ultimately a matter for the Judge to decide. I have told Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith that if he reached the conclusion that more time was needed to complete
his work, this would certainly be within his discretion. However, Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has indicated to me that he hopes to be able to keep to his original
timescale for completion of the report. I understand that he has now written to
you and other interested parties to confirm this.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also assured me that he has been given full access
to the material held by South Yorkshire Police and that the force has co-operated
throughout his scrutiny. He has not seen any sign that the police are
deliberately obstructing requests for information from other parties. He has also
expressed surprise that difficulties should have been encountered in obtaining
hospital records, (which are held by the hospital, and not the police), if the
request was made by a properly authorised representative of the victim's family.
In his letter to me, Richard Wells has indicated that the force has made every
effort to respond to requests for information within the constraints of the
Coroners' Rules and considerations of witness confidentiality. He states that no
family is waiting for all or part of a body file to be released, although the force is
processing requests for photographs from two families having already supplied
laser copies.

From what I have been told by Richard Wells and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith it
appears that, for the purposes of the scrutiny, all the material which should be
available for examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been available to him,
and that the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully the issues raised by the
Family Support Group and others.

The Judge has indicated that he would have arranged for the archive of material
to be removed from the South Yorkshire Police if there had been any doubt as to
its continuing integrity there, but that this was not his view. He does not,
therefore, consider it justifiable to incur the considerable logistical difficulties and
costs involved in such an operation.

You have also written to me about the scrutiny's terms of reference. I will
consider the points you have raised and reply as soon as possible.



                                                 /




                                    JACK STRAW
                                               Q U E E N A N N E ’ S G A T E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT


                                                                                 0 4 DF-H i$< n

Colin Moneypenney Esq
Clerk to the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party
Liverpool City Council
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool
L69 2DH




Thank you for your letter of 14 November on behalf of Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party in support of the Family Support Group's request for the
timescale of the scrutiny to be extended.

Although I indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we hoped it would be
possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale is
ultimately a matter for the Judge to decide. I have told Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith that if he decides that more time is needed to complete his work, this
would certainly be within his discretion. However, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
has indicated to me that he expects to keep to his original timescale for
completion of the report.

Trevor Hick's letter expressed concern about access to information held by the
South Yorkshire Police. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also assured me that he
has been given full access to the material held by the force and that the force
has co-operated throughout his scrutiny. From what I have been told by the
Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith it
appears that, for the purposes of the scrutiny, all the material which should be
available for examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been available to him,
and that the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully the issues raised by the
Family Support Group and others.

The terms of reference which I have given Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the
Scrutiny will allow him to establish conclusively whether any material evidence
was overlooked in the consideration of the causes of the disaster or the
consideration of criminal or other proceedings. The Judge will also be able to
recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest. His
terms of reference are, therefore, very wide indeed and I am confident that they
will allow him to carry out a full scrutiny of the evidence which has been
submitted by the families and others.

As you know, the Judge spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families of
those who died and listening to their concerns. He has said that he found these
meetings fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to write his report.
I do, of course, understand the distress caused by the Judge's comment to
Mr Phil Hammond. The Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this
remark, which he made off-the-cuff and without any intention to offend or for it
to be taken seriously. He has made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not
the subject of the Scrutiny.

I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a thorough report in
which the families and the public can have confidence. As I have indicated
before, I will make public the advice given by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his
report, and will take whatever action is needed if he suggests material evidence
about the disaster has been overlooked.




                                                            7




                                  JACK STRAW
