                                                            ^       c^lim   /fesr
E.R.                                        <r-
                                                         43-10.JS




   From:          J L Goddard                     cc:   Ms Snow
                  F8 Division                           Mrs Chapman
                  Ext. 3314                             Mr Yates
                  11 October 1990                       Mr Hammond
                                                        Mr Burns
                                                        HMCIC
                                                        Mr Angel
                                                        Mr Boys Smith
                                                        Mr Moorey
                                                        Mr Clayton
                                                        Mr Cogbill
                                                        Miss A Edwards
                                                        Mr Fulton
                                                        Miss Goose
                                                        Mr Grant
                                                        Mr Nagler
                                                        Mr Sandiford
                                                        Mr Kinney
                                                         Mr Simmonds

       Mr Storr

       H COMMITTEE: TAYLOR OFFENCES
         M
       I attach a draft paper for circulation before H Committee's
       discussion on Monday 22 October of the offences recommended by
       Lord Justice Taylor.
                                                                »

       2 . The Home Secretary wrote to H Committee colleagues on
       20 August seeking policy approval to create offences at
       football matches covering ticket touting, missile throwing,
       chanting obscene or racialist abuse, and running onto the
       pitch. He sought a firm place for legislation in the 1991/92
       programme while expressing the hope that a place might be
       found at short notice in 1990/91.

       3. The Secretaries of State for Environment, Employment,
       Northern Ireland and Wales, and the Attorney General have all
       written to support early introduction of the provisions. The
       Secretary of State for Scotland has raised no objection but
       would not intend extending the provisions north of the border.
The Chief Secretary has asked us to estimate the costs which
will fall on local authorities. We will submit advice and'a'
draft reply to him separately in the next day or two.
                                                             «
 4. We have not heard from any other Departments. In the
 absence of critical replies we are not sure where the concerns
 lie which have prompted the Lord President to call a meeting.
 However, at official level Cabinet Office have asked that the
 paper for H should not simply rely on the contents of the Home
 Secretary's letter of 20^August but should also point up the
 handling considerations. The attached draft seeks to do that
 and it is in the area of handling which we would expect
 discussion to concentrate.
                  »

  5. We shall prepare briefing for the meeting of H in the
* light of our discussion with the Home Secretary on Wednesday
  1T October.


 6. Is the Home Secretary content for the paper to be
 circulated as drafted?




                                c&T J L GODDARD
                                                           20 August 1_990




                         TAYLOR REPORT:    NSW Or FENCES



        I am writing *to outline the proposals which Lord Justice Taylor
made for new criminal offences in his final report into the Hillsborough
Stadium disaster, and to seek colleagues' agreement to legislate for them
at the earliest suitable opportunity.
                       ••
          Taylor recommended four new offences.. The first would outlaw the
 practice of selling tickets for and on the day of a football match without
 the authority of the home club to do so. Taylor argued that ticket touting
>>led directly and indirectly to disorder at -football grounds by undermining
  the"policy of segregating fans from rival clubs and by encouraging
  ticketless fans to travel to games where they wou l d mill around outside
  grounds with potentially disorderly consequences.    It was no part of
  Taylor's proposal to make ticket touting more generally an offence.    I
  believe that there is a valid distinction between the activities of touts
  at football matches and touts at other events.  In connection with football
     • - il ^
  it,is the potential for disorder which makes touting unacceptable.  In
v otner^cases there are no comparable consequences for public order.  O n the
 basis that the new offence applies only to football matches, I believe it         -■
  is acceptable and that we should propose legislation to create it.    The
  Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) and the Cr ow n Prosecution
 .Service (CPS) both support this course. .


          The three other offences which Lord Justice Taylor recommended all
  cover specific activities at designated sports grounds.   These are:
  throwing a missile;  chanting obscene or racialist abuse;   and going onto
  the pitch without reasonable excuse.   These activities in themselves and
  outside the context of football are not always particularly serious.
  However, Taylor argued, I believe rightly and convincingly, that football
  is a special case because of the unruly behaviour of a significant m i n o r i t y
  of attenders and the provocative effect that such behaviour may have on
  large numbers of other spectators.   Having accepted that principle, I
  believe that all three activities should be made criminal.


         'Missile throwing is already an offence under sections 4 and 5 of •
  the Public Order Act 1986 if there is a victim or'if there is someone ■ •
  within the sight or hearing of the activity who is likely to be caused




   The Rt non Sir Geoffrey Kowe QC M?
-• Lord President of the Council
  Privy Council Office
  Whitehall
  London S.W.1.,                                                     /ever...
harassment, alarm or distress.   But Taylor argued that adducing evidence of
a victim or someone likely to be caused harassment etc may be difficult and,
felt that it should be sufficient merely to show that a missile was thrown..
Missile throwing at a football ground can certainly provoke more general
disorderly behaviour which makes it a menace which requires a criminal
 sanction.  ACPO and the CPS both believe that the proposed offehce is
 enforceable - if not by immediate arrest at the time then by arrest later
 and by relying on video evidence, for which facilities now exist at all
 League football grounds.

             Chanting obscene or racialist abuse may also be caught by current
    legislation, such as sections 4, 5 or 18 of the Public Order Act 1986.    But
    Taylor suggests that the chanting at football matches often merely causes
    offence, embarrassment'or disgust and, as such, would not be caught by the
    provisions of the 1986 Act.   In other contexts this sort of behaviour would
    not be regarded as requiring criminal sanction, b u t again the collective
    nature and public context of the behaviour at football matches make it
    particularly objectionable.   Enforcement of the offence, particularly
     adducing evidence in relation to individuals, will not be easy but the
     police's.video evidence-gathering methods should make it workable.   Not to
     create this offence but to accept the other two would send the wrong
     message to football hooligans and also to the ethnic minorities.

           ' Running onto the pitch is not always a deliberately harmful
    activity, but Taylor argued that it should be made unlawful partly because
    its purpose could be to attack someone;   partly because whatever the reason
    for the encroachment it encourages others to do the same;   and partly (and
    most importantly) to introduce sanctions to ensure that the lowering of the
    level of perimeter fences, which was another of his recommendations on
    grounds of safety, is not abused.   Acceptance of this Taylor proposal would
    catch exuberant running onto the pitch at the end- of a game but this, too,
    has the potential to lead on to disorder and I believe that it should be
    prohibited.   An exception would, of course, have to be made for going onto
     the pitch if, for example, a person was in fear of his safety.


             The police have b e e n unable to assess the demand on their resources
     if the four offences were enacted but think that they would be minimal.
     The resource effect on the CPS will depend on the degree of enforcement by
'    the police but is also unlikely to be significant.


             I- believe that there is a good case for accepting these Taylor
     recommendations on their own merits.   But I also see advantage in accepting
     them as a further demonstration of our positive response to the Taylor
     report as a whole.

             If colleagues accept the case for creating the four offences
     recommended by Lord Justice Taylor, the question of handling arises.   I
     should like the Government to take the credit for implementation;    and I
     would not favour leaving this to the uncertainties of Private Members'
     Bills procedures.  As to timing, the Home Affairs Select Committee is about



                                                                         /cont.
to begin an inquiry into policing football hooliganism,.  I have to submit a
memorandum on this topic b y 28 September to the Select Committee.  When'  '
Parliament returns,the football-season will be in full swing tfcd Members
will undoubtedly ask questions about the implementation of the Taylor,
offences.   Interest in this topic will remain high and I believe we should
 find it difficult to defend rejection of this part of the Taylor report.

        That said, I cannot argue for including the proposals in the
Criminal Justice Bill but I would hope to secure a firm place in the
1991/92 session, perhaps in the proposed Criminal Law Bill.   I t h i n k it
would be difficult to leave legislation longer than that, and even on that
time-scale the Government could well be criticised for dragging its feet.
In order to pre-empt such criticism I would much prefer to bring
 legislative proposals to Parliament at an ear.lier date. This leads me to
. seek policy approval and authority to use Parliamentary Counsel n ow in *
  order that we could be ready, if an opportunity arose during the 1990/91
  session, to introduce a small Bill at-jshort notice rather than wait until
  1991/92.  I would hope'*that we could review the situation early in 1991 to
  see whether such an opportunity is likely to arise.

           I am sending copies of this letter to members of QL and H
 ‘'Committees, First Parliamentary Counsel and Sir Ro bi n Butler.




                                          ^
                                         Q7WJ          '      ( _.
                                                   S-%l/vCc/-£L
     -*4




                                           APPROVED BY THE HOME SECRETARY
                                             AND SIGNED IN HIS ABSENCE
