Institute for Consumer Ergonomics
75 Swingbridge Road                                                                Director
                                                                                   Professor N S Kirk
Loughborough                                                                       Scientific Director
                                                                                   I A R Galer
Leicestershire LE1 VO^tB                                                           Administrative and
                                                                                   Financial Director
Telephone: (0509) 236161                                                           Sheila Cooper
Fax:       (0509)610725
University of Technology         Loughborough            Leicestershire        Telephone: (0509) 263171                Telex: 34319         Fax:(0509)231983




                  Mr Colin Moynihan, MP,                                                                                        Y-Z
                  House of Commons,
                  Westminster,
                                                                                                                                                     M:i \f
                  London SW1A 0AA.                                                                                                                                    to

                  April 25, 1989


                   Dear Mr Moynihan,

                   Reference:                       Football Crowd Safety

                  We believe we have the potential for a practical and cost
                  effective solution to the protection of football supporters,
                  which does not include the provision of conventional seating.

                  Our proposal provides for the continuation of standing areas
                  and the individual protection of supporters, both adults and
                  children.

                  It is apparent from brief research that the provision of
                  seating does not in itself necessarily provide adequate
                  protection. The installation of seating may in certain
                  circumstances create dangerous obstruction particularly
                  during ground evacuation. Seats can be used as unsafe
                  stepping stones during times of crisis. Such a situation can
                  lead to falling, crushing, trampling, broken bones and even
                  death, as at Mexico City 1985 and Instanbul 1964.
                  Conventional seating does not appear to provide appropriate
                  protection for seated fans, who will still stand and jump up
                  and down during periods of great excitement. These
                  situations still allow for the forward surging and sideways
                  swaying of fans, which is the general cause of crush injury.




                         M em bers of Council: Dr Rachel E W aterhouse CBE (P resident) M r P Harm s (C hairm an) M r H Brooks Dr G M C ochrane M r G E P Constable
                                        Professor W F Floyd Professor F D H ales M rs C M cD ow all Dr F L Roberts Professor B Shackel Dr A H W ickens
          A non-profit com pany limited by guarantee and registered as a charity. T h e w ord ‘Limited’ is omitted from the C om pany’s title by licence of the Secretary of State for Trade.
                                            Registered Office: 8 0-81 W o odgate Loughborough Leicestershire. Registered Num ber: 9 92 7 4 6 England
We believe that our proposal has a number of advantages
including the potential for a higher degree of personal
protection than at present offered in sports stadiums:

1    Capital cost would appear to be significantly lower than
     traditional seating.

2    The reduction in ground capacity would be minimal.

3    The maintenance and liability to vandalism would be
     reduced.

The safe and proper procedures for ground evacuation could be
determined by research, and possibly controlled by the
appropriate installation of such protective systems.

We believe that our research experience in human factors and
product development would allow us to develop the concepts
and knowledge we already have to a practical solution as
quickly as possible.

If our ideas prove to be viable, we would also wish to
explore the possibility of working with relevant agencies,
such as the DTI, to develop an industrial cooperative in
Liverpool to manufacture and install the proposed system.
The establishment of such a cooperative would ensure that the
majority of any profits derived directly or indirectly from
the recent tragedy at Sheffield would be used to benefit the
people of Liverpool and football in general.

If, as Mr Hurd recently said, we are to grasp this
opportunity to look at new and better ways of protecting
football and spectators action must be taken as a matter of
urgency.

It would be tragic if by reacting to crisis pressures, the
football authorities made decisions which may be
inappropriate now and needlessly costly in the long term.
To this end we would be most grateful for your help in
sourcing research funding and the opportunity to discuss our
practical proposals with you.
Yours sincerely,


/J                             F-   /4^tJ--
IAR Galer                      F Hoyland
Scientific Director            Consultant
