                                           TH£ FIFE REGIONAL COUNCIL
                                                                                                    ^.VV%
                                                     HOUSE,    NORTH     STREET,   GLENROTHES
                                                     KY7 5LT       Telephone Glenrothes 754411



                                     I
                                                         Dr P. S. DAVISON
The Lord Mayor,                                          Halbeath House, Kingseat Road, Halbeath,
Sheffield City Council,                                  Dunfermline KYI 2 OTZ
Town Hall,                                               Telephone Dunfermline 723535
Sheffield.                                                                         11-8-89



         THE MOST SERIOUS ASPECT OP THE HILLSBOROUGH REPORT


Dear Lord Mayor,

     The most serious aspect of the Hillsborough tragedy itself
is of course the unnecesary and tragic loss of lives, especially
young lives, and the bereaved families left behind.         This,
however, is now in the past and cannot be undone, but the report
from Lord Justice Taylor raises extremely serious matters of a
different and separate nature and it is mainly because of these I
write.

     As a M e m b e r of the Fife Protective and General Services
Committee, I am well aware of the responsibilities of police in
football crowd control and licensing of football grounds and our
committee has visits to all the grounds in its area (when out of
use may I add) along with police and engineers so that safety
barriers, crowd separation, police procedures, and capacities of
each section of the ground can be properly debated.        The errors
at the Hillsborough match were glaring and startling and there is
no way that responsibility can be ducked: e it he r t h e resignation
of Chief Constable Wright must be accepted or that of the
Chairman of the responsible Committee,

     There is, however, an even more serious co mment from Lord
Justice Taylor.   After a situation where the main reason for the
loss of 95 lives was failure of police control, the Lord Justice
describes senior p'olice officers as "defensive and evasive" and
states that the quality, of t h e i r e v i d e n c e w a s in in v e r s e
proportion to t he ir r a n k (Times 5-8,-89).        This r e m a r k is
extraordinarily serious.     It means that, senior off icers lied or
sought to deceive a court on a matter involving the.loss of 95
lives.                                                            ,

     As someone who has when young (and alone)* been deliberately
falsely charged by (two) British policemen with an offence which
they knew I had not committed, I take a very serious view of
lying by police officers.         It does happen.            The only reason why I
do not have a finding of guilt as charged, which as one witness
against tw o a p p a r e n t l y i n d e p e n d e n t p o l i c e o f f i c e r s w o u l d
certainly have been supported by a court, was a mechanical defect
which c o u l d not be seen, w h i c h m a d e the            offence   charged
or anything like it physically impossible.

     We live in strange times in Britain in 1989, times when the
traditional British freedoms are under threat as rarely before in
peace time from the ever-expanding p ower of government.      The
borderline between the British state of freedom and the "freedoms"
peoples of, for example, Eastern Europe becomes narrower and
greyer.  One of the essential elements of that borderline is a
truthful police force, manned and officered by men who can be
relied on to speak the truth despite pressure.  Often that is the
ONLY protection the citizen has against injustice.  It is a vital
protection which, combined with truly independent courts, can
prevent Britain slipping over that most dangerous of borders _
into becoming a police state.

 ^   The police are very highly paid people,' often of modest
attainment in ordinary skills.    Their key qualifications are
uprightness, truthfulness and honesty.   If they lack these key
qualities, it is not a matter for minor disciplinary action, it
is a matter for immediate dismissal or resignation of all who
give false or tainted evidence.

      Make no mistake, the British police are on trial here    If
after Hillsborough where — perhaps understandable -- but very
serious mistakes were made, the British people see that promotion
    the police goes to those who "bend" or "economise in" the
truth or directly lie in order to achieve their ends (which many
of the public think is the main criterion for high office
elsewhere) Britain has taken a very serious step towards a police
state.    Our youth, whom we seek to persuade to law and order
will be watching.

                        A _a ^   j_^   ^   ^   ^   ^




                                                       /Z —
                   pP.S.Davison,
                     Independent Councillo


Copied to Horae Secretary and Yorkshire Post*
