        states:-


I am employed as a qualified ambulance woman for SYMAS.



My date of birth is


On 15th April I— was on duty from 0900 to 1730.        On the
previous two days I had been on duty from 0800 to 1630.     On

15th April I was on duty with                      in vehicle

with the call sign Sierra 407.


                   was driving and we were on out patient duty

on the way back to Longley Station, where we are based, at

about 1509 (Track 18 Page 1).    Control called us and told us

to go to Hillsborough Leppings Lane end.      We were told to

try to contact police control at the ground .


We approached Leppings Lane from the North.       It had only

taken us about three minutes to get there.         There were

several police officers on horses and several on foot around

the ground and some fans      still outside the ground.      I

believe that we were the first ambulance to arrive in this

area.


I asked a mounted police officer whether we were needed and

he and the other police officers seemed surprised and were

not aware that ambulances had been requested.         We were
directed into the service road where a barrier of four or

five movable metal barriers were removed to let us in.



We   stopped    by   the   side of C gate.    I got out of the
ambulance through the rear doors.      C gate was very slightly

open and I could see some movement behind it and I could see

a lot of people moving about.        I remeber thinking at the

time that it was strange that there were so many people in

the area after the kick off.      Suddenly C gate burst open and

a group of people came towards me carrying a young man with

a chest injury; there were two policemen in this group.       He

was put into the ambulance.        Three other people (who were

not injured)     got in with him.      They may all have been

relatives and I certainly understood that one of them was

his younger brother who kept saying          "My brother's been

crushed.    He's been crushed".    A girl in her late teens also

got onto the ambulance with an arm injury.       I turned to go
to close the doors and saw three people lying on the roadway

at the rear of the ambulance.        I do not know how they got

there.     I was very surprised because the message we had was

just of soem injuries.        One was an olderman, another was a

young woman of about 20.          All three had their clothing

dishevelled and pulled over their waists.         They were not

breathing      and I told                      to take our two

casualties off the vehicle because the other three clearly

required more urgent attention.        As I was getting off the

ambulance two other ambulances pulled up behind u s .
        got off one of them and ran up to ask how he could

help.     I told him he would have to take one of the three

casualties which were lying on the ground.                    and
his partner placed one of the three on a stretcher and I ran

round to the rear of their ambulance to open the doors for

them.   By this time there were people everywhere and when I

got to the rear of 1               ambulance there was already

an unconscious male lying on the cot in the ambulance with a

policeman in attendance.    This patient was not breathing.     I

cleared the patient's airway with the assistance of the

policeman by manipulating the patient.    I then saw a fireman

coming across with resuscitation equipment which I started

to use.     I then left the fireman and the policeman giving

oxygen to this patient.    The fireman had come from a tender

which must have come along the service road from Penistone

Road because it was blocking our path and facing towards us.



I returned to my own vehicle to find that Harold had cleared

the original casualties (which had clearly not been serious)

from the ambulance. The other 2 patients out of the original

3 had gone.     There was now, however, a teenager in one cot

who was having severe breathing difficulties and was semi­

conscious and there was a child of about 10 or 11 years old

in the other cot.      There were also two policeman on board.




 I gave the older casualty oxygen and we put him onto his
       side.    I told the policeman to monitor him and then I turned

       to the other patient a child whom I tried to resuscitate
       using a brook airway, together with the other policman.    The

       child's airway was difficult to clear, it was blocked with

       vomit.    Not even the use of a Liddell suction bit assisted.



10 . I stayed in the rear of the ambulance whilst we drove to the
       Northern General Hospital. We radioed in to say we were on

       our way and for the hospital to prepare for casualties

       (Track 18 page 12).       I assume that we drove along the

       service road to get to Penistone Road.



11 . We got to Northern General at 1535 (Track 18 page 16) and
       arrived at the casualty entrance where they were clearly

       expecting ambulances.     Staff came out to meet us and there

       was one ambulance crew stood by who assisted.    They took our

       patients in and then brought our cots back.     We cleaned the

       cots and loaded them back into the ambulance.



12 .            radioed green at Northern General and he told me that

       we had been instructed to take a medical team down to

       Hillsborough from Northern General.    We waited for less than

       five minutes for the medical team and we also took back one

       of the policemen who had previously accompanied us to the

       hospital.     There were two or three members in the medical

       team and they had 6 or 8 orange stacking boxes of equipment

       with them.    We left Northern General at approximately 1544.
(Track 18 page 18)


We drove back to the ground and arrived at the Penistone

Road entrance.     We reversed into the yard and the doctors

jumped out.   I handed them some of the boxes and then took

two boxes myself and got out of the ambulance.    By the time

I had got out the doctors had gone and I did not know where

they were but I was directed by a steward towards the

gymnasium.    I went to the gymnasium and put the two boxes

down in the middle of the gym floor.      There seemed to be

about 30 dead and injured in the gymnasium at this time.     I

was then told, possibly by I . .    J that our ambulance was

wanted on the pitch.    I went back to the ambulance and there

was a steward in front of the ambulance with Harold.    Before

we drove onto the pitch I gave Mr Higgins some boxes which

had been left in the ambulance and asked him to take these

to the gym.      We drove onto the pitch to a position where

there were two people attending a patient.    These two people

were clearly either doctors or ambulance men and I presumed

that they had come from the crowd.     They had intubated the

patient and were using a bag and mask.    They were also doing

cardiac massage.     X formed the impression that the steward

had wanted our ambulance onto the pitch specifically to

collect this patient.    We took our trolley off the ambulance

and loaded the patient, together with two policemen and the

two doctors/ambulance men.       The bag and mask was    then

connected to an oxygen supply so that the patient was
      receiving pure oxygen.


14.   We radioed in at 1558 to say we were on our way back to
      Northern General            (Track 18 page 21).    1.--     drove to
      Northern General with a police escort.              The casualty was

      unloaded and we worked on him all the time, giving oxygen

      and   c a rd i a c   massage.      The patient was taken into the

      hospital and I tidied up the ambulance and then our trolley

      was brought back.             We left one of the policemen at the

      hospital and returned to the ground at 1605 (Track 18 page
      22)   w it h   the    two    doctors/ambulance men and the other

      policeman.       We received a police escort to the Penistone

      Road end.


15. We joined a queue of ambulances in Penistone Road.             Mr Eason

      was organising this.           Someone took both of our trolleys and
      I followed them in.           There was no point in me waiting with

      the ambulance if I could be doing something useful inside

      the ground.


16.   I saw                       ~~1 an extended   trained   ambulance man

      struggling with some equipment that he was carrying.           He was

      going towards the gym and I carried some of the equipment

      for him.       As I went towards the gymnasium the policeman who

      had come back on our ambulance came up to me and said that

       splints were needed for another patient who was in the first

      aid room under the north stand.               I gave the items I was
      carrying to a policeman by the gym entrance and told him to

      take this equipment in.    I then went to the first aid room

      where some people were loading a youth of about 19 years

      onto a trolley; this was the casualty that the policeman had
      been referring to.      As they had obtained a trolley they

      clearly did not need splints.     I ran back up to find our

      vehicle.    It had moved along the queue and I did not see it
      at first.     There was an ambulance in the yard and the

      patient who I had just seen was being loaded into that

      ambulance by the policeman and ambulance man                3

      Tony did not have a partner with him and asked if I would go

      with him to Northern General because someone had to go in

      the back with the patient.       I said that I would and the

      policeman and I got into the back of the ambulance (S403).

      I heard I      radio at 1622 (Track 18 page 27) to say that he

      was leaving the ground and going to the Royal Hallamshire

      Hospital.    The patient appeared to have a possible fractured

      pelvis and internal injuries.    I administered Entonox which

      calmed him down after a while.



17.   We were given a police escort to the fractures admission

      area at the Royal Hallamshire.    We unloaded the patient who

      was transferred to a hospital trolley with the help of other

      people.     I saw a doctor by the entrance to the hospital and

      told him of the patient's apparent injuries.



18.      _ then radioed green at Hallamshire and we were told to




                                7 -
      stand   by   at   N e t h e r th o r p e   Road.   When we   arrived   at

      Netherthorpe Road there were already a couple of ambulances

      there and another four or so turned up behind us.



19.   Later we called control and were told to go to the B road at
      the Hallamshire to transfer patients to another hospital.

      We had probably been at Netherthorpe Road for something like

      30 minutes.


20.   We arrived at B road at the Hallamshire where I                    _ Iwas
      organising the transfers.             I would estimate that we arrived

      there at about 1650.           We only had one cot in our ambulance

      and so we transferred four sitting cases.               We were waiting

      quite some time before we left B road because porters in the

      hospital were engaged on other duties.                Two patients were

      brought down to us and I went to collect two myself who came

      down in wheelchairs.


21.   We transferred the four patients to King Edwards hospital on

      Rivelin Valley Road,


22.   When we had unloaded the patients at King Edward we radioed

      in and were told to go back to Longley but we were called

      again shortly after that and told to go to the intensive

      care unit at Northern General to collect and transfer a

      patient to the Royal Hallamshire for a CT scan with a team

      of doctors.       We arrived at Northern General where we waited
      to   transfer       t he   patient   and   Doctors    team    to   Royal

      Hallamshire transit ward.            At this point     I believe we

      dr op pe d   the policeman off at Northern General.                After

      delivering the patient to the transit ward,                  we radioed

      control      and were told to return to base,          this we did,
      returning the medical team to Northern General, en route to

      Longley^ Station.


24.   In summary when I arrived at Leppings Lane at 1513 within
      the space of 15 minutes there were at least six unconscious

      and,    I would say, a great many more,        injured people being

      brought out of gate C.


23.   We arrived back at Longley at about 2020 and signed off at

      2030.


Dated the          £>£0   day of                     1989



JANE MOFFAT        .                       ...........
