                                                                            1 August 1997

HILLSBOROUGH INVESTIGATION


Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

I refer to your letter dated 16th July 1997, and I thank you for your sincere condolences.

As I lost my young son Steven (17) at Hillsborough and believe strongly that Justice has never
been achieved for all those who needlessly died there, I very much welcome your invitation to
me to provide you with a list of fresh evidence that I feel is important for you to consider as part
of your new scrutiny.

The enclosed list of points I believe are pertinent to your defined terms of reference and I would
urge you to fully investigate each one:

 1. The "new" video evidence that was discovered by the Hillsborough Family Support Group
(HFSG). This tape provides crystal clear video footage of the main pens in the Leppings Lane
end of the ground where the majority of the crushing and subsequent fatalities took place. The
footage starts early on in the morning before the fans arrive and runs through until well after the
match was abandoned. The cameras that captured this footage fed directly into the main police
control box and therefore the senior police officers in charge of crowd safety on the day were
fully aware of the state of the pens throughout the course of the day and would have been easily
able to identify and put right the large build up of fans entering the terraces. During the inquests
 senior officers of the South Yorkshire Police stated categorically that the camera that captured
this footage was defective and therefore the video evidence from the camera was extremely poor
quality. On this basis the coroner ruled that this evidence was not shown to the jury during the
inquests. Clearly this was not the case as proven by the discovery of this tape and thus raises the
following issues:

(i) Key evidence was deliberately withheld from the Jury that should invalidate the findings of
the inquest.

(ii) The senior officers who lied under oath during the inquests should face disciplinary hearings
as they clearly and deliberately set out to pervert the course of justice.

(iii) The Coroner should be questioned re his failure to examine the alleged poor quality video
evidence that was held by the police. Why did he just take their word for it ?
2. Witness Statement - Mr Holdsworth (Video Technician responsible for setting up the camera
that covered the Leppings Lane end of the Ground). Mr Holdworth always maintained that the
camera in question was fully operational and not defective on the day - thus invalidating the
claims of the South Yorkshire Police. His written statement was not called upon during the
inquests even though throughout the inquests the Coroner stated on more than one occasion that
the video footage the police saw in the control room was pivotal evidence.

3. Selection of evidence. The overall decision on who was called to give testimony during the
inquests rested solely with the coroner. I was very concerned that throughout the proceedings the
majority of the witnesses he called appeared to be very pro-police (centring very much on the
allegations of drunken ticketless Liverpool fans) and yet important witnesses for the fans were
not called upon. For example the Coroner chose to hear the witness testimony of a so called
Land Lord who claimed that the Liverpool fans were all drunk and had consumed 10/20 pints of
beer each in his pub. Under cross examination he was found to have lied about these "facts" and
the jury was told to disregard his evidence. At the same time the coroner failed to consider an
extremely important witness statement from Mr Holdsworth (see above) and in my opinion
appeared to bow to the pressure from the police with regard to the witnesses who were called
generally. Obviously I cannot list all of the witnesses who gave accounts throughout the inquiry
(although obviously you will be able to gather this together) - the important point is that I feel it
is very important to establish from the Coroner what criteria he used to select witnesses in order
to establish whether he was indeed under pressure from the police in relation to who he called.

4. 3.15 cut-off time. Evidence was only admissible to the inquests up until this time as the
coroner deemed that every one of the 95 victims had died (or where brain-dead) by this time.
Facts have subsequently come out that proves that some of the victims who died as a result of
their injuries were being treated by the emergency services well after this time. The witness
statement submitted by Dr Ed Walker bears this out as does other witness statements that have
been sent in. In my opinion this fact alone (the inappropriate cut-off time) should in itself
invalidate the findings of the inquests as important evidence after 3.15 was never considered
which would have had some bearing on the outcome.

5. Scrutiny of evidence - West Yorkshire Police

The West Midlands Police were given the task of compiling, selecting and scrutinising all of the
evidence associated with the disaster (including the evidence provided by the South Yorkshire
Police) that was used throughout the legal proceedings. At the same time, South Yorkshire Police
were carrying out an investigation of the West Midlands Police for fraud allegations. Clearly this
situation demonstrates that there was a conflict of interests ! How can it be believed that the
scrutiny of evidence by the West Midlands force was totally without prejudice ?

6. The disaster plan.

One of the findings of the Taylor Report was that Sheffield City Council did have a disaster plan
but it was not put into action following the tragedy. This reason that this plan was not
implemented I believe warrants additional investigation as I believe it had a strong bearing on
why so many people needlessly died on the day.

The effect of this tragedy compounded by the injustice has had a devastating effect on my
family. My husband suffered a heart attack following the inquest resulting in major heart
surgery, followed by another heart attack and further major heart surgery 18 months later.
Having been employed for 30 years as an electrical Engineer, he was forced to give up work with
his medical condition. His doctor said stress played a major part in these events.

I myself was also employed in our local special care baby unit however I was forced to retire on
ill health grounds through the stress caused by not only losing my son, and almost losing my
husband, but having to go on fighting for justice which should have been mine by right. I had
five lovely children, Steven being the middle child. None of my children have ever been in any
trouble and were all employed or at school when the disaster incurred. Steven was not a criminal
and neither was I yet my husband and I were interrogated within five minutes of identifying
Steven's body - with the majority of the questions focusing on establishing how much alcohol he
had consumed and querying whether or not he had a ticket (Steven was neither drunk, arrived at
the ground early and had a fully intact ticket) Why did the police take this approach ? They
appeared to have a very clear agenda focused on pointing the blame of the disaster on the fans
and were not at all interested in establishing the facts (which came out later in the Taylor Report
which exonerated the fans from blame, concluded that alcohol did not play any part in the
disaster and established that the main cause of the disaster was the failings of the South
Yorkshire Police - a fact that has never been accepted by them)

If possible I would also very much welcome the opportunity to meet with you to discuss the
points that I have raised here (accompanied by my son Paul if agreeable) in more detail. Could
you please let me know whether this is possible.

I hope that the issues I have raised in this letter are acted upon with integrity and I look forward
to hearing from you.



Yours sincerely




Rose Robinson (Mrs)

Telephone:_______
