— J
 9 •

 W. A. Buliough
 M.Sc., C.Eng., M-LMech.E., A.R.Ae.Soc.
 Consulting Engineer: Electrohydraulic
 Interfacing & Industrial Fluid Mechanics
 Tel. 0226-
                                                                  (D. ^        England



       WAB/IAC                                           17th May, 1989

       To the Coamission of Enquiry,
       Hillsborough Football Disaster
                                            0   I-IV 4
       She££ield,
       15 April, 1989


       Dear Sir/Madam,


       Observations with respect to Safety at Football Hatches


       I understand that the terms of reference of the Commission include the
       production of recommendations on how to generally improve safety on and
       around            grounds.  It is in this context that I set out the
       following observations. They are based on seme forty years experience of
       attending professional games.  In particular they include an element of

•      knowledge of specific relevance to the fateful situations that arose at
       Bumden Park, Bolton, Ibrox Stadium, Glasgow, and now at Sheffield
       Wednesday F.C. The undersigned has been resident in these three cities at
       or about the time of the accidents there and has regularly attended the
       stadia in question. Further, I have checked out the value of the knowl­
       edge that I set down (whether it would be of use to the Commission) with
       my former colleague Professor D. E. Newland of Cambridge University, no
       stranger to accident enquiries. It was he who convinced me of my duty to
       write this letter.

       1.   The salient features of the three disasters cited will be well known
            to the Committee. One common element that strikes me most forcefully
            is that a n tfrT-ee were precipated by "off-terracing" events which
            occurred in areas of sever**       *•*-■§r»n of         Bits leads to
            the first point that I wish to stress, i.e. that whilst great efforts
            have been made to improve the accommodation of spectators within the
            grounds proper, it has not always been possible to do much where it
            really matters, i.e. on the approaches and exits. Any football fan
            knows that the worst crush will usually'occur Whilst passing out
            through the gates of a ground or, by latecomers pushing in at the
            entrance.

            One factor that has caused a worsening of sucJh crushes has been the
            erection of covered stands and enclosures. These have invariably led
            to constrictions via blind and unrelieved entrance/exit tunnels and
            gates etc. Previously, uncovered earth embankments had a wider area
            of approach and even more importantly, a wide emergency exit, usually
            via the entire reverse facing slope.    Such was formerly the case at
            Maine Road, Manchester, surely the most uncomfortable of soccer
            grounds with a 75,000 semi-final crowd. Yet, though the spectators
            would sway very badly on account of the slimness of the terrace steps
            and the obscuring of near touchline play by a wall, I never witnessed
            a serious potential accident build up there. The streets around the
            ground comprised short terraces of houses running both normal and
 tangential to every side of the playing pitch. This seemed to break
 up the crowd and provided close proximity parking. An adequate amount
 of space (and no more) was prevalent on both sides of the turnstiles
 - this was disposed all round the perimeter. I an sure that much can
 be learned from this arrangement. Hampden Park, Glasgow, comfortably
 held 134,000 people and again there was little restriction to crowd
 movement inside or outside of the ground. In both cases unbroken
 uncovered earth embankments made for generally good visibility on
 both the outside and the inside of the auditorium.

 The Hillsborough ground at Sheffield runs contrary to these features.
 It is particularly unfortunate in its location with respect to the
 position and directions of its surrounding roads, a prisoner of its
 success and history being developed within a land-locked site remote
 from car parking facilities. The effects of the constrictions thus
 brought about have usually been felt most severely at the Leppings
 Lane interface. The river at this point runs its closest to the
 terracing perimeter; the outer, byway within the the site converges
 (from both the Penistone Road and Loppings Lane gates) to a minimum
 width at the turnstiles of the Leppings Lane End Terrace. Normally
 police are very active in this vicinity protecting spectators against
 the effects of cross and counterflow.

 A second point relates to the provision of-^jaui adequate number of^
 turnstiles. Mr. Joe Ashton M.P. has made the point that people cio not
''«lRreaiftys arrive at a ground hours in advance of a game.    Public
 transport no longer governs the rate of arrival of spectators. Thus,
 a build up of a crowd is always likely unless a liberal number of
 extra ’big game* turnstiles are provided. It is interesting to note
 the position with respect to this problem if say a crowd of 400
 people per turnstile arrive in the last 15 minutes before any match
 starts.     This would allow a time of only 2.25 seconds to check
 tickets and pass each person through the turnstile - it is clearly
  insufficient. This area of operations needs careful scrutiny. People
 today are much larger in stature than they were when most of our
 principal grounds and their turnstile facilities were arranged. The
 rate of flow from the turnstiles onto the terraces is an important
 associated factor.

  I have recently witnesses an incident which I suspect was caused by
  the necessity to relieve approach gates because of a crowd build up
  at the turnstiles. This was at the &*11 ▼ Halifax Rugby League
, Challenge Cup Semi Final replay at E l l a M J Boad, Leeds in 198eT H ere
  the start of the game was delayed by about 30 minutes. Even so, at
  the kick off, a mass of people suddenly shot out of a tunnel on the
  Kop End.   Only the fact that there was no lateral restriction to
  dispersal and the ground was only partially filled prevented loss of
  life. The police on that occasion opened the trackside gates but they
  cannot possibly respond within the short time required on these
  occasions. This incident particularly worried me since the shock load
  caused by the momentum of the fast moving crowd was, as in            any
  physical situation, far in excess of that steadily applied by the
  crush. This is a necessary feature of wave motion.

  It is interesting to note the situation that exists at the other
  large Leeds sports ground, at Leeds RLFC, Headingley. Here, on the
  popular side of the ground the few turnstiles are well separated,
  located in line with the ends of the tunnels and close to their

                                   2
entrances. The gateman can see the crowd in the short tunnel and
there is a large amount of 'plane wall* approach space outside the
turnstiles.   At the other end of the tunnel the playing pitch/-
perimeter wall is relieved. Any surge that could occur should be
fwaii and hopefully deliver the crowd onto the pitch. It is like the
hydraulic 'surge protection tank* in effect. The outer barrier along
the line of the turnstiles is of iron bars thus affording the police ^
a very good command point.       Similar openings to the pitch are
provided from the wooden stand at Huddersfield RLFC, Fartown, as a
fire precaution.   I recommend that these features be considered as
good practice by the Commission.      I do not say that the grounds
cited, or indeed any parts of them are without danger.

     failure of                      a ma-ioT           Whilst some
maintain that if they are too strong, the crush side spectators will
be hurt. Others maintain that a barrier should never fall. I have
tended to the latter opinion.     My father, now over 80 was at the
Bumden Park disaster. He told me that the corpses were disfigured.
They had gone down with the barriers and been trampled on as well as
suffocated.     A falling barrier is a loss of control, it will
invariably produce a vicious surge.

A further point I wish to make relates to the attitude of spectators.
Their discipline has declined greatly in the last 20 years.      Foul
language as well as a great increase in the consumption of alcoholic
drinks has precipitated this decline.    I am disturbed to note that
the police do not always make their presence felt to subdue the
trouble areas of infantiles Who so often precipitate disorder by
verbal abuse.

No crushing can occur unless elements of the crowd push in an
offensive fashion.   Contrast the scenes at Hillsborough with that
evening in 1954 when 103,000 people turned up unexpectedly for a
Rugby League Challenge Cup Final Replay at Odsal stadium, Bradford.
The ground approaches were poor, the number of turnstiles inadequate,
there was little in the way of formal terracing or crush barriers.
The crowd was mixed and relatively unmarshalled, yet, to my knowledge
few problems were encountered - good behaviour was the principal
element in its self control, as it always will be.

A multiplicity of factors affects the safety and comfort of a
football crowd, as would have been the case at Hillsborough on the
day in question. The provision of more seats will temporarily reduce
the size of the crowds but will not solve all of the problems.
Numbered seating will perhaps remove the annonymity which the mob
hides behind. However, a new class of problems is being encountered
in 'all seating' areas - some spectators will not sit down, others
stand on their seats.   I have had occasion to wonder at the lade of
consideration shown to other spectators. The location of any ground
within its approach roads and the number of turnstiles and the space
within and around than are all important factors.    Police control,
good communication and observation are vital. The good behaviour of
the crowd is mandatory. A mob element in any situation will always
be potentially dangerous.

These conditions, for the protection and well being of football spec­
tators, are rarely all present on any one of our football or rugby
grounds. With respect to the specific situation at the Hillsborough,
     L ep p in g s Lane End, the road situation alone in this area is complex,
     the failure to check tickets is understandable if the attendees
     arrive late and en masse; the crowd must then be passed through the
     turnstiles without delay. The opening of the gates is understanda­
     ble, if it was done to the same end though this must not be done so
     often as to encourage 'gate crashing'.          the failure to delay the
     start of the recent semi-final is difficult to comprehend. Nothing
     excites locked out spectators more than the roar of the crowd when
     the teams appear.

6.   Large crowds often require a double control such as at Wembley
     Stadium where section gates at the tops of steps (crowds do not push
     up steps) mist be passed through on the tray to blocks of terracing;
     each block has its own (individual) gate.

     the Leppings Lane end problem could be somewhat alleviated by the
     provision of a platform over the river in that vicinity.' the gates
     there, one suspects, are derived from the 'all ground* type of
     entrance prevalant on Yorkshire football grounds in the 1950's and
     before, the situation will not have been improved by the erection of
     the North stand and the division of the turnstiles. Retreating the
     line of turnstiles to provide a better shaped and larger queuing area
     would also help.

7.   Cages on the terraces are despicable things - they are squalid and
     dangerous. If they are necessary to separate opposing factions and
     protect players, then there is a strong case for the prohibition of
     'away' travelling spectators, the Valley Parade lesson must not be
     forgotten; what result there, had fencing been in place when the
     Bradford City fixe occurred? The aspect ratio of a terrace is an
     important facet of its design. This is particularly so in the case
     of a narrow terrace.

8.   My remarks by and large apply to all sports grounds. They are meant
     to provide cause for thought amongst the Commissioners.        I was
     fortunate not to be at Hillsborough, Ibrox or Bumden Parks on the
     days of tragedies there. I have been on all three (and at many other
     grounds) in circumstances of danger.    From What I have experienced
     and heard of various situations a whole series of accidents will come
     together to cause a severe loss of life. No one and yet everyone is
     to blame.    It is with this firmly in mind that I conclude that
     whatever arrangements are made that the high standard of discipline
     of the crowd is the overriding requirement for safety, there is ample
     evidence to the effect that many of todays youth do not know how to
     conduct themselves in a crowd situation.


In any general order of merit for the continuous improvement of facili­
ties, Sheffield Wednesday F.C. must stand in the first rank of profes­
sional football clubs, the cleanliness, standard of repair and paintwork
on their ground is rarely anything but exemplory, these are signs of a
management that tries to do a good job. the efforts of their directors
and officials have not yet gone without note in the twenty years of so
that I have lived in South Yorkshire. It is a matter of great regret that
they have not had the opportunity to deal with the topological situation
caused principally by the river bridge on Leppings Lane.      A different
means of approach to the turnstiles (over the river) could possibly (but
by no means certainly) have averted the disaster of 15 April.

                                      4
I trust that these observations will be received by the Commission in the
way that I have intended to present them, i.e. in an entirely positive
sense and to help ensure that the chance of any similar future accident is
reduced to its practical limitations.




                            Yours /faithfully,




                                    Bullough




Secretary to the Enquiry,
Room 662,
50 Queen Anne Gate,
LONDON
SWUB 9AT




                                     5
vifc.
&
    •#
