                                       I                                                               My
                                      “p                                                             <-*v-oasra —
                                 Department of Employment                                                  fY)^ «         p    j         i
                 Caxton House, Tothill Street. London SW1H 9NF                                             .*     _       ..
                                                                          5802                                                           <VW G c ^
                           Telephone 071-273 ....................                                          r                                     fYW>-eos
                           T aU Q K « l
                           Telex 915564  C ox, n - 7 1 ^ ') 7 'J
                                         Fax   071-273 5821                                      M
                                                                                                 hW  . /
                                                                                                           QroMc^Ji
                                                                                                           I w t 4 .1 ,        .1
                                                                                                                                         tYh-
                                                                                                                                           V     <J5xjz>o
                                                                                                                                                              >


                                                                                                                                             W " .jS^J/rvrrtoAci.i
                                          Secretary of State                                                              -—
                                                                                                                                                    rag.
                                                                                                                                             f V "r^Q.
                                                                                                htr «<urucs.                                     ^

The Rt Hon David Waddington QC MP                                                                                              '
Home Secretary
Home Office                                                                                                                         (A               ■    ■
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON                                                                                                                ^         lO-^l 3c.
W1H 9AT                                                                                                                        September 1990




TAYLOR REPORT: NEW OFFENCES
You sent me a copy of your letter of 20 August to Geoffrey Howe.
I   am directly interested in your proposals because of my
responsibilities for health and safety and for tourism - some
tourists will be present at football matches, and legislation on
football may create precedents for other        events  involving
tourists.

I welcome your initiative and support your wish to introduce
legislation at the earliest opportunity. Any significant delay
could play into the hands of the considerable body of opinion that
is pressing for wider action on ticket touts.  I also have some
detailed comments on your proposals.

I wonder whether Taylor goes far enough in recommending the new
offence of selling tickets without the authority of the home club.
As the latter stages of the FA Cup are played on neutral grounds,
neither team is the home club, and tickets for the final itself
are allocated not by the clubs but by the Football Association. It
is therefore not clear how the Taylor proposal will prevent touts
selling tickets at these venues. This problem was pointed out in
the recent report by Croydon and Liverpool Trading Standards
Offices into the activities of touts at the 1989 Cup Final. That
report also said there was evidence that a significant proportion
of* tickets were bought from touts before the day of the game.

The ' FA seems to contribute to the touting problem by allocating
too few tickets to the fans of participating clubs who want to see
the match and too many tickets to others who may sell their

                                                                                                                                                              }


                                                m
                     E m p l o y m e n t D c p u r t f l T c n tI T r a i n i n g A g c n c y
                          H e a l t h a n d S a f e ty E x e c u t i v e • A C A S
                                                                                                                 RECEIVED BY

                                                                                                                          10 SEP 1990


                                                                                                                PRIVATE SECRETARY
                           Secretary of State
                           for Employment




tickets to touts. The Westminster City Council Trading Standards
Office report on ticket touts in the West End came to more or less
similar conclusions. We need more effective measures by sponsors
of events to control the sale of their own tickets.

You are probably already aware that an attempt is likely to be
made during the Bill's progress through Parliament to widen its
scope in order to restrict or prevent the activities of touts at
other events. We have had correspondence from a wide variety of
bodies, sporting and entertainment, all calling for 'more action
such as some form of licensing on American lines. My officials
have kept yours informed about these approaches.

You should also know that Nick Ullswater has recently supported an
English Tourist Board initiative to draw up a guide for incoming
tourists on the purchase of tickets.

Turning to the health and safety aspects and to the new offence of
running onto the pitch, I am glad to see that exceptions will be
made for safety. These should include people being crushed;
individuals injured or taken ill; an adult removing a frightened
child; and anyone at the ground called for over the PA system.   I
should be grateful if my officials could be consulted about the
details of this proposal.

I am copying this letter to members of QL and H Committees, to Sir
Robin Butler and to the First Parliamentary Counsel,




                        MICHAEL HOWARD
