  The Central Council of Physical Recreation
      Francis House, Francis Street, London SW1P1DE Telephone: 01-828 3163/4 Telex: 8956058 Fax: 01-630 8820
                                                                   Patron:
                                                           H er M ajesty The Q ueen
                                                                 President:
                                                                                                          I-      Xw-CUb -
                                           HRH The P rince Philip, D uke of E din b u rg h KG KT OM




                                                                                                                    Ni . JoVw.




Executive Com m ittee Chairman:   D eputy Chairman:               Divisional Chairmen:                         W ater Recreation: A E Hodges
Ron W Ernes MBE                   Jim F Elms MBE                  Games and Sports: C S Palmer OBE             O utdoor Pursuits: G A Cubitt MBE
General Secretary:                Honorary Treasurer:             Major Spectator Sports: R G Robinson         Interested Organisations:
Peter Lawson                      Miss Marea Hartman CBE          Movement and Dance: Miss A Bambra            Lt-Col R G Satterthwaite LVO OBE



       NH/dc

       6 October 1989

       The Right Honourable Lord Justice Taylor
       Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
       The Home Office
       50 Queen Anne's Gate
       London
       SWIH 9AT

       Dear Lord Justice Taylor

       The CCPR is the national association of the governing bodies
       of sport in the United Kingdom, and its Major Spectator Sports
       Division has previously submitted evidence to you, dated 15
       June 1989, in respect of the Inquiry into the Hillsborough
       Stadium Disaster.

       During the past eighteen months, our members have met on
       several occasions with representatives from the Home Office
       expressing their concerns over a matter which is related to
       your present Enquiry, namely the licensing of indoor sports
       centres.

       At a recent working party meeting, held on 8 September 1989,
       reference was made to your interim report and paragraph 314:

           "Arguments have been put to me suggesting the need for some
            national  oversight   or  inspection  of   local  authority
            certification procedures.  This raised complex issues which
            I shall want to consider further at Stage 2 of the
            Inquiry."

       In the light of these comments, representatives suggested that
       the CCPR should write supporting the concept of a "single
       operator's licence" which would not only be in the interest of
       public safety, but would also reduce the present level of
       bureaucracy   and   expense   incurred   by   governing   body
       associations whose member clubs and voluntary organisations
       are   endeavouring   to   increase   the  levels   of   sports
       participation in local communities.

                                                                                                                               1/


                                    A C o m p a n y limited by guarantee: No. 474512 Registered in E ngland
6 October 1989
Lord Justice Taylor


                              2


I enclose notes of the two meetings held on 11 July and
8 September 1989 which clarify the concerns expressed by the
governing  bodies   as  well   as  the   local  authorities'
representatives.

We would be delighted if you were able to     consider   these
comments in the light of your final report.

Yours sincerely




NIGEL HOOK
Senior Technical Officer


Encs
           THE CENTRAL COUNCIL OF PHYSICAL RECREATION

   NOTE OF A MEETING WITH THE HOME OFFICE AND GOVERNING BODY
    REPRESENTATIVES TO DISCUSS THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF
  PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 HELD ON FRIDAY 8 SEPTEMBER 1989 AT
11.00 AM AT THE CCPR, FRANCIS HOUSE, FRANCIS STREET, LONDON SW1

PRESENT

Mr Nigel Hook                    In the Chair, CCPR

Mr David Hillier             Home Office
Mr Phillip Reader            Association of District Councils
Mr Bob Perkins               Association of Metropolitan
                               Authorities
Mr Tony Reay                 British Judo Association
Mr Peter Neighbour           English Indoor Bowling Association
Mr Brian Coleman             English Basket Ball Association
Miss Davina Coulter          CCPR


1   CHAIRMAN'S REMARKS

The Chairman welcomed everyone to the meeting and in particular
Mr Phillip Reader (Association of District Councils) and Mr Bob
Perkins  (Association of Metropolitan Authorities) who were
representing the local authority associations.

Attention was drawn to the previous meeting when concern over
the present legislation had been voiced by the national
governing bodies on behalf of their member clubs throughout the
country, and during which it had been suggested that a meeting
should be sought with the local authority representatives in
order to see if a solution could be found to the difficulties
being faced by these associations.


2   APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

Apologies    for    absence     had    been    received from
Mr Keith Delderfield, British Paraplegic Sports Society and
Mr George Bulman, English Volleyball Association.


3   NOTE OF THE PREVIOUS MEETING

The note of     the   previous    meeting   held   on   11   July   1989    was
received.


4   HOME OFFICE

Mr David Hillier (Home Office) spoke of the general background
to the legislation which had been introduced as a result of the
tragic circumstances surrounding the fire at Bradford City
Football Club.  As a result of this accident, coupled with the
outbreak of a fire at a sports centre in Northern Ireland,
theGovernment had sought to introduce measures which would
ensure that football stadia and indoor sporting arenas were
safe for members of the public and the sportsmen and women
participating in various activities.

                                                                      5/.
                                  2

5    GOVERNING BODIES OF SPORT

Mr Phillip Reader (ADC) referred to the extensive campaign
which had been carried out by his association during the
drafting stages of the Bill in close co-operation with the
Department of Trade and Industry and the National Economic
Development Office in an effort to ensure a satisfactory
wording to the Bill and to endeavour to devise a system
whereby a "single operator's licence" for sports centres could
be introduced.   In the opinion of the ADC, such a measure
would have reduced the level of bureacracy that was recently
faced by the local authorities, and would have brought some
financial savings to the Treasury.    However, such arguments
put forward by the ADC for cost effective savings and
reductions in manpower had been rejected by the Treasury.

Mr Bob Perkins (AMA) suggested that the present legislation
merited a simple enabling Bill which would simplify the
current situation, but equally support the notion that the
sports centres should be safe for the individual members of
the public.    He expressed the view that there was somel
difficulty over the interpretation of the present legislation
at local level which presented difficulties in achieving a
common standard of safety which would be in the interest of
the public at large.

Reference was made to the present legislation and the interim
report recently published by The Lord Justice Taylor Enquiry,
which in paragraph 314 stated:

    "Arguments have been put to me suggesting the need for some
     national   oversight  or   inspection  of   local  authority
     certification procedures.   This raised complex issues which
     I shall want to consider further at Stage 2 of the Inquiry."

During the general discussion it was noted that the intention
of the Bill had been to put into effect a simple piece of
legislation which was to be principally targeted for special
events at mass spectator sports and had not been drafted for
the sporting and recreational events at local level.   It was
noted that there were numerous licences which were recently
sought for a wide variety of different aspects of public
entertainment including recreation, music and motor vehicle
licences.

It was noted that many voluntary governing body club officials
at local level were currently faced with the difficult task of
both identifying the individual within the local authority
administration who had the responsibility for issuing the
licence, and also the difficulty of raising money to cover the
cost of the licences which were now being charged in some
areas of the country at an exhorbitant rate.

The governing body representatives indicated that any policy
by local authorities which maximised their revenue by charging
extortionate costs to the governing bodies would result in a
conflict with the expressed Government policy for maximising
sports   participation    within   the    local   communities.
Representatives suggested that the Home Office should consider
at some appropriate stage licensing the buildings and not the
sporting event.

                                            Mr David Hillier/.
                               3


Mr David Hillier (Home Office) kindly offered to meet the
representatives of the local authority associations to see if
a greater clarification of the Act could be achieved in order
that the events     in sports centres could be specified   in
respect of the legislation's primary intentions.      It was
suggested that     the CCPR submit further evidence to    the
Taylor Enquiry seeking a "licensing operator for indoor
sports" which would be in the interest of public safety.   It
was further requested that the CCPR should endeavour to seek
the support of those politicians who might be sympathetic in
raising the matter in the House of Commons.

The suggestion was made that the governing bodies should
reappraise their   licensing arrangements in the light of the
statements which   would be forthcoming from the Taylor Report
in an effort to clarify the position with their member clubs.

On behalf of the governing bodies, the Chairman thanked the
representatives from the Home Office and the local authorities
for attending the meeting.
           THE CENTRAL COUNCIL OF PHYSICAL RECREATION


NOTES OF THE MEETING WITH THE HOME OFFICE TO DISCUSS THE FIRE
SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 HELD ON TUESDAY
11 JULY 1989 AT 2.30 PM AT FRANCIS HOUSE


PRESENT

Mr Nigel Hook                In the Chair, CCPR

Mr David Hillier             Home Office

Mr   Brian Coleman           English   Basket Ball Association
Mr   Peter Neighbour         English   Indoor Bowling Association
Mr   Ken Eales               British   Judo Association
Mr   Keith Delderfield       British   Paraplegic Sports Society

Miss Davina Coulter          CCPR


1 CHAIRMAN'S REMARKS

The Chairman drew attention to the minutes of the Games and
Sports meeting (GS/M50/88) held on 11 October 1988 and to the
submission to the Home Office by the Sports Council s Director
of Development Services dated 20 August 1986.    It was noy®°
that this submission had been made without consultation with
the national governing bodies of sport which were largely
affected by the new Act, nor indeed with certain members of
the Sports Council.


2 APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

Apologies had been received from Mr Charles Palmer.


 3 THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987

Mr Hillier referred to the legislation which had arisen as a
result of the Popplewell Enquiry into the tragic events at
Bradford City Football Club and the extensive consultation
exercise which had taken place with national associations
throughout the country.    "Part IV of the Act, which concerned
indoor sports licences, had come into force on 1 June 1988 and
this had been preceded by the issue of a Home Office
Circular (NO 19/1988 - circulated) on 22 March containing
information and advice about its provisions to the c*11®*
executives of licencing authorities, clerks to fire and civil
defence authorities, and the police".        He said that the
purpose of the Act was to require, in the interests of public
safety, the licencing of all premises used for indoor sports
entertainments to which the public were invited as spectators
where the entertainment was the principal purpose for which
the premises were being used at the time.         There was one
exception   to   the  last   criterion   -  every   such  sports
entertainment held in a sports complex required a licence, to
overcome the difficulty of having to decide which, of the many
 events which might possibly be taking place, was the principal
                                                   purpose for/.
                                2


purpose for which the premises were being used.     It had not
been expected   that   the Act would    place very heavy    an
additional burden on local authorities which were ready
responsible for administering similar licencing arrangements
in respect of public entertainments in their districts etc.


4 GENERAL DISCUSSION

The representatives present spoke of their concern about the
legislation  since   it  had   been  introduced   without  any
appropriate consultation with the national governing bodies of
sport.  The governing bodies were now faced with the problem
of dealing with the various departments within the local
authority structure which were responsible for issuing the
licences.

It was noted that the act was "silent" about who, in any
particular case, was responsible for obtaining a licence w h e n ^
one was required.    The representatives present were of thf^P
opinion that it should be the responsibility of whoever was
providing the accommodation used for an event to ensure that
an appropriate licence had been obtained and that this should
not be incumbent upon the governing bodies or individual
sports clubs concerned.   Mr Hillier explained that, in form,
the provisions for indoor sports licensing followed those
already enacted in respect of public entertainments licensing
in general and that there was little prospect of any further
changes to this area of the law for the time being.     It was
with the hirers of halls about whether an appropriate licence
was already in existence.     Concern was expressed that the
present requirements, which were listed in the Home Office
Circular, were not working satisfactorily at a local level.
Mr Hillier said the Home Office would be concerned if this
were the case.  A suggestion that a meeting be sought with the
Association of District Councils and the Association of
Metropolitan Authorities to clarify the situation and seek
their assistance in resolving the difficulties currently being
faced by sports bodies was agreed.   Mr Hillier said he would
be prepared to attend any meeting convened for this purpose.

It  was    further   suggested  that,  when   appropriate,   the
Government should consider a review of the various licensing
requirements in existence at the present to which sports
centres were subject in the hope that some form of single
"operators" licence could be devised to cover them all.       Mr
Hillier explained that the Enterprise and Deregulation Unit at
the Department of Trade and Industry had been looking into
this possibility but had found the practical obstacles to
progress   very   severe.    It was   currently   reviewing,  in
conjuction     with    other   Government    departments,    the
administration of licencing with a view to simplifying and
streamlining procedures at the local level.

                                       The representatives/.
!
                                       3


        The   representatives, whilst   making  it   clear  that  they
        supported the Government's intentions in bringing in Part IV
        of the 1987 Act, said that the various interpretations being
        placed upon it by different local authorities were causing
        considerable difficulties for voluntary clubs etc who were
        trying to promote sport throughout the country.     Mr Hillier
        said the Home Office took the view that the flexibility
        provided for in the legislation over such matters as the terms
        and conditions which could be imposed on the grant of a
        licence enabled local authorities to respond appropriately to
        the particular circumstances of any licence application.
        However, it was hoped some greater uniformity of approach
        would be in evidence after the publication, later this summer,
        of the Home Office "Guide to Fire Precautions in Existing
        Places of Public Entertainment and Like Premises", which
        consolidated and to some extent revised existing guidance in
        this sphere and covered some areas not dealt with in similar
        previous publications.   It contained guidance on such matters
        as seating arrangements, room capacities and means of escape

    •   in case of fire and covered, amongst other premises, indoor
        leisure centres.

        The point was made in conclusion that it was to be hoped that
        when the report of the Lord Justice Taylor's Enquiry into the
        Hillsborough disaster or any future legislation concerning
        sport was being considered, the views of the governing bodies
        of sport would be fully taken into account.

        On behalf of the members the Chairman thanked Mr Hillisr for
        attending the meeting.



        28 July 1989
ni'75>
           l- H                    t?»         K tw w h           p            AM                 .
                    T T T T i-                       '                                      Ri
                        'J                     St John AmbulancezJfl'0
                                  -4 Voluntary Organisation of The Order of St. John
                   Z . ^ r U i KdZ               LONDON (PRINCE OF WALES'S) DISTRICT
                         IS) . J o k o
                                                             C om m ander D erek R . F e n to n M VO MBE.
                         rs              Asst. C om m ander D. J . R egan MA BSc (Econ) IP FA B an iste r

                          V”i'                                         Edwina M ountbatten House
                                                                                  63 York Street
Tel: 01-258 3456
Fax: 01-258 3793                     to* u|                                    London WIH IPS


The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor,12th October 1989
50 Queen A n n e 1s Ga t e ,
London SW1H 9AT

                              >       “^ “"1

Thank you for the letter acknowledging my letter
of 2nd October.

On re-reading my letter I feel I should clarify item
(4) on page 2. The provision of St. John ambulances
in lieu of those from the LAS has been due in the
last four weeks to the fact that none have been
available from the LAS and will continue until the
pay dispute is settled.

There was also a typographical error in the second
paragraph whereas I suggested that there should be
a statutory liaison ambulance officer for crowds,
of over 50,000 - this naturally should be 5,000.*

I very much regret that I did not fully explain the
former and made a mistake in the latter.




Derek Fenton
Commander
