           NEIL THORNE, OBE., TD., M.P.




              HOUSE OF COMMON^
                 L O N D O N SW1A0AA

                 20th April 1989




                               2 5 APR 1
                                           .   f j [ / i\JW W *T
                                               /t/i/   {,
It is always easy to be wise after the event but I
did write on 26th January to Robin Ferrers warning
him on behalf of St John Ambulance of the danger
in which the Home Office could find itself if it
failed to take the initiative in laying down a
national code for public safety at sports grounds.

Would it be possible to have a meeting with you
early in June,in order to let the dust settle after
Hillsborough, so that we could discuss what really
needs to be done to ensure that proper attention is
paid to the necessity of providing adequate cover for
spectators at sporting events?

At present the decision to leave with the local
authority the responsibility for deciding on the
level of care seems to have been proved woefully
inadequate.

I enclose a cutting from The Times of 18th April 1989
in case you have not already seen it.




The Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP,
Secretary of State,
Home Office,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London SW1H 9AT.
                               ST JOHN AMBULANCE

   Medical “ M
         By Ronald Faux
                                                       t h cheap
  The St John Ambulance Bri-
                Pa'd « 5 by the
  Sheffield Wednesday football
  club for providing medical
                                                                 sSSSStS
  cover at Hillsborough on Sat­
  urday. -The volunteer organi*
 zation, which had two ambu-
 lances and 30 officers at the
 match, receives a flat-rate      ii                                    9 **** 63,000 mem*
 donation of £5 for every 5,000   Usually 10 St John officm      “ f t wh° P"1 « about four
 spectators —generous by the aid.would be ready to give first    milJion hours ■ year of unpaid
standards of some clubs.             Because Saturday’s match    ®ervice.
                                was a semi-final, more were        Last year Sheffield Werfn«.
   Mr Derek Fenton, com-                   ^ l5^cther with two   day paid£650 to the briaade
in&nder of the London district South Yorkshire ambulances        for cover at mpyhes. Liver
                                and their crews.                 pool paid £ ™ oa        L,Ver
