                                                                             Derek Bruder
                                                                           Contact address
                                                                           as shown below
Lord Justice Stewart-Smith

       Dear Sir,

               I wish to avail myself for interview with regards to your inquiry into the
Hillsborough tragedy.

       I was directly involved with the tragedy in the following way:

       1.     I attended Hillsborough on 15th April 1989 as a Liverpool supporter.( I
               was also an off duty Merseyside Police Officer)

       2.     I attended a casualty who unfortunately died. I now know the casualty to
               be Kevin Williams.

       3.     I provided a statement to West Midlands police officers as to my actions.

       4.     The day before Kevin William’s mini-inquest I was visited at home by a
               West Midlands Detective Inspector, who took from me a second
               statement. During the taking of the statement, he telephoned the Coroner’s
               Office in Sheffield as he was having difficulty in taking the statement using
               medical terms. I also spoke to someone from the Coroner’s Office in
               relation to my statement.

       I was not asked to attend the mini-inquest and therefore I feel my evidence was not
presented in its entirety or in a professional manner.

       To this date I have declined all invitations to be interviewed by any member of the
press or television, but maintain that had I have been requested to attend the inquest, I
would have done so.

       My friend who was with me on the day of the tragedy, and members of my family
have been subjected to nothing short of harassment by certain members of the media, in
what I can only imagine to be a vain attempt for me to ‘Go Public’

         As you will be aware a dramatisation that was made about the tragedy was
recently shown on television and its makers stood by its right of freedom of speech and
justice for the individual. I understand freedom of speech to mean the right to speak or not
to speak as the case may be and as I have chosen not to speak to any ‘unofficial’ parties in
relation to the tragedy. I feel as if I have been misrepresented and mis-quoted, even
though I have not made any statements other than the ones provided to West Midlands
police.
       I hope it wiD be apparent to you that I am not a publicity seeker in any way, shape
or form, and for no other reason than those already mentioned, if you wish to contact me
could you please do so through correspondence with my chosen solicitor:

              Mr David Blaquiere
              Davies Wallis Foyster Solicitors
              5 Castle Street
              Liverpool
              L2 4XE

       Whilst I understand that you will have many, many lines of inquiry, I am available
to speak to you without reservation should the need arise.



                                             Yours Faithfully


                                                    Derek Bruder
