 I STEPHEN WILLIAMS will say:




        I attended the FA Cup semi-final at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 and arrived at the
        Ground at around 1,30pm. I had a ticket for the Leppings Lane end o f the ground and
        was in Pen 3.

       I was on the terraces, approximately three quarters o f the way up Pen 3, for half an
       hour before any overcrowding problems developed. The crush became serious about
       2.50pm. When Peter Beardsley hit the cross bar a huge surge caused me to be pushed
       against the crash barrier where I was pinned for about 5-10 minutes, unable to move
       and in considerable pain. I was unable to get anyone to help me, I remember biting a
       man’s arm to alert him, but he was not able to help me.

       I was subjected to at least thirty minutes o f intense crushing and remember that a point
       came, when I gave up fighting for my life. I said goodbye to my family and fiancee as I
       thought that there was no way out, and eventually lost consciousness.

       I woke up on the ground vomiting and with pains in my chest. In addition, I was
       shaking uncontrollably, which I now attribute to shock. I was taken by ambulance to
       the Northern General Hospital NHS Trust in Sheffield, where I stayed for three days.
       X-rays taken during my stay in hospital showed two fractured ribs.

       I had also sustained bruising to the right side o f my chest, with reduced air entry in
       addition to a small bruise to the right side o f my head. I was prescribed analgesics and
       discharged on 17 April 1989. Appended hereto is a copy o f my hospital notes
       (Appendix 1) including a letter from Dr Wardrope confirming that I had been crushed
       for 30 minutes.

       When I returned home I visited my General Practitioner who arranged for further X-
       rays, these showed that the injuries were more extensive than first thought, and in fact
       I had five fractured ribs. Appendix 2 consists o f specialists’ reports.



                    i-iU w
Dated this day      I|       of October 1997




STEPHEN WILLIAMS
