                                                                  C'C   /W r Q c W ^

                                          QD
                                          WSSr
                                                                        /Wo              61
                                                                         far   Qcfacuk, t Coul Qtt/v?
                                                                         /w                   vsu
                            lO DOW NING STREET
                                L O N D O N SW1A 2AA                    0                j

TH E PRIME MINISTER
                                                                        30 August 1994




      Thank you for your letter of 28 July. I have the utmost sympathy for




                            and I have great admiration for the bravery and
dedication they have shown.


      There was enormous public sympathy following the Hillsborough
disaster, in consequence of which such a very substantial and impressive sum of
money was donated. As you appreciate, in such a situation those responsible
for administering the money have some discretion over the terms under which a
trust or trusts are established. Guidance has been published which can be of
assistance in these circumstances, and this may have been taken into account by
the trustees of the Hillsborough funds.


       One option is to establish a charitable fund, which would bring the
monies within the remit of the law on charities, and would place the
organisation concerned (which would be a charity) under the supervision of the
Charity Commission. However, as the trustees explained to you (as recorded in
your letter of 28 July tq                        ), that can have significant
limitations in the way the money can be applied. A considered decision is
necessary, taking the advantages and disadvantages of both into account. The
Government considers that both types of trust have their place in providing for
the allocation o f resources.
      Where a non-charitable, discretionary trust is established, its status is the
same in law as any other private trust. As a non-charitable private fund, the
use of the money is the responsibility of the trustees under the law as it relates
to private trusts. Trustees of private trusts are responsible for the
administration and distribution of the money and property pertaining to the trust
within the terms of their trust deeds and the law. However, they do have the
authority, within those constraints and subject to limitations on their powers of
investment, to make judgements about how the money is used. Such
judgements in the case of any disaster fund will be complicated and difficult;
the allocation between short term and long term needs, for example, may well
be an issue the trustees should properly consider.


       I have considered carefully whether private trusts should be further
regulated, but I am not convinced that there is a general need for such
legislation. The Government is not better placed to take decisions about the
disposal of funds than the trustees concerned, or the courts. Indeed if the
Government were to seek to place legislative constraints on the actions of
private trustees, this might well prevent the imaginative and efficient use of
resources which discretionary funds can allow.


       In the case of private trusts, where someone who considers he or she has
a claim to the money disputes how it has been administered, the proper course
of action would be to pursue the matter in the courts. With this in mind, I am
afraid it would not be right for me to comment on the actions of the trustees in
this particular instance.




David Alton Esq MP
