         HOME OFFICE
         Operational Policing Policy Unit
      Hj 50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
      W Direct Line 0171273 4046 Fax 4028



FAX
To:       Graham Catherall, Clerk to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

From:     C F BONE

Date:     10 July 1997                            Time:

Recipient’s Fax
Number:

Number of pages (including this one):


Graham

We spoke about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s photo-call here at the Home Office
on Monday.

As I said the plan now is that this will be on just the same lines as the one at the
RCJ on the day o f his appointment to the Hillsborough Scrutiny. There will be
a brief session during which the media can film and photograph him sitting at a
desk in QAG looking at documents, etc.

The Home Office press office will issue a press statement on his behalf But
there will be no oral statement to the press or question and answer session.

I attach a draft statement, and would be gratefulfor the Judge’s views on it
and on the sligthly changed plans for Monday. It would be very helpful to
have these tomorrow so that we can get everything properly teed up for
Monday morning.

You also mentioned a call you had hadfrom Mrs Abbott-Charles o f the
Broadcasting Standards Commission. I have spoken to her andfaxed her as
attached. There is no further action on this but I think Lord Justice Stuart-
                     IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                        PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 4046
Smith should see it.

The Dr Slater mentioned is the pathologist who was shown giving evidence at
the Inquest and, in effect, leaning on a police witness to change his story about
the time o f a victim’s death. It is perhaps not too surprising that he has
complained to the BSC.

CHRIS BONE




                  IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                     PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 4046
    DRAFT STATEMENT BY LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




“   I have today started work on the scrutiny of possible new evidence relating

to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. My work will involve looking at

evidence which it is said was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s

inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or disciplinary authorities. I

will also be taking written representations and will then decide whom I wish

to see in person. But I can confirm that after the summer I will go to

Liverpool to meet the relatives of those killed and their legal representatives.



The meetings I have will be private and I will not be making any public

comments on the evidence or representations which are made to me during

the course o f the scrutiny. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary

towards the end of the year.



Anyone wishing to submit material to me can do so via Room 528, Home

Office, 50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London SW1H 9AT




                   IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                      PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 4046
          HOME OFFICE
         Operational Policing Policy Unit
      (a 50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
      tj Direct Line 0171 273 4046        Fax 4028




To:       Mrs Abbott-Charles, Broadcasting Standards Commission

From:     C F BONE

Date:     10 July 1997                               Time:

Recipient’s Fax             233 0564
Number:

Number of pages (including this one): TWO


HILLSBOROUGH

We spoke this morning about a complaint which the Commission received last
December from Dr Slater, a pathologist, about the way in which he was
depicted in the Granada TV programme broadcast that month about the
Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster in 1989. You said that Dr Slater’s
complaint had been through various formal stages at the Commission and that
the next step was to have a hearing. This was presently scheduled for mid-
October.

You asked whether the hearing might clash in any way with Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny o f the evidence about Hillsborough. I think it could.
Lord Stuart-Smith’s terms o f reference (copy attached) mean that he will need
to examine evidence given at the Inquests at which Dr Slater was a witness.

You suggested that the Commission might defer Dr Slater’s hearing until after
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made his report to the Home Secretary (the report
will be published). I am sure that would be sensible.

CFBONE                                                                       -
Secretary to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny
                      IF ANY         T OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                                     rfeLEPHONE: 0171 273 4046
