                                                     cc. Ka»6
                                                        rU± & *■


NOTE FOR RECORD
HILLSBOROOGH
1.   Chief Superintendent Alan Fell (0742 768522 Ext 8410) of
South Yorkshire Police spoke to Miss Cole and I today about
difficulties arising from the PCA's decision to charge
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray with
disciplinary offences.
2.   South Yorkshire were the force involved in the disciplinary
tribunal in which the PCA felt that evidence against the officer
concerned had not been properly presented.   They were therefore
concerned to distance themselves from the proceedings and to
introduce an independent element wherever possible so that the
PCA should have no grounds for accusing them in relation to any
failure to prove the charges.
3.   Five charges - four of neglect of duty and one of
discreditable conduct - will be brought against CS Duckenfield
and one - neglect of duty - against Superintendent Murray.
4.   South Yorkshire consider that it will be necessary to hold
two disciplinary tribunals, with different composition, so that
neither officer is disadvantaged.   The Chief Constable will ask
the Chief Constable of Derby to sit on one such tribunal.       I
suggested that it would be important to confirm with the PCA that
there were four members who were unacquainted with the
Hillsborough case to meet this requirement.
Legal Representation
5.   I enquired whether the charges were thought to be of such
a nature that legal representation should be offered.  pie Chief
Constable feels that he should have available the option of at
least demotion.       Legal representation also provides the
advantage that presentation of the case is made other than by an
officer of the force.    I suggested that, as the investigation
had been conducted by the West Midland's Constabulary, it might
be helpful if West Midlands also supplied information to the
presenter, thus maintaining the distance of the South Yorkshire
force from the prosecution.
6.   The legal cost of defence to the officers was likely to be
ruinous.   Superintendents nowadays normally insured themselves
against such possibilities, but the two officers' insurance must
be largely exhausted given the high legal costs of their defence
at the inquest and the Taylor Inquiry.   Indeed the high cost of
the whole tribunal would be a matter for consideration by the
police authority.     I suggested that in the circumstances it
would be appropriate if the police authority considered bearing
the officers' legal costs.    They would certainly do so had the
officers' had ACPO rank and it would seem proper to do so as they
were effectively in command on that day, I thought.
7.   Costs generally were a source of some concern.    The police
authority expected to brief counsel.         I pointed out that
transcripts would need to be available soon after the hearing and
that South Yorkshire would need to make arrangements for this.
Mr Fell said that they normally used a firm of court reporters.
I said that this sounded satisfactory but they would need to
state a date by which the transcript was required. It might also
be necessary to provide for the costs of an appeal, should the
officers be found guilty.
8.   This led to a discussion of the charges. Mr Fell said they
had been drafted by the PCA.     I observed that the discipline
regulations did not provide for the PCA to draft charges and that
it might be that, when their legal adviser drafted charges, he
might wish to point out to the PCA that the precise formulation
they had suggested would be difficult of proof.     Mr Fell said
that leading counsel had already made this point to the PCA who
were not prepared to alter the suggested wording of charges.
Because of the earlier disciplinary tribunal, referred to in
paragraph 1, South Yorkshire were not prepared to make an issue
of this.
9. Copies. Regulation 10 provides that accused officers should
receive copies of all relevant papers.   In the light of the very
lengthy Taylor Inquiry and subsequent inquest, the number of
documents and copies of videos which might be thought relevant
were astronomical.   It would be unreasonable and impractical to
attempt to copy all of them and the best solution seemed to be
to invite the defence to make whatever use of the material
available they wished and to agree to provide a copy of any
material desired.




                                         MRS G I MOODY
                                         16 July 1991
