                                                                                 1 J MAR 1998
                                                                                         •i£ 0 *
 5* S‘CR^
                                               QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT
                                                                           re m

                                                                 Or. (Y\<L mic
                                                                      (Y \ f t tt& J A itn -ir
Derek Twigg Esq MP                                                    (Y\fL o rw trv i3
House of Commons                                                      (HO. & & S S ^ r t v i
LONDON
                                                                      (Y)S
S W 1 A OAA                                                           'C N L s f& s lA
                                                                      0T\(t Isu.'b&jzfi-
                                                                      (Y\<L CX&Dr^ •




Thank you for your letter of 6 March about Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith's report on
evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster.

You raised some points specifically about the role of the DPP and the decision at
the time not to bring criminal proceedings against any person. The DPP has the
statutory responsibility of deciding whether criminal proceedings should be
brought against any person, and it is not for me as Home Secretary to say
whether the decision of the DPP in a particular case was right or wrong.

The decision not to prosecute was, however, considered on pages 9 and 1 0 of
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report. He set out there the basis of the advice
which was given to the DPP at the time: essentially that the analysis of the
facts contained in the Taylor Report should be the basis on which to approach
any question of criminal liability. The DPP in taking his decision at the time had
to bear in mind the significantly different and greater degree of culpability which
would be involved in securing a conviction for a criminal offence as against the
degree of negligence which would give rise to liability and compensation
payments, under the civil law.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concluded that there was no error or omission in the
facts considered by the DPP at the time, nor any error in the consideration of the
legal position. On page 1 0 3 of the report he summarises his conclusion that,
after considering at great length all the detailed material set out in the report,
that there is no material which might cause the DPP to re-consider the decisions
which have previously been taken. In my oral statem ent w hen I published the
report, I indicated that I, the Attorney General and the DPP accepted
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's conclusions.

I understand w hy people find it difficult to appreciate w h y no prosecutions took
place. There is no question about responsibility for the disaster. That has been
made clear over and over again in pubic statements, and through the substantial
amounts of compensation which have been made by South Yorkshire Police,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Sheffield City Council. The heart of the
issue is that acceptance of responsibility and liability under the civil law does not
amount to the serious degree of recklessness which would be necessary to
prove a criminal offence against any individual.

You are right that there is a lot of misunderstanding, fuelled by the media, about
how far the causes of the disaster have been established. There can be fe w
events in recent history which have been subject to such long and
comprehensive examination. W e have to explain at every opportunity that w h at
happened and w h y was established in detail by the Taylor Inquiry and has been
confirmed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report.




                                                 /




                                   JACK S TR A W
