                                                                                             KEITH MONKS LIMITED
                  K S IT W                s r iK S
                                                                                                Unit 3, Monkton Park
                                                                                             Farnham Trading Estate
   TKM/GK                  s .0                                                        Farnham, Surrey GU9 9PA. UK
                                                                                                   Tel: 0252-733717
   19th April, 1989.                                                                             Tlx 858606 K M A LG
                                                                                                   Fax:0252-

  Mrs. M argaret Thatcher,
  Prime Minister,
  10 Downing Street,
  LONDON.
  SW1

  Dear Mrs. Thatcher,

  Whilst the Falklands crisis was taking place I had the pleasure of being one of sixty
  entrepreneurs of industry to visit Downing Street, and I was very proud to be invited.

  I^was most distressed to hear of the Hillsborough football tragedy last Saturday. My
  flf e p a n y is very much involved in the insJjgJ^tjyQ ij^j^nubncackh^^                        to all
  s<Ws of areas, including sports grounds. I am m o s tc o n c e m e c P a T * ^ e v e r y low standard
  th a t is found in many first division gounds, never mind in other divisions of the Football
  League. What I find extrem ely concerning is th at clear announcements cannot be heard
  by sp ectato rs, w hether it is for casual announcements or emergency purposes. What
  is even more disturbing is th a t the entrances and exits of the grounds seem to have
  no facilities a t all to make annoucements as would have been made last Saturday.
  I watched the television during the Saturday afternoon and heard Mr. Jimmy Hill, the
  BBC C om m entator, mention on a number of occasions how poor sound systems are,
  and also unfortunately the very poor standard of com m entator on match days in the
  grounds. I am sure you will appreciate th at we have financial prospects for providing
  sound systems in grounds, but this is not the reason for my le tte r . As an active member
  of my Trade Association and having been in the Industry now for over thirty years,
  I, like many others, have tried to improve the very poor standard of public address
  in public places. I am quite prepared in any capacity, with no financial gain, to advise
  the Government, Football League and Football Association on this very im portant aspect
  of crowd control, and allowing people to hear clearly announcements in emergency
  cases.

  If there is anything I can do in any way, I would be only too pleased to assist, and
  I am sure there are others in my Trade Association who feel, as I do, th a t we would
  very much like to assist all we can.

  I hope you do not mind my writing a le tte r of this nature, but as a life-long Liverpool
  supporter since I was a very small boy standing in the "Kop", I feel perhaps more sad
  and upset than some other people feel.

  Best wishes.

  Yours sincerely,




 T.Fw Monks
 Director

 c .c. Football Association.
       Football League.
       Mr. Jimmy Hill, Fulham F.C.
                                                     N ational Association o f   A
Registered Office as above. No. 1514374

Directors: T. K. Monks, T. J. Monks                  NUB
                                                     BROADCASTERS
                                                                                 APRS
                                                                                 ▲                      p jr-ea N
                                                                                 i c e s f ' d i r - i Q a a a a ic s c iM t ie s n
