                               ROTHERHAM HOSPITAL
                                   NHS TRUST

                           Department of Histopathology
                            Rotherham District Hospital
                                 Moorgate Road
                               ROTHERHAM S60 2UD

                                             Tel: Rotherham (01709) 820000 Ext 5246
                                             Fax: 01709 824085
Dr D N SLATER FRCPath
Consultant Histopathologist & Cytopathologist
consultant Dermatopathologist

DNS/OK/hoffice. Your ref PW/98110/145/1


Mr. Mj . Pyne,
Home office,
Operational Policing Policy unit,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON SW1H 9AT                                       5 March 1998
Dear Mr. Pyne,

Re: HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

l am grateful for your letter dated 27th February relating to release of material considered
by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his scrutiny of evidence about the Hillsborough Disaster.

I note that you refer particularly to my letters dated 4th and 22nd December 1997.

I feel that l am unable to give my consent for release of either of these letters. Although
l am entirely happy with the accuracy and honesty of the contents, past and projected
potential future experiences firmly indicate that I should take this line of approach.

At the time of the Hillsborough inquests, I did my utmost to help and counsel relatives of
the deceased, on which l had undertaken autopsies. After a course of time, however, the
relationship between myself and certain relatives clearly changed for the worse.
Specifically l refer here to Mrs. Williams. Although I was always extremely courteous to her
letter queries, in the final instance l had to say 'enough is enough’, it was clear that
without this statement, correspondence would never end and that even then Mrs.
Williams would never accept the situation.

Following this, it is clear that Mrs. Williams sought the opinion of other expert pathologists
within the country, one in particular gave support fdr her increasing views as to whether
or not her son was alive at the times discussed in the Scrutiny.

The net outcome was implied criticism of my pathological findings and indeed myself on
the Cook Television Report. This then escalated in the Granada Television Programme
where there was strong implied criticism of a possibl e conspiracy between the coroner,
Pathologist and police Force. Fortunately, the witness involved (PC Bruder) has clearly
indicated that that was not the case. I have a formal complaint with the Broadcasting
Standards Commission in view of the innuendoes. This was suspended in view of the
Scrutiny but is now going forward. Another complaint has been lodged in view of the
reshowing. My complaint involves the Kevin Williams case.

During all this time, l was not privileged to see the reports of Mrs. Williams' expert
pathology witnesses, was not invited to discuss the case with them and was not given the
opportunity to respond. I just had to hear them on televisiion!

With this disturbing background, one can now reasonably project the future if l give my
consent. I note that you say evidence will only be released to Mrs. Williams. However, in
reality, past experience indicates that release will be extensive. Previous experience with
Mrs. Williams gives good clues as to what will happen. One can reasonably project, I feel,
word by word dissection of my letters with any debatable or possible inappropriate points
yet again being dissected by another string of expert witnesses. Then, yet again, more
television programmes indicating how myself and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith could have
been wrong!

Having had a totally impartial scrutiny of the evidence, one would hope that would now
be the final end of the unfortunate story relating to Hillsborough, consent to release the
correspondence, l feel, would set off a new train of events which could drag in an
unfortunate way for many more years.

I feel it reasonable to say at this point in time that considerable consideration has always
been given to the deceased, the relatives, the police force and others involved. At no
time has any consideration been given to the pathologists involved. Having now been
exposed to Hillsborough for many years, l was now rather looking forward to a period
with peace of mind and freedom from ongoing professional criticism.

My letter dated the 4th December was a general letter offered by myself, not requested
by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. My letter dated the 22nd December was a specific response
to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. as far as l can see, the area covered was not, however,
included in the final report. This related predominantly (but not entirely) to comments
on Mrs. Williams' expert witness and not the original Hillsborough evidence.

I would have been happy for parts or all of the letters to have been used in the Scrutiny
Report, if deemed appropriate by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. I had full faith in his legal
independence. I had not envisaged, however, that if not used that they would be
released.

       uncerely,




         ER
consultant         lathologist
