                                 01729 840602
01/12   ’ 97 0 8 : 51.   FAX 01.729 8 40 602               TREVOR H IC KS                                             ®oi f^§):
                                                                                          ••   :          1981         %v\
                                                       C 2.1                 (X ; M/ Mx.&LctX^
                                                                                       K / Hoc^ t Cl -


        ■I                                          C A c /t
                                                                                    b-Ay J & y J ajuI'K
        To:               Rt Hon Jack Straw MP                   I /f lL -         Aa /' U w f l i ^
        Of:               Home Secretary                                          ✓V       U c /x ^
        Facsimile:        0171-273-3965                                             f V        £9 uT^~>         ,            :

        Pages:            1, including this cover sheet.

        Date:             December 1, 1997



        re -   Hillsborough Scrutiny



        further to our letter of the 9th November herewith our concerns at terms of reference etc.

        We have not released this to the media at this time.

        Yours sinceret



        Trevor Hicks




                                                                                               From the desk erf...

                                                                                                     T rew Hicks
                                                                                                        Chairman
                                                                                                           HFSG
01/12    '97 08:51   FAX 01729 840002                 TREVOR HICKS                                              @02


    vSBORot,                                                                                 ,SBORot




                                                                                              sup?&
                           Hillsborough Family Support Group

        Rt Hon Jack Straw MP -Home Secretary
        Home Office
        Queen Anne’s Gate
        London SW1 9AT


        BO"1November 1997


        Dear Mr Straw,

        re: Hillsborough Scrutiny

        You wiU recall that in our letter of 9th November, we said we would write to you to highlight the
        Group's concerns relating to the Terms of Reference of the Hillsborough Scrutiny.

        At the outset I would point out that this letter is not intended to undermine the appointment and/ or
        foie of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. Indeed, we are pleased that he took the time and trouble to meet
        the families in Liverpool and you are aware that we have accepted, admittedly with some reservation,
        his apology for the offensive gaffe about latecomers.

         I trust you will concede that this is in keeping with the responsible attitude our group has always
         adopted and that our forbearance should not to be seen as weakness or diminution of our resolve.

         We remain committed to assisting the Scrutiny, however we have considerable disquiet at some areas
         of the Terms of Reference and /or the interpretation that appears to have been adopted.

         This letter seeks clarification of these areas and places on the record our deep concerns.

         The families' initial reaction to your statement to the House of Commons on 30th June was positive and
         we felt that you seemed determined that the Scrutiny would be a thorough and just one. Our view was
         based on the wording of your statement, your demeanor and responses to questions both on the floor
         of the House and during our meetings.
          We felt that your statement was balanced, gave a clear commitment and culminated by “saying it all
          in the last few words:-
          In our view it represented a huge step in the right direction and understandably raised within the group
          a legitimate expectation of the eventual attainment ofjustice.

                                                VICE-CHAIRMAN / SECRETARY                     TREASURER
 CHAIRMAN                                                                                     Mrs. J. Travnor
                                                P. Hammond
 T. Hicks
01/12    '97 08:51    FAX 01729 840602                  TREVOR HICKS                                          @03




    Sadly that view is changing and we are now concerned that the “legal small print” rather than the spirit
    of your statement is being applied. It may be that our expectations were too high or that our treatment
    over the last eight years has jaundiced our judgement but we would respectfully suggest that Lord
    Justice Stuart-Smith's practical interpretation of the Terms of Reference of the Scrutiny appear to us to
    be at variance with your stated intentions.

        There are five major areas of concem:-

               1)     Relationship with the Divisional Court/ Judicial Review

               2)     Definition of “new” evidence

               3)     Attorney General / Director of Public Prosecutions

               4)     no “limited” Inquiry

               5)     prima facia case /burden of proof

        1) Relationship with the Divisional Court

        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has repeatedly stated that he is not a Court of Appeal of the Divisional Court
        and that he cannot reverse their findings even if he thought they were wrong.

        If this is the case, it presents us the families with insurmountable difficulties and with no prospect of
        remedy. It effectively renders the whole scrutiny a waste of time and money.

        As you are probably aware, the Judicial Review proceedings involved only six of the families and to a
        very great extent concentrated on the legal process at the court of first instant. It also took place
        before much of the current evidence was in the public domain and/or the families possession.

        However, the Divisional Court made certain findings which arguably could be deemed to apply to all
        families. For example, the Court upheld the coroners imposition of the 3.15 cut-off time and as you are
        well aware that is one of the major issues which continue to concern families. The Coroners decision
        may have been lawful but it is manifestly unjust and has denied us the opportunity to investigate critical
        life or death actions (or non action!).

         It seems manifestly unjust that the whole of the Hillsborough Family Support Group now appear to be
         saddled with that decision without the Court having heard any details relevant to these other cases.

         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has on occasions conceded that if there is fresh evidence that puts a different
         complexion on the decision of the High Court then the matter may have to be reconsidered.

         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also said that he does not have the power to order either a fresh judicial
         inquiry or a re-opening of the Taylor Inquiry. Neither is he a Court of Appeal. What then is his role?
         What does he have the power to do?
         Obviously, there is a great deal of confusion and we are at a loss to say with any certainty just what
         families can hope to achieve out of this Scrutiny.

         We arc of course unable to take legal advice on this confusion as the Scrutiny is unprecedented.
    01/12    '97 08:51    FAX 01729 840602                  TREVOR HICKS                                        @04




       We trust you will agree that this is a major problem and is a clearly a matter upon which families (and
       in our view, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith!) require and indeed are entitled to urgent clarification.

       2) Definition of “New Evidence”

       In your statement to the House you said:

                 (Para 18 ) We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other
                 evidence which has been submitted. He will also consider anyfurther material which
                 interested parties wish to submit.

       It is our belief that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith seems to be restricting the Scrutiny to a definition of
       “fresh evidence” much narrower than the above statement. From the many comments contained in the
       transcripts of meetings we believe he is only really considering anything which could have affected:

       i)      the outcome of Lord Taylor's Inquiry,
       ii)the verdict of the jury at the inquest;
       iii)    the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions not to take criminal proceedings against any
               person in connection with the disaster; or
™      iv)      the decision not to pursue disciplinary proceedings against any police officer.

       It is the Group’s submission that such a narrow interpretation is fundamentally flawed for the following
       reasons:-

        a)        This does not satisfy the Terms of Reference (page 9 line 13) - 'To ascertain whether any
                  evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15thApril 1989 which
                  was not available; ”
        b)        It is not consistent with Terms of Reference (page 9 line 26):- ‘To draw to their attention any ^
                  evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to their respective duties:..

        c)        It seems to disallow the final sentence (page 9 line 28) :- “ and to advise whether there is any
                   other action which should be taken in the public interest. ”

        It       be argued however that this definition is entirely consistent with (page 9 line 37)

                   “First to advise me whether any evidence not previously available is o f such significance as to
                  justify establishment by the Secretary o f State for the Home Department o f afurtherfu ll
                  public enquiry;....

        Does this last statement indicate you have therefore already ruled out a limited form of public inquiry?

         In our meeting with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on 30th September he indicated (transcript p3 lines 10-
         11 & 20-21) broad agreement with our concession in the written submission that it may not be sensible
         or even practical to re-run a full public enquiry and/or foil inquests after all this time . We made that
         observation in the spirit of sensible compromise but are now concerned that it will be used against us in
         an “all or nothing” decision process.

            Which is it to be and will Lord Justice Stuart-Smith be the final arbitrator ??

                                                                                                   Page 3 of         9
01/12      '97 08:51   FAX 01729 840602                 TREVOR HICKS                                           @05




    In the context of new evidence and/or its interpretation we would like to add the following comments:-

    i)          The outcome of the lad fll iBfluiffi

                As you are aware, Lord Taylor was only concerned with events which happened at the
                Ground. Therefore, his Inquiry did not deal with, for example, whether or not facilities at
                the Northern General Hospital were adequate.

                  This is of major concern to famines as subsequent to the inquest it emerged that Mure to
                 activate the major disaster plan earlier meant that only a few staff had to cope with a large
                 clinical workload in addition to implementing the major incident plan. This information was
                 contained in an article in the British Medical Journal and is completely at odds with evidence
                 given to Lord Justice Taylor.
                 Although it may not have affected Lord Taylor’s principal finding (that the primary cause of
                 the disaster was loss ofpolice control) in itself it merits further investigation in the context
                 of not only safety at sporting events, but emergency planning as a whole.

Q    ii)         Ih sY sid k loftM jiax^ ^ Iiiavisst

                 This is the area which is causing the greatest concern to families. Such a narrow
                 interpretation of your Terms of Reference could potentially undermine the credibility of the
                 Scrutiny. If the verdict is the only aspect of the Inquest which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is
                 examining, then in effect he is empanelling himself as a twelfth juror which cannot be right.
                 Further, this approach ignores the function of an inquest which is to seek out and record as
                 many of the facts concerning the death as the public interest requires.

                  Families are deeply embittered by the 3.15 pm cut-off time imposed at the inquest. This
                  single act, almost by itself was sufficient to vitiate the legitimacy of the inquest as it
                  prevented any meaningful examination of the response of the emergency services.

                  Surely the public interest requires that such an important aspect requires vigorous scrutiny.
                  Whilst Lord Justice Taylor considered some aspects of the response of the emergency
                  services, in the main he attributed any failings to the feet that the police were slow to
                  recognise the extent of the disaster. He may be forgiven for perhaps presuming that this was
                  a matter which would be more thoroughly investigated at the inquest but the feet of the
                  matter is that it was not.
                   Therefore, a major aspect of the disaster has never been felly examined. This will remain the
                   case unless Lord Justice Stuart-Smith can be persuaded or instructed to widen his
                   interpretation of the Terms of Reference.

                   The Judge's insistence that he will only be persuaded by new evidence which would have
                   resulted in a verdict ofunlawful killing feils to acknowledge families' expectations at the
                   inquest that all the circumstances related to their loved ones deaths would be investigated
                   and relevant questions answered, irrespective of the verdict.




                                                                                                 Page 4 of           9
01/12   '97 08:51     FAX 01729 840602                  TREVOR HICKS                                            @06




              The decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions not to take criminal proceedings against
              anv person in connection with the disaster.

               In relation to the above the HFSG is particularly concerned that it is not in a position to say
               how any new evidence could affect the decision of the DPP not to prosecute as we have
               never had access to the documentation upon which the DPP originally reached his decision,
               neither do we know what possible charges were considered by the DPP. For example, did
               he consider the common law offence of misconduct in public office?

               We are also concerned with the content and implications of Dru Sharpling’s (Chief Crown
               Prosecutor - Crown Prosecution Service) letter written to us on the 30thJune 1997- the
               very day you announced the scrutiny!!

               A copy is attached for we draw your attention to the phrase

               “ At this stage the CPS takes the view that the material so far presented does notjustify
               asking the police to re-open the investigation ”
                The timing and content hardly inspires us to believe in an open and fair appraisal by the
                scrutiny. The CPS already seems to have an entrenched position and we seek assurance that
                Lord Justice Stuart-Smith Mill not be limited by them.


                The fW.kinn ?nt to pursue disciplinary proceedings against m . PQifce offices

                The Group's concerns here mirror those outlined at iii) above insofar as we do not know the
                nature and extent of the evidence before the PCA. Nor are we aware of any "defence"
                advanced by Messrs Duckenfield and Murray.

                We are only too aware that Duckenfield was allowed to retire on ill-health grounds and
                Murray was not proceeded against- despite neglect of duty charges being initiated against
                them both. The “evidence” was irrelevant to these decisions and the reasons they were
                taken.
                    Paragraph 10 of your statement dealt with the Police Complaints Authority preferring
                    charges for neglect of duty against Duckenfield and Murray and the lack of proceedings
                    ultimately.
                    The robust cross-party interventions and questions at the end of your statement clearly
                    illustrated the universal dissatisfection that exists with Police Discipline matters in practise.
                    Our view is that the whole thing has became a travesty of farcical proportions !

                    Clearly, in the absence of relevant information, it is difficult for us to see how we can
                    evaluate any new evidence with a view to telling Lord Justice Stuart-Smith how this would
                    have affected either section iii) or iv) above. The CPS letter and their track record todate
                    does not inspire confidence and the total lack of information moves this into the distrust
                    zone. We are therefore totally dependant on the freedom to investigate and the robust
                    intentions of Lord Justice Stuart Smith. Please make sure he feels able to look at, comment,
                    and mnlfp recommendations, if required, in these areas.
12 '97 08:51    FAX 01729 840602                TREVOR HICKS                                         12107



 31 Attorney General/ DPP

 We feel the comments within (2) above clearly show our concern and we need say no more, other
 than to reinforce our concern and incredulity at their letter of the 30thJune.

 41 No limited inquiry

 Again, we merely repeat what we said earlier under (2c)

 SlPrima Facie Case/ Burden of proof.

 We cautiously welcomed this scrutiny in the belief that its task was to examine whether there was a
 prima fecie case to be answered. We accepted the methodology and timetable in this belief.

 It is of great concern that we feel that the “burden of proof’ placed upon us is now “beyond all
 reasonable doubt”. We feel that the femilies are being expected to prove everything, with minimal
 access to information, information that is being/ has been subject to delays by South Yorkshire Police,
 who unlike the HFSG seem to have infinite resources throughout this scrutiny, which, from the
 families point of view is proceeding with undue, almost indecent, haste. The task started late through
 no fault of ours, the burden has been shifted to being upon us and yet it is expected to remain within
 the timetable drawn up in June .

  Again, we seek clarification for ourselves (and perhaps Lord Justice Stuart Smith!) Is this a scrutiny
  prior to the proceedings or are these the proceedings 7?

  I apologise for the length and complexity of this letter but trust you can understand our concerns
  having considered the above comments. It is important that these matters are dealt with now lest we
  have to cry “foul” later and the whole process is a waste of time and resource, achieving nothing but
  heightening the acrimony that already exists. We looked to new Labour for justice at last, please don t
  let administrative convenience, inter-departmental wrangling, political dogma or fear of loss of face
  affect the aims of this process .

  I close with a repeat of your words-

             “We owe it to everyone touched by the tragedy, but above all to thefamilies o f those who
             died, to get to the bottom o f this matter once andfor all


   Yours sine&elv



   Trevor Hicks
   Chairman - HFSG.
01/12    '97 08:51      PAX 01729 840602                        TREVOR HICKS                                                             011




    MUa D. H. Sharpling
    Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                                         CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                         50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                                         London EC4M TEX


                                                                                                          Switchboard'   0171-273 8000
                                                                                                               DX No:    300850 Ludgate EC4
     iMr T Hicks
      Chairman
      ^ u a u i r n u of HFSG
                      ________                                                      Facsimile: 0171-215 8 0 5 0

                                                                                  D in a Lme:     0171•   273 1225
                                                                                Our Referenct:


                                                                                Your Rtferenct:



                                                                                                           30 June 1997

/

                   M /             Ik e tc *
        HILLSBOROUGH
        Although we have not corresponded personally                                                                               t0
        express my deepest sympathy for your tragic loss in the Hillsborough Disaster.

        I am aware that you have been in contact with my colleague George Croston m York and I
        thoueht it appropriate to write to you to let you know the up to date position. As you know,
        th„ rVrvwn Prosecution Service has been considering very carefully papers and tapes m
          i t tn the dicaster In addition we have examined the material supplied by you on behalf
                                                      in your tetter addressed to * e “     of Public
         Prosecutions, Dame Barbara Mills QC, togellier with material supplied by Ms Adiington m
         her letter of 4 March 1997.
         I know you have heard the announcement by the Home Secretary that there is to be an
         independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists                        "“ e.n0t
         previously available relating to the Hillsborough Disaster. The terms of reference are.

                  To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
                  Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:
                             (a)     To the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

                                      To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the
                                      purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or

                             (c)     To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to police
                                      disciplinary matters;




                                      Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
    01/12    ’97 08:51    FAX 01729 840602               TREVOR HICKS                                         @12




                  And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of
                  such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
                  Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their
                  attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
                  their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which should
                  be taken in the public interest.

        It may be helpful if I explain the role of the CPS in relation to the Hillsborough Disaster to
        help you put this announcement in context so far as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
        responsible for the prosecution of all criminal cases resulting from police investigations in
        England and Wales (with the exception of certain minor offences). The police are
        responsible for investigating offences and for deciding whether or not to charge or summons
        an offender.
        In recent months, senior lawyers within the CPS have examined large quantities of material
        arising from the Hillsborough disaster. The purpose of considering this material was to
        ascertain whether there was sufficient evidence to start a criminal prosecution. If the
        evidence was sufficient, the CPS would invite the police to conduct a further formal
^       investigation and prepare a file for consideration of criminal charges against named
        individuals.
            At this stage the Crown Prosecution Service takes the view that the material so far presented
            does not justify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

            In the light of the decision of the Home Secretary to institute an independent scrutiny, the
            CPS will consider the matter again when the outcome of that scrutiny is known. I can assure
            you that the CPS will assist the independent scrutiny in whatever way it can and we will
            carefully examine its findings before making any further decisions.

            There are two outstanding issues upon which you await a reply, they are:

                    •      the request for a meeting (as mentioned in the opinion of Alun Jones QC dated
                           3 March 1997); and

                    •      a considered reply to your fax of 8 April 1997, enclosing your comments on
                           the statement of South Yorkshire police dated 1 April 1997.

             In relation to both of these, the Home Secretary’s announcement means that you can be
             assured that there is to be an independent scrutiny to establish whether material not
             previously considered might have an impact on decisions to be made, as well as whether
             there should be a further public enquiry. I imagine you will be inviting those responsible for
             the scrutiny to examine the material referred to by Alun Jones QC as well as your comments
             in relation to the South Yorkshire police press statement of 1 April 1997. I think the proper
             course would be for these issues to be considered by the independent scrutiny before any
             meeting is held with the CPS. I am particularly anxious to avoid any suggestion or
              impression that the CPS has in any way pre-judged the outcome of the independent scrutiny.
              I am sure you will appreciate the importance of ensuring that everything is done properly and
              in the right order. I will write to you again when the outcome of the scrutiny is known.
    01/12   '97 08:51   FAX 01729 840602              TREVOR HICKS



%




        I have sent a letter similar to this one to Ms Adlington.

        I hope that this letter is helpful to you.




        Dru Sharpling (Miss)
        Chief Crown Prosecutor
      01/12       '97 08:51       FAX 01729 840602          TREVOR HICKS                                         114




                                                                                                             £
                                                                                         V z s r r *
                  sup'ftfr                                                                  SUP?<$'
                                        Hillsborough Family Support Group




                                  fc g fe e

                                                                                                                       ; st'

                                                     n   & £)>           7 -t                       r r
% o t -




5 *       r
                                  Woo           #*5              ^> 7              S o      /C      S tS e ?




                                    (£                            .
      /       /   ^




                                    U   fa                Y0 r          & e> * *




I# * *                -M      f                                     ^




                                                     VICE-CHAIRMAN / SECRETARY             TREASURER
      CHAIRMAN
                                                     P. Hammond                            Mrs. 1. Travnor
      T. Hicks
