h s .4.12/hillsb.peb


From:   P E Bolton                          cc   Miss Snow
        G2 Division                              Ms Craig
        X3322                                    Miss Nicholson
                                                 Ms Harrison
        12 April 1990                            Mr Chilcot
                                                 Mr Boys Smith
                                                 Mr Goddard
                                                 Miss Edwards, F2
                                                 Mr Mould
                                                 Mr F Smith
                                                 Mr Haslam
                                                 Mr Taylor

Mr Walters



HILLSBOROUGH MEMORIAL SERVICE:   15 APRIL

If the Home Secretary attends the memorial service at Anfield on
15 April, he may find it helpful to have sight of the attached
brief notes to remind him on the state of play on the main
current issues.

2.   I understand that this is not an occasion on which there
will be any pre-arranged press call, but there may well be
questions in the course of conversation.

3.   The Home Secretary will remember that he was unable to be
present at the meeting which was requested by the Football
Association and the Football League (Mr Millichip is Chairman of
the Association; Mr Fox of the League) .      The meeting with
Lord Ferrers was successful but the Home Secretary may wish to
apologise, if the occasion presents itself, for his inability to
be present.




                                                 P E BOLTON
h s .4.12/hillsb.peb



BRIEFING ON POINTS LIKELY TO BE RAISED IF THE HOME SECRETARY IS
QUESTIONED ON THE OCCASION OF THE MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR
HILLSBOROUGH VICTIMS ON 15 APRIL


ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION


Government accepts Lord- Justice Taylor's target dates for all
seated accommodation (1994 for First and Second Division clubs,
1999 for Third and Fourth).


Football League and Football Association fully accept the need
to move towards all seated grounds; encouraged by their response.


Up to clubs to get on with it in the first instance.


Prepared to consider some departure from the interim timetable
if that helps to get the job done properly and safety is not
compromised as a result.


FINANCE FOR ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION


Football Trust has already pledged £75 million.


Government has provided another £100 million through reduction
in   pools   betting   tax   (dependent   solely   on   suitable   legal
arrangements being made between the Pools Promoters Association,
the Football Trust and the Football League all well in hand).


Hope the Football Association Authorities can themselves divert
some of their income for this purpose as Lord Justice Taylor has
suggested.


Must remember that some clubs are well able to meet some or all
of the costs themselves; appropriate that they should do so.
ENFORCEMENT OF ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION


Responsibility of the clubs in the first instance.


Government will rely on            advice       from the   Football     Licensing
Authority on progress.


If   necessary     Government      will    direct    the   Football     Licensing
Authority    to    include      specific    conditions     on    seating   in the
licence for particular grounds.


Not expecting local authorities to use safety certificates to
bring about all seated accommodation.


Their role is to ensure that where                   seated     accommodation   is
provided it is provided safely.


FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY


Hope that the FLA will be appointed from 1 June 1990.


Membership not yet decided:             looking for people who will bring
relevant expert knowledge.


Two main powers:


      the licensing scheme which will address safety and public
      order issues and be available to bring about all seated
      accommodation;


      to review the way in which local authorities carry out their
      safety functions.


Unrealistic       to   expect     the     FLA   to   become     fully   effective
overnight?    hence    the   importance that clubs themselves              should
respond to Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations themselves in
the first instance.
POSITION IN SCOTLAND


(Michael Forsyth has told Scottish clubs that they are expected
to comply with Taylor's overall objectives but the departures
from the interim timetable may be possible.)


Completely     consistent   with    our   line   in   England   and     Wales;
(Lord Ferrers has already discussed this with the Football League
and the Football Association).


Difference is solely that the remit of the Football Licensing
Authority will not extend to Scotland, therefore no powers of
enforcement.


OTHER SPORTS


We will be discussing the implications of the Taylor report with
representatives of other sports shortly.              Present thoughts are
that we would wish to see at least the national rugby stadia
move   towards    all   seated     accommodation      but   recognise     that
resources may not be available to require               it at other rugby
grounds (whether rugby union or rugby league).


Conscious however that the problems of hooliganism and crowd
disorder   are   essentially     a problem   for associated       football;
situation therefore not so serious at rugby grounds.


NEW OFFENCES


Still considering Lord Justice Taylor's proposals.


COST OF POLICING FOOTBALL MATCHES


Think it proper that so far as practicable the cost of policing
matches inside the grounds should be borne by the clubs.


Charges should be realistic but should nevertheless take account
of local circumstances.
Some assistance is nevertheless provided by the Football Trust
with policing         costs     and       with    the     cost    of    close    circuit
television.


HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP


Chairman is Trevor Hicks              (wife Jenni) who lost 2 daughters at
Hillsborough.  He has asked to meet Lord Ferrers and this has
been arranged for 3 May.


The group has had a number of meetings with sympathetic members
in the Commons.


They   are   interested       in    improved      safety     at   football grounds;
provide mutual support for the bereaved;                          and   seek    improved
arrangements for compensating victims.


They are very critical of recent statements by South Yorkshire
police indicating that Lord Justice Taylor underestimates the
consequence of drinking by Liverpool fans.


[Important    to     remember      that     there was       no    evidence      that    the
victims at Hillsborough had been misbehaving; many of them were
well-behaved        early   arrivals        who    were    at     the   front    of     the
terracing.]


FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS


There are two National             Supporters       Associations        (the National
Federation     of     Football       Supporters         Clubs     and   the     Football
Supporters Association). Neither body is heavyweight.                           They had
a recent meeting with              Lord    Ferrers.        They    are anxious         that
supporters should be represented on the FLA.                       They were invited
to suggest a nomination.


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


(Chief Constable has expressed publicly his surprise that Taylor
understated the contribution that drinking by fans made to the
tragedy (article in Sheffield Star); similar comments by less
senior officers).


Lord Justice Taylor's conclusion on the immediate .cause of the
tragedy was failure when gate C was opened to cut off access to
the central pens which were already overfull.


No   reason   to   disagree   with   his   conclusion.   If   there   were
contributory factors, these          will be aired at the inquest or in
the civil proceedings.
