CHAPTER 6


Miscellaneous


Television programmes

1.    Not unnaturally the Hillsborough disaster has attracted a lot of media coverage over
      the years. Three television programmes I think are particularly significant, and I
      think it right to offer brief comments on these.

2.    The first is a ‘First Tuesday’ programme, ‘Disaster at Hillsborough', broadcast by
      Yorkshire Television in February 1990. It is in my view a fair and balanced
      account, using much original material, including scenes taken from police camera 5
      after 15.02 (being part of the clip shown to the jury as C539). The commentary
      closely corresponds with Lord Taylor’s findings.

3.    The second is an episode of the ‘Cook Report' (Yorkshire Television) shown in June
      1994. This concentrated on the case of Kevin Williams. A number of statements
      made in the course of the programme are in my opinion not substantiated, for
      reasons I set out when discussing the Kevin Williams case earlier. For example -

                Roger Cook ‘Evidence previously disregarded or altered with duress and
                witnesses previously ignored demonstrate that Kevin and others could be
                alive today”.

                Sir Malcolm Thornton MP “ The truth seems to have been suppressed    -


                policemen and women on the spot were ‘leaned on ’ by their colleagues to
                change their evidence.”

                 Roger Cook “If evidence that (Kevin) was alive at five to four had been
                 allowed to stand, events after 3.15 would have had to be investigated” (by
                 the Inquest).


4.    The third is the Granada Television programme ‘Hillsborough ’ shown on 5
      December 1996. This is a highly emotive and powerful drama based on
      Hillsborough and the Inquest. It portrays most graphically the appalling grief of the
      bereaved and their disillusion with the Inquest. It is not always easy for the viewer
      of this programme to tell what is reconstruction and what is original video footage
      taken on the day.

 5.   I do not have much doubt that this programme played a substantial part in the
       decision to set up my scrutiny. It is not for me to comment on the accuracy of the
       impressions which it gives as a whole. But in so far as it suggests that police
      videotapes were suppressed or destroyed, it is not accurate. The programme also
      relies on Mr Houldsworth’s assertions, made for the first time at about this time,
      that he could see from police cameras 5 and 3 as relayed in the Club Control Room
      that pens 3 and 4 were already full before Gate C was opened. For reasons I have
      set out at length, I do not accept this evidence.


Ten unresolved questions?

6.    At the time of the ‘Hillsborough’ television programme in 1996 the programme
      makers, Granada Television, wrote to Mr David Maclean MP, then a Minister at the
      Home Office, with a list of what they said were ten unresolved questions about the
      disaster. Most of these questions were in my view clearly answered by Lord Taylor’s
      Inquiry. Nevertheless I have looked at them and set out the answers in Appendix 10.


The state of the ground

7.    At a late stage of my scrutiny I was invited by the South Yorkshire Police to consider
      the evidence of Mr Noel Bume, BSc(Eng), ACGI, FICE, FI.StructE., FCIOB, FFB,
      ACI ACG, FBAE. Mr Bume is a structural engineer who was instructed in July 1989
      to report on and advise the South Yorkshire Police Authority on the safety and
      structural aspects of the Hillsborough ground, in particular with a view to the
      anticipated civil proceedings. He produced a report, dated August 1990, and gave oral
      evidence in the contribution proceedings heard before the Hon Mr Justice Jowitt
      which began on 2 October 1990. His evidence was therefore not available at the time
      of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and he was not called to give evidence at the Inquest.


Mr Burne 's evidence

8.     In his Report Mr Bume dealt with the following matters:

              (a)      Turnstiles - poor labelling and inadequate number

              (b)      Lack of proper direction signs in the concourse

              (c)      Lack of control system for monitoring numbers in each pen

              (d)      Overall capacity of Leppings Lane Terraces overestimated

              (e)      Incorrect slope of the tunnel

              (f)   Exits from the pens not signed and inadequate for emergency
              evacuation

              (g) Crush barriers - poorly placed, too low, of inadequate strength and
              insufficient in number
9.     In Mr Bume’s view there were many breaches of the advice and recommendations
       contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide) to such an extent
       that his overall opinion was:

               “As a whole, the West Terrace was unsafe by reason o f neglect to conform to
                the primary recommendations and obligations o f the Green Guide, among
               others. ”

10.    On 5 October 1990 Mr Bume gave evidence before the Hon Mr Justice Jowitt in the
       contribution proceedings. Before his evidence was completed or tested in cross-
       examination, the proceedings were settled. It is reasonable to assume that Mr Bume’s
       opinion was a material factor in persuading the Club and Eastwood and Partners to
       make a substantial contribution to what was then estimated to be the overall cost of
       the claims.

11.    For the most part the matters that Mr Bume criticised were fully considered by
       Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, and Lord Taylor made a number of findings consistent with
       Mr Bume’s criticisms, some of which I have referred to in Chapter 1 (paragraphs 47
       and 48). But there are two matters which Mr Bume pointed to which the police
       suggest were either not considered or not fully considered at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.


Height o f the crush barriers

12.    The first relates to the height of the crush barriers. The recommended height for crush
       barriers in the Green Guide is between 1,02m and 1.12m with a preferred height of
        1.1m. This is measured above the nosing of that part of the step immediately behind
       the barrier. According to Mr Bume, adopting this method of measurement, the .
       effective height of crush barrier 124A (the one which collapsed in pen 3) was between
        .865 - .915m, and more importantly the height of the barrier immediately behind,
       namely 136, was only .745 - .775m; barrier 136A (which was diagonally between
       barrier 124A and the entrance to the tunnel) was .765 - ,785m.

13.    Mr Bume identified three disadvantages resulting from too low a crush barrier. First,
       if the barrier is at the level of the upper leg and below the groin it is not anatomically
       in the best position and the person behind it cannot use his arms to push away from
       the barrier. This is not particularly relevant in the circumstances of extreme
       overcrowding. Secondly, the upper part of the body of a person behind the crush
       barrier is not restrained by it, so that the load is transferred from those behind to those
       in front, thereby imposing an excessive load on the next barrier. Finally, there will be
       a downward component in the forces exercised on the barrier in addition to a
       horizontal one, which tends to make it more vulnerable to collapse under conditions of
       extreme pressure.

 14.   There is little doubt that the failure of barrier 124A contributed to the substantially
        larger number of deaths in pen 3 and in particular in the area between barrier 124A
        and the perimeter fence. These points could therefore be of some significance.
15.    Dr Nicholson, who was a Chartered Engineer and Deputy Director of the Research
       and Laboratory Services Division of the Health and Safety Executive, made a written
       report to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. He also gave evidence at the inquest. He did not deal
       with these specific matters; but in his oral evidence at the inquest he considered that
       one of the important causes of the collapse of barrier 124A was that there was a gap in
       the barrier behind, between barriers 136 and 136A, with the result that there was
       nothing to break the density of the crowd bearing on barrier 124A. and it may well be
       that this is a more important factor in causing the failure of barrier 124A than those
       suggested by Mr Bume relating to the height of the barriers.


Capacity o f the Leppings Lane terrace

16.    The second matter which Mr Bume pointed to relates to the overall capacity of the
       Leppings Lane terrace. The overall capacity for the terrace had been calculated by
       Eastwood and Partners, the consulting engineers to Sheffield Wednesday Football
       Club, and accepted by the City Council at 10,100. This was divided between 2,900 to
       the North West Terrace and 7,200 for the remainder, calculated at the rate of 54
       spectators per 10 sq meters. The size of the area in question was not based on a
       survey of the ground by Eastwood and Partners, but on a drawing produced by the
       Club. In December 1989 (after Lord Taylor’s interim report) the area was measured
       and this revealed that the size of the North West Terrace as shown on the Club’s
       drawing was too great. Adopting the correct measurement, at the rate of 54 spectators
       per 10 sq meters the capacity of the North West Terrace was only 2,242. There was
       therefore an excess of 658 or 22.6% allowed in this area.

17.    In paragraphs 137 to 142 of his Interim Report, Lord Taylor dealt with the correct
        calculation of the capacity for pens 3 and 4. These had been calculated by Eastwood
        and Partners at 1,200 for pen 3 and 1,000 for pen 4. These figures would have been
        too high even if the terraces complied with the Green Guide recommendations. If
        they had complied with the Green Guide the figures should have been 1,015 and
         1,036 respectively. But they did not and Lord Taylor calculated that the capacities of
        pens 3 and 4 should have been 822 and 871 respectively, a total of 507 less than the
        2,200 allocated.

18.    It is not clear whether the other pens on the Leppings Lane terraces, numbers 1 , 2 , 6
        and 7 complied as to layout, position and size of crush barriers, means of access and
        gangways with the Green Guide. It seems unlikely that they did. But even assuming
        that they did, and that it was appropriate to calculate the capacity of these pens on the
        basis of 54 spectators per 10 sq meters, it is apparent that the capacity overall was
        overestimated by 1,165, ie 658 in the North West Terraces and 507 in pens 3 and 4.
        The result would be that an excessive number of tickets were sold over the safe
        capacity.

 19.   The individual pens were not segregated and did not have separate turnstiles, and
       spectators naturally tended to congregate in the central pens 3 and 4 because these
       were the ones behind the goal. The overstatement of the capacity of the Leppings
       Lane terraces is clearly therefore a matter of some importance. Lord Taylor was
       aware of part of the problem, but it does not seem that he was aware of the
       overstatement of the size of the North West Terrace and it is not clear whether an
       adjustment for non-compliance with the Green Guide should have been made in
       relation to the pens other than 3 and 4.

20.    These matters do not give grounds for re-opening the Judicial Inquiry or any other
       proceedings. Indeed it is not suggested by the police that they do. Lord Taylor
       might, if he had known of them, have criticised Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
       their consultant engineers, and those responsible for licensing the ground in more
       stringent terms than he did, but I do not consider that there would have been any
       question of his changing his central conclusion, borne out as it is by the overwhelming
       mass of the evidence, that the primary cause of the disaster was a failure of police
       control. However, if the responsibility of the other parties was somewhat greater than
       had earlier been appreciated, that might have a bearing on any reconsideration of
       criminal proceedings against police officers.



Further complaints about the Inquest

21.    In further very late submissions dated 11 December 1997, Junior Counsel for the
       Family Support Group raised two further complaints about the Inquest. The first
       concerns the Coroner’s summing-up. Counsel said that in relation to the state of the
       central pens at 14.52 he directed the jury to reach ‘a factual conclusion which was
       in direct conflict with the conclusions reached by Lord Taylor’ and by so doing he
       distorted the evidence.

22.    This has nothing to do with any fresh evidence and strictly speaking therefore does
       not call for comment from me. But lest it be given credence it is I think only fair to
       the Coroner that I say something. Counsel cites three passages. When his
       summing-up is read as a whole, it seems to me that the Coroner dealt fully and
       fairly with all the evidence.

23.    He did not direct the jury to make particular findings of fact and he did not usurp he
       jury’s function. Had he done so, I have no doubt that it would have been
       challenged in the Divisional Court. Complaint was made there of his directions to
       the jury on law, but not of his summary of the facts.

24.     Secondly, Junior Counsel for the Family Support Group criticised the Coroner’s
        ruling about the use of transcripts in cross examination. This again has nothing to
        do with fresh evidence. It is a point which if there was any substance in it, could
        and should have been raised in the Divisional Court.

 25.    Under cover of a letter dated 17 December 1997 the Solicitor for the Family
        Support Group sent me “an analysis of the major variances between the findings of
        Lord Justice Taylor and the summing-up of Dr Popper”. The analysis does not
        contain any fresh evidence. Moreover it appears to confuse the function of Lord
      Taylor in weighing conflicting evidence and making his findings according to his
      view of its reliability, and the function of the Coroner who has to sum up the
      evidence so that the jury can reach their verdict. The two things are quite
      different.

26.   The fact that there is evidence both consistent and inconsistent with Lord Taylor’s
      findings is a consequence of having an Inquest which covers much the same ground
      as the Inquests. I comment on this below.

27.   It is perhaps some indication of the substance of these points that they were raised
      for the first time on 11 and 17 December 1997.


An Inquest following a Judicial InquirY

28.   I do not agree with the criticisms of the Coroner and his conduct of the Inquests
      advanced by the families (most of them had already been rejected by the Divisional
      Court) and I have found no fresh evidence to justify reopening them. But I have
      come to the very firm conclusion that it is unsatisfactory to have an Inquest into the
      question of how the deceased came to their deaths where there has been a major
      disaster and an inquiry chaired by a High Court Judge, which will inevitably have
      covered the same ground and indeed, as in this case, ranged much wider.

29.    I have read the Report of the Home Office Working Group on Disasters and
       Inquests (published in March 1997) and concur with their recommendation that in
       such cases the role of the Coroner should be limited by securing the adjournment of
       the Inquest when a public inquiry is established and limiting the circumstances in
       which the inquest can be resumed. I also agree with the Working Group’s
       reasoning for making this recommendation. I would like to make the following
       points specifically in the case of Hillsborough:

              a)     At the Taylor Inquiry 179 witnesses gave evidence over a period of
              31 days. Of these over 50 were Liverpool supporters. Their evidence
              occupied about four days in total. Their evidence was graphic, clear and
              substantially to the same effect. By contrast at the Inquest over 200
              witnesses gave evidence over a period of 72 days. Of these over 100 were
              Liverpool supporters and included only a few of those who gave evidence
              before Lord Taylor. I estimate that their evidence in total took in excess of
              15 days. Again their evidence of the critical events was often graphic and
              substantially to the same effect. But it took much longer because it was not
              concentrated on the vital points and much of the questioning was repetitive.

              Dr Popper told me that he considered it necessary to call so many supporters
              so that their side of the case should be fully put. While I understand this
              desire, it must be open to question whether in considering the question ‘how’
              a deceased came to his death, it is necessary to call so many witnesses whose
              evidence is essentially the same.
      b)      Although the issues at the Inquest are likely to be of far more limited
      scope than at a judicial inquiry, and in particular questions of civil liability
      and individual criminal liability are not matters for the Inquest, in practice it
      is very difficult for the Coroner to draw the line, especially if, as in this
      case, there are a considerable number of parties legally represented, all of
      whom have interests to pursue or protect.

      c)     In practice it is the decision of the DPP that it important in
      determining whether or not there should be a prosecution for manslaughter,
      though the DPP can reconsider a decision not to bring a charge if further
      evidence not previously considered emerges at an Inquest and the jury reach
      a verdict of unlawful killing.

      d)     It is most unlikely that a Coroner will have experience comparable to
      that of a High Court Judge in controlling an Inquiry of this magnitude. It is
      an extremely onerous task.

      e)     A tribunal of Inquiry is an inquisitorial body, usually charged with
      the responsibility of finding out what happened and why and making
      recommendations to avoid similar disasters in future. The tribunal will
      make detailed findings of fact and very probably express an opinion as to
      where responsibility or criticism lies. It seems pointless to go over part of
      the same ground again, especially having regard to the limited scope of the
      Inquest and available verdicts. Although as I have already said, the
      perception is misconceived, there is no doubt that a number of the families
      have perceived the verdict of accidental death as in some way reversing or
      negating the findings of Lord Taylor.

      f)      Quite apart from other considerations, a major inquest of this sort
      involves very considerable expense both in time and money. Witnesses have
      to attend; local taxpayers have to bear the expense of the Inquest, interested
      parties the expense of legal representation for which legal aid is not
      available.

      g)     There is distress and anxiety caused by the delay. In this case it was
      over two years before the verdict at the Inquest. Not infrequently in this
      type of case, there is a challenge in the Divisional Court which increases the
      delay and adds to the uncertainty. If the challenge is mounted by legal
      advisers who did not appear at the Inquiry or Inquest, points may be taken
      which could not have been taken by those who had appeared before, possibly
      giving rise to false hopes of the applicants. It is not only the bereaved who
      suffer from this long drawn out process. Those whose conduct has been
      called in question should not have the anxiety hanging over their heads
      indefinitely.

In the case of Hillsborough the Coroner was confronted with a most formidable
task. The Divisional Court rejected the criticisms made of him and complimented
him on his summing up. The undue prolixity of the proceedings flowed in part
from the difficulties in controlling such an Inquiry with many parties represented
and in part from the Coroner’s understandable desire that the Liverpool supporters
side should be fully presented to the jury. It is not the sort of case which a Coroner
should be asked to undertake where there has already been a full judicial inquiry.
But as the law now stands he has no option.
