             S o u t h Yorkshire

             PO LICE                                           Richard Wells QPM, MA(Oxon), CIMgt.
                                                               Chief Constable
             JUSTICE    with   COURAGE




16 January 1998

Mr C F Bone
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




Hillsborough - Report to the Home Secretary

t a n k you for your letter of 14 January 1998. I am grateful to you for the opportunity to
offer my observations on the draft of that part of the report which deals with apologies. The
 comments which follow do not detract from my feeling that you have very ably captured the
 essence of this very difficult issue.

I have shown your letter to Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines and Superintendent Alan
Hepworth. Alan was sure that my predecessor as Chief Constable, Mr Peter Wright, had
apologised for the police’s errors. Alan has found a press release of 4 August 1989 which I
attach for your information and you will see that Peter-WrighTcfid apologise. In view of that,
I feel that paragraph 1 might be amended as shown in Appendix One.

In paragraph 2, I suggest a footnote be added to explain that the press release predated
the death of the 96th victim.

In paragraph 7, line 4, I suggest that the wording be “.. failing to ask for a postponement of
the kick o ff...”

In paragraph 8, lines 4-5, I suggest that the wording be “... and is reflected in the
apportionment of liabilities to pay claimants in civil proceedings”. I suggest the deletion of
the words, “whatever may have been the attitude of the previous Chief Constable ... “ (lines
5-6).

May I stress again how much I value the opportunity to offer these observations.

You will see that I have suggested above some amendments to paragraphs 7 and 8.
Whilst I would be content with these if Sir Murray felt minded to follow them, we would be
even happier if he would consider a re-writing of those two paragraphs as suggested at
Appendix Two. If his Lordship cannot accede to the wording of Appendix Two then the
above suggested amendments would become operative as our ‘fall back position’.
My request for a more fundamental rewrite is because I am concerned that the focus of
public attention on the causes of the disaster has been upon South Yorkshire Police even
more than we deserved. I do not shy away from our mistakes but, as I said in my press
release after the “Hillsborough” television film, from which you quote, “we were found
wanting and have faced up to our responsibility for our role but we were not the only ones
who played a part...”.

If you wish to discuss these matters please do not hesitate to telephone me or Ian Daines.
May I repeat my appreciation for your courtesy and consideration in this difficult matter.




Richard We
APPENDIX ONE



Para 1

One frequent complaint made to me by victim’s families was that the police had
never apologised for the part they played in the disaster. I discussed this with
Mr Richard Wells who took office as Chief Constable in mid 1990. He has
drawn to my attention a press release by his predecessor, Mr Peter Wright,
issued on 4 August 1989 on the occasion of the publication of Lord Taylor’s
interim report. Mr Wright said,

“I accept the findings and the conclusions of the Inquiry in so far as they relate
to South Yorkshire Police. The fact that we are held to have contributed to the
terrible tragedy o f Hillsborough is a matter of profound sadness to all members
of the Force, and both personally and on their behalf I once again extend my
heartfelt regret to those who have lost loved ones or suffered injury”.

Mr Wells said that he often uses the occasion of public speeches to express his
and the Force’s regret. Mr Wells gave me some examples (and there are many
others).
APPENDIX TWO



Para 7

At my meeting with him, Mr Wells made it plain that since Lord Taylor’s interim
report he had acknowledged on behalf of the Force that there had been four
main errors:

i)       failing to ask for a postponement of the kick off,

ii)      not taking steps to prevent further admissions to the already full central
         pens,

iii)     not blocking off the tunnel when gate C was opened,

iv)      not distinguishing distress from disorder.


Para 8

Mr Wells accepted the finding of Lord Taylor that the principal cause of the
disaster was the failure of police control.

Lord Taylor also criticised others and Mr Wells pointed out those other parties
had not been so prominent in apologising for their errors, indeed if they had
done so at all.        South Yorkshire Police had apologised and accepted
responsibility for their contribution to the causes of the disaster.
