      H o m e O ffic e
      Operational Policing Policy Unit                                 ( %   -
      50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
      Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433




 FAX
To:        Ann Adlington, Hillsborough Family Support Group


From:      M JP yne

Date:       7 May 1998                        Time:   14:51

Fax Nfi: 0151 236 1936

Number of pages (including this one)                  4


Message

Hard copy and enclosures to follow by post.




              IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 2433
            H o m e O ffic e
            Operational Policing Policy Unit
            50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
            Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433________________

                                                                      Our reference:    PW/98 110/145/2

                                                                      Your reference:

Ms Ann Adlington                                                      £>ate:            j May 1998
Solicitor
Hillsborough Family Support Group
Pioneer Building
67 Dale Street
Liverpool L2 2NS




Dear Ms Adlington



Thank you for your letters of 28 April and 1 May about the disclosure of evidence considered by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

The Home Secretary’s undertaking on the day of his statement was to publish as much of the
material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as possible, by placing it in the House of Commons
Library. This has been done other than where we are awaiting confirmation that the parties
concerned are content for disclosure to take place. In response to a specific request from Peter
Kilfoyle MP, copies of all the original and amended police statements were also sent to the Family
Support Group on 16 April. I am not aware of any further undertaking in relation to the supply of
material to the Family Support Group.

You refer in your letter of 28 April to one specific item of correspondence from ACC Mervyn Jones
to David Brummell, the reply to which is contained in Appendix 8, p213 of the Scrutiny Report. I
enclose a copy of ACC Jones’ letter of 7 June 1989 as requested.

You enclosed with your letter signed authorities from 11 Members of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group for the disclosure of material which forms Appendix 9 of the Report. I understand
that you are still awaiting written confirmation that the family of Kevin Williams are content for the
publication of the appendix. If this can be confirmed, we should be able to arrange for it to be placed
in the House of Commons Library. In the meantime, it is, of course, a matter for the families
concerned to decide whether to publish the constituent parts of appendix 9.




f:\oppu\complnts\letter\mp-0557.doc
I am sorry that you did not receive copies of the police statements referred to in your letter of 1 May.
I understand from South Yorkshire Police that, in error, Sergeant Morgan’s details were actually
recorded twice. His statement should appear as document R267. Please let me know if you have any
difficulty locating this. Superintendent McKay’s statement and that of Inspector Hand-Davis are
being obtained from South Yorkshire Police and I will forward copies as soon as possible. Neither
statement was among those amended before submission to the Taylor inquiry.

                                            Yours sincerely




                                            M J Pyne




f:\oppu\complnts\letter\mp-0557.doc
J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                                            FURNIVAL HOUSE
a s s i s t a n t c hief c o n s t a b l e                                     Furnival G a te
 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                                                     Sheffield S I 4QN
                                                                               T ele pho ne 0 7 4 2 72 7 5 9 9
WEST M ID LA N D S POLICE HQ                                                   S M IT H D O W N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52 . Lloyd H ou se                                                       Liverpool L7 3PR
Co!more Circus Q u e e n s w a v                                                Teleph one; 0 51 7 0 9 7 1 7 5
9 'fm in g h a m B4 6 N Q
Telephone: 02 1 2 3 6 5 0 0 0 . e x t n      2025                               Your Ref.
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STA TIO N
Fowler S tr eet                                                                 Our Ref;
Birmingham B7 5DA
T elephone: 0 2 1 - 3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                               D ate;                 7 June i 959



             C -rurr.me
             Treasury S o l i c i t o r
             C/C Town Hail

             S hef f i e l d
             S’ 2HH




             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS

             YC'.; w i l l r e c a l l ir. tne e a r l y s t a g e s , because o f the s lownes s o f the
             supply of w r i t t e n r e c o l l e c t i o n s from South Yorks hire P o l i ce O f f i c e r s , i t
             was agreed t h a t we would ta ke from them t h e i r i n i t i a l s u bmi ss i on s which
             would be l a t e r superseded by t h e i r s i g n ed f i n a l v e r s i o n s , a f t e r they had
             Peer; checked by t h e i r a p p r o p r i a t e l e g a l ad v i c e. I p e r s o n a l l y made an
             un der taking with the Chief C o ns t ab l e o f South Yorks h ire P o l i ce t h a t only
             the f i n a l v e r s io n s would be t he ones used in t he P ub l i c In q u i ry and t h i s
             was a f t e r d i s c u s s i o n with you.

             I arr. concerned m a t y e st e rd a y an o f f i c e r was r e f e r r e d t o h i s i n i t i a l
             submission which con ta ine d op i n i o n t h a t had s u b s eq u e n t l y been removed
             from n is f i n a l acc ount.    Given the u n d e rt a k i n g I made t o South Yorks hi re
             Police I would hope t h a t t h i s would n o t happen in t he f u t u r e because i t
             was only on t h a t un de rs ta nd i n g t h a t we re cei v e d t h e i r i n fo r m a t i o n as
             e a r l y as we d id .

             I have fo rm a l ise d t h i s in w r i t i n g becaus e t h i s e f f e c t s o u r p ers o n al
             i n t e g r i t y in the m a t t e r . I have co pi ed t h i s l e t t e r t o t h e C h i ef
             Constable of South Yorkshire P o l i c e f o r h i s i n fo r m a t i o n .




                                                                                /


    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                              Sheffield
                                                                                             VSB0R0(jr




                             Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                Pioneer Building
                                                 67 Dale Street
                                               Liverpool L2 2NS
                                              Tel: 0151 236 1919
                                              Fax: 0151 236 1936


         6 May 1998


         Matthew Pyne
         Home Office
         Operational Policing Policy Unit
         50 Queen Anne’s Gate
         London SW1H 9AT


         Dear Sir

        Hillsborough Documentation

        I refer to my letter of 24 April regarding the statements of Police Officers which were missing
        from the 11 boxes sent to this office, and should be grateful for an early reply.


        Yours faithfully




         Iv
        Ann Adlington
        Solicitor




CHAIRMAN                                      VICE-CHAIRMAN / SECRETARY                    TREASURER
T. Hicks                                      P. Hammond_________                          Mrs. J. Traynor
Fern Hill Bam
      H o m e O ffic e
 m    Operational Policing Policy Unit
      50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
      Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 0171 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 2433




 FAX
To:         Ch. Insp. Chris Thompson


From:       M JP yne

Date:       5 May 1998                        Time:       H=36




Number of pages (including this one)                      2


Message
Subject:     HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - POLICE STATEMENTS


I enclose a letter from Ann Adlington, acting for the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
enquiring about three police statements which are apparently missing from the ones released to the
Group and placed in the House of Comons Library. Can you let me know whether you have any
trace of them?

There is to be a debate on Hillsborough in the House of Commons this Friday, so an early reply
would be helpful.




               IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                 PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273 2433
                                                                                           v SBO R 0 ( /
   ^ ■ 580R%



                                                                                                           &
         St/ppO^                                                                             su p ? ^
                          Hillsborough Family Support Group

                                              Pioneer Building
                                               67 Dale Street
                                             Liverpool L2 2NS
                                            Tel: 0151 236 1919
                                            Fax: 0151 236 1936


     1 May 1998


     Matthew J Pyne
     Home Office
     Operational Policing Policy unit
     50 Queen Anne’s Gate
     London SW1H 9AT


     Dear Sir

    Further to my letter of 24 April 1998, the following statements are also missing:-

    NUMBER:          NAME:

     29            Paul Hand Davis

     30            Morgan 758

     6             McKay Graham


     I look forward to an early response.


     Yours faithfully




     Ann Adlington
     Solicitor
CHAIRMAN                                     VICE-CHAIRMAN / SECRETARY                   TREASURER
T. Hicks                                     P. Hammond                                  Mrs. J. Traynor
      iVSBOR0n                                                                            VSBORon,




       sup?^
                          Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                             Pioneer Building
                                              67 Dale Street
                                            Liverpool L2 2NS
                                           Tel: 0151 236 1919
                                           Fax: 0151 236 1936

     28 April 1998

     Matthew J Pyne
     Home Office
     50 Queen Anne’s Gate
Q    London SW1A 9AT


     Dear Sir

     I refer to your telephone conversation with Kathy Durham on 20 April regarding the
     disclosure of all the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

     You will recall that when the Home Secretary announced the establishment of the
     Hillsborough Scrutiny to the House of Commons on 30th June 1997, he was asked whether he
     would publish all the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. He replied that he
     would do his best to ensure that this would be the case. He stressed, however, that there may
     be good reasons why such evidence could not be published, “for example, in respect of
     criminal or disciplinary proceedings.” Given that the Report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
     advises against the taking of either type of proceedings, I await your confirmation that, the
     Hillsborough Family Support Group will be supplied with a copy of all the evidence including
     transcripts of all meetings with witnesses and others who assisted Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in
     the Scrutiny.

     In particular, families would also like to see a copy of the letter from ACC Mervyn Jones
     dated 7,h June 1989 which is referred to in the Treasury Solicitor’s letter of the same date
     (Appendix 8, page 213) together with details of the personal undertaking given by Mervyn
     Jones to the then Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.

     I would remind you that in his statement to the House on 18th February, Jack Straw stated as
     follows:-

     “As I told the shadow Home Secretary, I am arranging for the other material considered by
     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed in the Library of the House, save where there are
     overriding reasons for doing otherwise. Let me make it clear that the material that will be

CHAIRMAN                                   V I c B $ g & iR $ £ r # SECRETARY           TREASURER
T. Hicks                                   P. Hammond                                   Mrs. J. Traynor
published will include all the original statements made by South Yorkshire police officers,
together with the amended versions submitted to the Taylor inquiry.”

Finally, as previously discussed I am enclosing signed authorities from all members of the
HFSG confirming their agreement to the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Can you
please supply me with a copy of the same and confirm that this Appendix will also be placed in
the Library of the House.

Yours faithfully




V\^
Ann Adlington
Solicitor




                                        Page 2 of 2
Mr and Mrs D Church




20 April 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

Judicial Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

I the undersigned authorise the publication of my extract of Appendix 9 in order to facilitate
the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, I agree that the said Appendix 9
should be placed in the House of Commons Library.




Signed




Date
Mr and Mrs J Traynor




20 April 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

Judicial Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

I the undersigned authorise the publication of my extract of Appendix 9 in order to facilitate
the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, I agree that the said Appendix 9
should be placed in the House of Commons Library.




S ign ed          ../




Date
Jenni Hicks




6 March 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

Judicial Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

I the undersigned authorise the publication of my extract of Appendix 9 in order to facilitate
the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, I agree that the said Appendix 9
should be placed in the House of Commons Library.




Signed
6 March 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

Judicial Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

We the undersigned authorise the publication of our extract of Appendix 9 in order to
facilitate the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, we agree that the said
Appendix 9 should be placed in the House of Commons Library.
Mr and Mrs S Roberts



6 March 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

Judicial Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

We the undersigned authorise the publication of our extract of Appendix 9 in order to
facilitate the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, we agree that the said
Appendix 9 should be placed in the House of Commons Library.




Signed
Sandra Stringer




6 March 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

Judicial Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

I the undersigned authorise the publication of my extract of Appendix 9 in order to facilitate
the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, I agree that the said Appendix 9
should be placed in the House of Commons Library.
Joan Sinclair




9 March 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

Judicial Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

I the undersigned authorise the publication of my extract of Appendix 9 in order to facilitate
the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, I agree that the said Appendix 9
should be placed in the House of Commons Library.
John and Teresa Glover




5 March 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

Judicial Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

We the undersigned authorise the publication of our extract of Appendix 9 in order to
facilitate the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, we agree that the said
Appendix 9 should be placed in the House of Commons Library.
Hilda and Phil Hammonc




31 March 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

Judicial Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

I the undersigned authorise the publication of my extract of Appendix 9 in order to facilitate
the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, I agree that the said Appendix 9
should be placed in the House of Commons Library.




Signed
  M r and Mrs J Asoinall




 6 March 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

              iny into the Hillsborough D i s a s t e r

We the undersigned authorise the publication of our extract of Appendix 9 in order to
facilitate the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, we agree that the said
Appendix 9 should be placed in the House of Commons Library.
Mr and Mrs C Sefton




20 April 1998



Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1A 9AT

Dear Mr Straw

Judicial Scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster

I the undersigned authorise the publication of my extract of Appendix 9 in order to facilitate
the publication of Appendix 9 in its entirety. Furthermore, I agree that the said Appendix 9
should be placed in the House of Commons Library.




Signed




Date
APPENDIX 9



I deal in this Appendix with a number of questions that have been put to me by the
families of particular victims about the exact circumstances in which their relatives came
to die and with difficulties which they have told me exist with the police documentation.

The individual cases which I discuss are those of

      James Aspinall
      Paul Carlile
      Gary Church
      Ian Glover
      Philip Hammond
      Sarah Hicks
      Victoria Hicks
      Richard Jones
      Michael Kelly
      Graham Roberts
      Andrew Sefton
      Christopher Tray nor
      Kevin Traynor                                       j
      Kevin Williams

James Aspinall

At the mini inquest on 19 April 1990, Detective Sergeant Killoch said when
summarising the evidence about the death of James Aspinall that:
      “Sometime after the crushing had occurred in the West Stand terracing, James was
      removed from the enclosure, placed onto the pitch and taken to the gymnasium. It
      has not been possible to identify the persons involved in these actions”.

There is however a statement on the body file for James Aspinall from Detective
Constable Fox in which Mr Fox identifies himself with James in a photograph (MW1/2)
and says that he tried, without success, to resuscitate him. This statement is dated 25
March 1990. An addendum to the summary on James’s body file refers to DC Fox’s
statement, though there is no date indicating when this addendum was made.

Mr and Mrs Aspinall asked me why DC Fox’s evidence was not mentioned at the mini­
inquest. I asked D r Popper about this. He could not offer an explanation but there can
in my view be no conceivable reason for anybody to suppress this statement
deliberately. Inspector Layton, who was in charge of the visual identification from
photographic material, gave evidence at the mini-inquest and referred to the
photograph MW1/2. But he did not take the statement from DC Fox.

                                           213
    I think the most likely explanation is that there was some delay in adding DC Fox’s
    statement to the body file, so that when Detective Sergeant Killoch and Inspector
    Layton examined it for the purpose of giving evidence it was not then available. If so,
    that would clearly have been an unfortunate error. But it does not affect the verdict of
    the Inquest.


    Paul Carlile

    A t my interview with her, Mrs Stringer said she was convinced that there was
    photographic evidence that showed her son Paul Carlile outside the ground and in the
    vicinity of Gate C at 14.54 and 14.55, but also inside the ground, on the terraces, at the
    earlier time of 14.49.


    Inspector Layton gave evidence at the mini-inquest held on 3 May 1990 that Paul Carlile
    had been identified by his two sisters on the photographs taken outside the ground at

•
    14.54 and 14.55. These photographs are of good quality. Mrs Stringer told me that she
    had recently come into possession of a video still, apparently from a BBC video, timed
    at 14.49 showing Paul on the terrace. She said she could identify him.


    Quite clearly both identifications cannot be right. There is another video still of the
    terraces timed at 14.58, and again Mrs Stringer said she could identify her son in it.
    While it is not impossible that he could be outside at 14.55 and inside at 14.58 it seems
    unlikely. The quality of the video stills is in my view very poor and that at 14.49 shows
    less than half of the person’s face.


    I have not been able to draw any definite conclusions and am not sure that it would now
    be possible to do so. However, the photographs which show Paul outside the ground at
    14.54 and 14.55 are far clearer than the two video stills of the terraces at 14.49 and 14.58.
    In my view the West Midlands Police and the Coroner cannot be criticised for accepting
    the identification made by Paul Carlile’s sisters.


    The other area of concern that Mrs Stringer has is about the evidence of
    Mr Hollinghurst, an off duty nurse. There is a passage in a statement by Mr Hollinghurst
    dated 15 May 1989 which suggests that when he first saw Paul Carlile he was alive, but
    on the ground in the crush. Mr Hollinghurst was aware of a hand grabbing at his leg.
    Very sadly, when Mr Hollinghurst got an opportunity some time later to attempt to
    resuscitate Paul, he was dead.


    Mrs Stringer’s concern was that this was not mentioned at the mini-inquest on Paul
    Carlile or when Mr Hollinghurst later gave evidence on Day 26 of the Inquest. But this
    aspect of Paul Carlile’s case was considered in full by the Divisional Court. There is
    certainly no new evidence in relation to it.




                                                 214
    Gary Church

    A t their meeting with me Mr and Mrs Church complained that PC Webster and PC
    Hays claimed in the statements to have done too much on the day of the disaster, and
    could not have been in the ground at 3 o ’clock as they claimed. As I understand it their
    argument is that these two officers could not have been involved with Gary Church at
    3.25.


    There is no evidence that PC Hays was involved with Gary at all and he never said that
    he was.


    PC Webster made a statement which is undated but evidently made soon after the
    event. He said he was on duty on the day of the disaster on a mobile patrol which
    included PC Hays. Shortly after 15.00 they were in Penistone Road North area when
    they received a radio message that there was crowd disturbance at the ground. On

•
    arrival at the pitch he went to the West Terraces and tried to help. After the gate from
    pen 3 onto the pitch was opened he formed part of the chain of police recovering bodies.


    He describes one youth whom he helped to resuscitate (not Gary Church), apparently
    successfully. In a statement dated the 12th October 1989 he identified himself on BBC
    film between 15.25 and 15.27 carrying a young lad, who he identified from other
    photographic evidence as Gary Church. He placed him on the pitch and tried to
    resuscitate him, unsuccessfully.


    A nother police officer, PC Haigh, also attempted with this resuscitation.


    I cannot see that there is any valid criticism of this evidence.


    Ian Glover

    The police originally had on the body file a statement dated 7 July 1989 made by PC
    Fojut, in which he purported to identify a person whom he had helped to carry across
    the pitch to the gymnasium as Ian Glover. The identification was based on a recognition
    of clothing shown to the officer in a photograph.


    There are a number of inconsistencies between this statement and that of Joseph
    Glover, Ian’s brother, who saw him brought onto the pitch from pen 3, and helped to
    take him across the pitch. In these circumstances, it is not surprising that at the mini­
    inquest Joseph Glover was asked if any police officer had helped to carry his brother
    across the pitch to the gymnasium. He said that they had not.




                                                 215
    In the result, PC Fojut’s evidence was not included in the inquest summary of evidence
    of Ian Glover’s case because it was appreciated that his identification must have been
    mistaken. This m atter was fully explained at the mini-inquest. In my view it is clear that
    PC Fojut had mistakenly identified the person he helped with as Ian Glover.


    Mr and Mrs Glover told me at my meeting with them that they were still confused about
    this. It is, of course, unfortunate that PC Fojut misidentified the person he was dealing
    with as Ian Glover, but I do not consider there is now any room for doubt that Joseph
    Glover was right and PC Fojut was mistaken.


    Philip Hammond

    Counsel for the Family Support group submitted to me that D r W alker’s evidence was
    of critical importance in the case of Philip Hammond, and shows that evidence given at
    the mini-inquest in his case was wrong (para 64 written submissions). I do not accept

•
    this. A t the mini-inquest P S Killock summarised the relevant part of the evidence about
    Philip as follows (2 May 1990 p8 D-G):
          “Shortly after 1505 hours, following the severe crushing in the West Stand
          terracing, Police Constable Stephen Taylor went into the tunnel leading to the West
          Stand terraces. A t the end o f the tunnel he saw a boy who he now knows to be
          Philip lying on the ground. The Officer, with assistance from Police Constable
          Andrew James Shiel, carried Philip and placed him in an ambulance which was in
          attendance at Leppings Lane.
          Attempted resuscitation was then carried out by Police Constable Taylor,
          Ambulance Officer Jane Moffatt and Ambulance Officer Alan Smith. The
          ambulance was then driven to the Northern General Hospital by Police Constable
          Shiel and during that journey the Police Constable and the ambulance crew
          continued attempted resuscitation.
           Upon arrival at the hospital Philip was taken into the Casualty Department where
          further treatment was carried out by a doctor who unfortunately has not been
          identified, sir. After some twenty minutes the doctor stated he could not detect any
          pulse or signs o f life and Constable Taylor took Philip into the plaster room which
          was being used as a temporary mortuary at the hospital.
          Dr Janet Rosemary Doore shortly afterwards examined Philip in the plaster room
          and certified life extinct”.


    In answer to the Coroner, Sergeant Killock gave further details of Philip’s case,
    including the fact the doctor tried for twenty minutes to revive him. The unidentified
    doctor was D r Walker. The hospital record of Philip Hammond has no relevant
    information on it and it was not appreciated at that time that he was the second patient
    referred to in D r W alker’s statement of 20 July 1989.




                                                216
    Dr Slater, who was the pathologist in this case gave evidence. He said that his autopsy of
    Philip showed signs of medical intervention in that three ECG electrodes were
    positioned on his body (inquest, page 3F). In answer to a leading question from
    Mr Fraser, who appeared for the family, he said (page 5E):
          “Q. Dr Slater, correct me if I am wrong, but I think by the time Philip had got to
          hospital he was dead?—A. Yes, I shouldn’t be surprised in my profession. I was
          somewhat surprised that Philip was taken to the Northern General Hospital
          because my autopsy finding was such that I would have thought he would have
          died extremely quickly and become unconscious instantaneously at Hillsborough. I
          have asked the Officers involved with this and I understand Philip was not seen by
          a doctor at Hillsborough. I think this explains that only essentially lay people saw
          him and, in my opinion, Philip would have been brain dead at Hillsborough


    Having heard the evidence summarised by P S Killock, D r Slater was recalled and asked
    about it. He accepted that it was theoretically possible for the heart of someone in
    cardiac arrest to be restarted. But he thought that a lay person, namely a policeman

•
    might be mistaken in detecting a pulse. Mr Wardrope, Accident and Emergency
    Consultant at the Northern General, also gave evidence in relation to Philip Hammond.
    He said (page 23 C):
          “In the initial part o f the incident I was sending people who came in with a cardiac
          arrest, patients undergoing mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and external cardiac
          massage, I sent them to the resuscitation room initially to see whether they could
          have a chance o f being brought round, to start the heart going. The fact that the
          only post mortem evidence were three ECG electrodes, I think possibly he was sent
          to the resuscitation room but the ECG showed no cardiac activity, and because o f
          the great pressure on the resuscitation beds at that time he would be sent to the
          mortuary”.


    Mr W ardrope also said that if someone underwent a resuscitation attempt he would not
    have been triaged dead. (P26B). What D r W alker’s evidence does is to confirm that
    Philip was not dead on arrival, but he died very soon afterwards. This would mean that
    D r Slater’s opinion—which was in any event at variance with the other evidence given at
    the mini-inquest—was wrong to that extent.


    I entirely understand that it is important to Philip’s family that he died somewhat later
    than D r Slater thought. But it is not something that can impugn the inquest verdict of
    accidental death. Nor does it support the conclusion that D r Slater’s opinion in other
    cases was wrong.


    In written submissions to me dated 3 December 1997 Mr Hammond, Philip’s father,
    claims that Mr Fraser, the solicitor acting for the Hillsborough Steering Committee was
    not acting for all the families, including the Hammonds, when arrangements were made
    in respect of the mini-inquests. He also says that Mr Fraser was being paid by Municipal
    Mutual Insurance (MMI), insurers for the South Yorkshire Police, the implication being
    that he did not properly represent the families.


                                                217
These claims are based on a misunderstanding. It is clear from Mr Fraser’s letter of the 9
March 1990 addressed to the firms of solicitors acting directly for the families (in the
Hammonds’ case Bartlett & Son) that Mr Fraser would be acting on an agency basis for
these solicitors at the mini-inquests unless the client wished otherwise, in which case
they could appear in person or through their own solicitors.


So far as MMI p aying his costs are concerned, it is quite clear that Mr Fraser was not
retained by MMI and there was no conflict of interest. In fatal cases where civil liability
is established, it is perfectly proper for the dependants to recover, as part costs in the
action, reasonable expense of legal representation at the Inquest. In my view what MMI
accepted in this case was that the attendance of Mr Fraser, whether as directly
representing a client or as agent for other solicitors representing the families, could be
regarded as a reasonable expense for this purpose. To that very limited extent they were
meeting his costs, but he was not retained by them and was in no way acting on their
behalf or under their instruction.


Victoria and Sarah Hicks

Mr and Mrs Hicks had the terrible misfortune of losing their two daughters Sarah and
Victoria.


Victoria


When I met Mr and Mrs Hicks in Liverpool in October their main concerns in respect of
Victoria related to the evidence of Paul Taylor and that of PC Marshall. I have dealt
with Paul Taylor’s evidence in Chapter 4. In a submission which I received on 8 January
1998 Mr Hicks disputes the part which PC Marshall says that he played in recovering
Victoria from pen 3, taking her to the ambulance and accompanying her to the hospital.


Mr Hicks says that he has no recollection of the presence of any police officer other than
PC McGuinness assisting with Victoria. He believes that PC Marshall’s evidence is
untrue and that he played no part in assisting with Victoria.


A number of witnesses in addition to Mr Hicks himself helped with Victoria.


PC McGuinness made three statements. The first is undated. He said:
      “Eventually I made my way back through the West Stand and onto the pitch,
      assisting officers to carry another girl onto the pitch. Whilst fire and Police Officers
      attempted to assist her I ran to the gymnasium where I collected an oxygen cylinder
      and mask.




                                            218
      I brought this to the girl and attempted to resuscitate her. Together with the girls
      father Mr Hicks we put the girl ‘Vicky ’ into an ambulance and travelled to the
      Northern General Hospital. Mouth to Mouth was administered throughout the
      journey to the hospital and then on arrival the hospital medical staff took over.
      A fter assisting a doctor at the hospital I was told that Vicky was dead. ”


PC McGuinness’s second statement is dated 8 May 1989. It is much to the same effect
but he says that he performed mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on Victoria in the
ambulance.


His third statement is dated 6 July 1989. It is concerned with visual identification from
photographic material. He identifies himself at 15.38 running towards the ambulance
with the oxygen bottle.


Two things should be noted about PC McGuinness’s evidence. The first is that there is
no mention of a second police officer in the ambulance, but neither is there any
reference to ambulanceman Tony Edwards, the nurse or anybody else, other than Mr
Hicks, who was on the scene or travelled in the ambulance. Secondly, he does not say
that Victoria was passed over the radial fence into pen 2.


Paul Winston Turner was a spectator in pen 3. He made two statements. In the first
dated 31.5.89 he said that he assisted in taking bodies from police officers through the
perimeter gate to pen 3. He said:
      “We then returned to the gate and the same four officers met us with a young
      woman. I do n’t know where they had collected her body from. Me and the dark
      haired lad had an arm each to carry her and one Police Officer had both her legs.
      We carried her passed [sic] the 2 men we had already taken onto the pitch and we
      laid her perhaps 8 or 10 yards (8 or 10 yds) further into the playing area from the
      touch line. ”


In a statement dated 16 November 1989 he identified the girl as Victoria Hicks from
photographic evidence.


PC Marshall made a statement dated 10 July 1989. He said:
      “A fter moving numerous bodies I helped an officer lift a young girl out o f the pile
      o f bodies. We walked to the fence with her and I jumped onto the perimeter,
      carrying her in my arms towards an ambulance.
      After leaving her on the grass for a short while a further officer approached me
      holding an oxygen bottle, he said, Come on do you know first a id. . . we can save
      this one I carried the girl to the rear o f an open ambulance placing her along the
      seats. Alm ost immediately two others were placed in the van, one a youth being put
      on its floor. The ambulance then shut its doors and we set o ff at speed to the
      N.G.H.



                                            219
      Throughout the journey we attempted to revive the girl using chest and heart
      massage, the mask o f the oxygen being placed intermittently over her mouth as we
      tried to pum p air into her body. The girl was Victoria Hicks. Her father was trying
      mouth to mouth after I had cleared the vomit from her mouth. The second girl in
      the ambulance was I believed her older sister.
      Upon arrival at the NGH. I carried the body o f the girl into the hospital and placed
      her on a wooden bench, the only free furniture in turn I then carried the youth, my
      strength seemed that often, the hospital was in chaos with bodies everywhere and
      medical staff running about. ”


He said that Mr Hicks had been abusive to him in the hospital.

Fireman Peter Mulcrome also assisted with Victoria. In his first statement he wrongly
described her as having blonde hair, but he later corrected this on being shown
photographs. His reference to blonde hair was obviously a mistake.

Tony Edwards was the ambulance man concerned. I have discussed his evidence at
length in the main body of my report. He says that there were three bodies in the
ambulance, a nurse, two police officers, two spectators (one of whom was Mr Hicks) and
himself. He treated Victoria and showed how to do mouth-to-mouth resuscitation while
the spectator did cardiac massage. He remembers nothing of the journey.

In his very detailed comments which reached me on 8 January 1998, Mr Hicks makes a
number of criticisms of PC Marshall’s evidence, and for that m atter PC McGuinness’s
evidence as well. Although PC Marshall may be inaccurate in matters of detail, I can see
no reason to doubt that he assisted in recovering Victoria from pen 3, putting her in the
ambulance and travelling with her in the ambulance. There were obvious omissions
from PC McGuinness’s statements, but there is nothing otherwise inconsistent between
them. Mr Edwards’s statement confirms the presence of a second police officer in the
ambulance.

The evidence of PC Marshall was accurately summarised in the summary of the
evidence on the body file for Victoria Hicks, and a copy of this was sent to Mr Hicks
before the mini-inquests. No point was raised in relation to PC Marshall’s participation.
I find it entirely understandable that in the terrible circumstances in which he found
himself Mr Hicks, whose concentration must have been almost entirely on Victoria and
Sarah, did not take in what others around him were doing.

Mr Hicks, in his latest submission, says that the reason why he did not question what was
said in the summary about PC Marshall’s participation is because he was beginning to
doubt his own memory and that he was still in a state of deep shock. Had the matter
been raised at the time, it is possible that some of the minor discrepancies which exist,
such as PC McGuinness’s omission to mention others in the ambulance, and who exactly
performed resuscitation on Victoria, might have been capable of resolution. I do not
consider that it will be possible to resolve these matters now and I have not thought it
right to delay submission of my report in an effort to do so.
    In his latest submissions to me Mr Hicks raises a very large number of points of detail
    relating to the contents of, or omissions from, the body file relating to Victoria. It is not
    possible for me to deal with all these extremely detailed questions. None of them,
    singularly or cumulatively, could affect the verdict of accidental death, and neither do
    they affect the question of where and when Victoria died. They do not justify the
    suggestion that there has been some deliberate concealment or suppression of evidence.
    For reasons I have already explained, it is only to be expected that there will be
    differences of recollection among witnesses.


    But I will nevertheless try to deal with some of these points.


    Omission o f statements from Victoria’s body file


    Mr Hicks complains that the following statements by PC Stephen Taylor, PC Andrew
    Sheil, Iain Boileau, Neville Udall and James Wardrope were wrongly omitted from the
0   file.


    PC Stephen Taylor refers in an undated statement to meeting a Liverpool supporter at
    the Northern General Hospital who said that two of his daughters had been killed. He
    goes on to describe what happened. Mr Hicks says this must be a reference to himself
    although he is not identified as such. He disputes some of the detail, but it is not clear
    whether he accepts that he had an encounter with a police officer on the lines described
    by PC Taylor. In a further statement dated 3 May 1989 PC Taylor makes no reference to
    this incident.


    PC Andrew Sheil made two statements, in one of which he refers to one of the 11 bodies
    which he saw in the mortuary at the Northern General Hospital as being female. Again
    Mr Hicks says this must have been a reference to Victoria, although she is not identified
    in the statement.


    Iain B oileau was a spectator. He made two statements. In the second, dated 9 January
    1990, he speaks of helping to put a girl into an ambulance and says that her father was
    present. From the context of the statement, this appears to be a reference to Victoria
    and he identifies Mr Hicks as the man, having subsequently seen him on television.


    N eville U dall was a mortuary technician who was involved with all the bodies in the
    mortuary at the Northern General. He refers to one having been identified as Victoria.


    James Wardrope, consultant at the Accident and Emergency Department at the
    Northern General Hospital, made a statement referring to the resuscitative treatment
    given to those who were taken to hospital, including Victoria.




                                                221
Mr W ardrope gave oral evidence about this on Day 1 of the main inquest. But it might
have been preferable if the statements of PC Taylor, Iain Boileau and Neville Udall had
been on the body file. However it is entirely understandable that a conscious decision
may have been taken to exclude them. The involvement of each of these witnesses is
entirely peripheral, and adds nothing of consequence to the evidence of other witnesses.
In my view, PC Sheil’s statement has no relevance.


Sarah


There was clear evidence of what happened to Sarah. She was removed from pen 3 and
placed on the pitch. Attempts were made to resuscitate her by, amongst others, Dr
Flenley. These were unsuccessful and D r Flenley said Sarah was dead. She was taken to
the gymnasium end on an improvised stretcher, where again attempts to resuscitate her
were made until a person who was unidentified, but believed to be medically qualified,
said she was dead. She was taken to the part of the gymnasium where those who were
believed to be dead were placed. Her death was confirmed by D r Bull at 16.20.


In his latest submissions, Mr Hicks has expressed his concern about two matters in
particular. The first is a statement by a Liverpool supporter, Tony Barnbrock. He made
a statement to the police, dated 2 May 1989. He says that he was in pen 4 and managed
to make his escape onto the pitch and then assisted with the injured. Among those he
helped was a girl who he thought was about 22 years old. She was recovered from pen 4
and laid on the pitch. He says he knew she was dead. He says that a man came up and
said he was her father. He then left the girl. He says he later found out that the girl was
only 19 and her name was Sarah Hicks.


Mr Hicks had a copy of the statement in December 1989 and sent it in February 1990 to
Mr Fraser, who was both his personal solicitor and representing the Families as a whole.
It does not appear that any point was taken on it at the inquests. This is not surprising. It
is clear in my view that this is a case of misidentification. Sarah was never in pen 4. Mr
Barnbrock’s account is wholly inconsistent with that of all other witnesses if it related to
Sarah, which in my opinion it does not. There is no reason why Mr Barnbrock’s
statement should be on Sarah’s body file.


The second m atter relates to the police video tape taken in the gymnasium (VRM 2). A
copy of this had been supplied by South Yorkshire Police to Yorkshire Television at the
same time as tapes T B 1,2,3, and 4. Yorkshire Television allowed Mr Hicks to view it
and copy it. The relevant footage showed someone on the floor in that part of the
gymnasium set aside for recovery. The person concerned is surrounded by people,
mainly firemen, evidently trying to resuscitate him or her.


It is only possible to see the person’s body from the waist down. They are dressed in
light blue jeans with sharp turn-up of 1-2” and dark shoes. It is just possible to see a
white garment on the top part of the body. The footage lasts about one minute. It is not
timed but would appear to have been taken at some time between 15.50 and 16.20.


                                             222
Mr and Mrs Hicks say that the body is that of a female, and they consider it is Sarah. I
have examined the tape carefully. The body may well be that of a young woman, but I
do not think one can be sure. The jeans are much lighter than those in the photograph of
Sarah’s clothes which is on the body file and the shoes do not appear to me to be the
same, though this is more difficult to tell. In my judgement it is not possible to make a
reliable identification from the video footage. It does not cast any reasonable doubt on
the very clear evidence to which I have already referred.


I have carefully considered Mr Hicks’ comments on the witnesses relating to Sarah. I do
not consider they justify any suggestion that evidence has been concealed, suppressed or
slanted in favour of South Yorkshire Police.


Richard Jones

A t my interview with Mr and Mrs Jones about the death of their son Richard they said
that they were concerned that statements made by Mr Jones had apparently gone astray
and not been provided by the police when he asked for them. Mr Jones told me that he
made three statements to the police in the early hours of the Sunday morning after the
disaster (16 April). One of his statements identified Richard, one identified Richard’s
girlfriend Tracey Cox, who was with him and was also killed, and the third was an
overall statement. He said they hadn’t got the statement relating to Tracey.


In the body file for Richard Jones there are three statements made by his father. The
first, dated 16 April 1989, deals with the identification of both Richard and Tracey. The
second and third dated 15 August and 23 November 1989 deal with identification from
photographic material. I think these would have been the only matters upon which Mr
Jones could or would be likely to give relevant evidence.


Mr Jones also told me he had doubts of the reliability of the evidence of PC Bromley.
PC Bromley was involved in the rescue operation. In a statement dated 3 May 1989 he
said he saw a man lying unconscious on the pitch. Two supporters were attending him,
but he thought he was dead.


PC Bromley said that he assisted another person to the gymnasium and then returned to
the pitch. He saw a group of supporters carrying a body on an advertisement hoarding—
      “The body on the hoarding was, I believe, the same body I had seen earlier on the
      pitch. A ll I can remember about the clothing on the body was that the man was
      wearing grey coloured trousers. ”


He said that, with another officer, they attempted resuscitation without success and that
he then accompanied the body to the gymnasium and stayed with it until Mr Jones
identified it as that of his son. Mr Jones said that Richard was in fact wearing blue jeans
and he therefore considered that PC Bromley cannot have been with Richard’s body as
he states.

                                            223
There is a photograph of Richard’s clothing including his trousers on the body file. The
colour reproduction in the photograph may not be perfect but the trousers could easily
be described as grey, although I suspect they are much washed jeans. I do not consider
this is a sufficient basis for doubting PC Bromley’s evidence.


Michael Kelly

At her interview with me on 8 October 1997 Mrs Sinclair raised her concern over the
evidence of PC Maugham in relation to the death of her brother, Michael Kelly.


In a statement dated 15 February 1990 PC Maugham stated that he was approached at
the West End of the pitch (the Leppings Lane end) by two men carrying a person who
they said was their friend. They asked him to help. He saw that the man was blue in the
face and appeared not to be breathing. He attempted to resuscitate him. After a while
he started to breathe but kept slipping back into unconsciousness.


PC Maugham assisted in carrying this man to the other (Kop) end of the ground, where
he was handed to the care of a St John Ambulance man. He then went back to the
Leppings Lane end where he rendered further assistance. He later identified the person
he had helped to carry as Michael Kelly from photographic evidence, though he was by
no means certain.


PC Maugham’s evidence was accurately summarised at the mini-inquest by Inspector
Layton who also said that since that time PC Maugham had discussed the identification
with Michael Kelly’s sister and he was now satisfied that it was him. At the family’s
request PC Maugham was called to give evidence at the main inquest, and he said that
when he handed the person over to the St John Ambulance man he was still breathing.


All this evidence was considered by the Divisional Court, because it was alleged to them
that Inspector Layton had misled the Court in his summary of PC Maugham’s evidence.
The Court rejected this.


The point that now troubles Mrs Sinclair appears to be that PC Maugham was
summoned away from Michael Kelly to form a cordon across the pitch instead of
attending to the dead and dying. This criticism seems to me unfair. PC Maugham
handed over the person he was carrying to qualified hands. He did not neglect the
people who were still in trouble at the West End of the ground. He said that he rendered
further assistance there until he was asked to help make a cordon.


I have examined the body file for Michael Kelly. It is clear that there is a marked
conflict between the evidence of PC Maugham, if he has correctly identified Michael
Kelly, and that of two other police officers, PC Wilmot and PC Lally.



                                           224
Both PC Wilmot and PC Lally, in statements dated 3 May 1989 and the 7 May 1989
respectively, describe finding a man lying unconscious on the pitch near the goal. He
was checked for signs of life and there were none. They took him on a stretcher to the
gymnasium where he was again checked for signs of life. At 15.59 Dr Byrne certified
death in PC Wilmot’s presence.

PC Wilmot remained with this person’s body, which was given the body number 72.
Evidence from other witnesses proves that the person was later identified as Michael
Kelly. It is true that there is a period of about 20 minutes between 15.40 and 15.59
during which PC Wilmot does not appear to have been with the body.

This evidence was summarised at the mini-inquest and the conflict with that of PC
Maugham must have been apparent. The St John Ambulance man referred to by PC
Maugham has not been identified and it is not known what happened to the person
whom PC Wilmot handed over to him.

It is impossible to resolve this conflict now and it is not in fact one which Mrs Sinclair
raised with me. It seems to me more likely that PC Maugham was mistaken in thinking
that the person whom the two men had brought to him at the Leppings Lane end of the
ground was Michael Kelly.

Graham Roberts

There are two problems in this case.

The first is an apparent conflict between the evidence of two police officers as to when
Graham Roberts died.

PC Yates described treating a man (later identified as Graham Roberts) lying on the
terrace about 15-20 feet from the tunnel entrance, partially concealing the body of a
youth. It appeared that he had been dragged there by supporters. He pulled the man off
and left him in the prone position. He said he appeared to be dead.

PC Best helped to carry a number of persons from the area near to and in the tunnel.
One of these he identified as Graham Roberts. He said that he carried him to an area of
the lane near the gates and as he put him on the ground he was breathing. Moments
later he returned with another body and saw that the man was dead.

Neither PC Yates nor PC Best gave oral evidence, and so far as I am aware there was no
request by Mr Fraser, solicitor for the Steering Committee representing the families,
that they should. But the conflict between their accounts was explored as far as possible
at the mini-inquest. It is not possible to resolve it now. In the light of the pathologist’s
evidence, it seems probable that PC Best was mistaken in believing that Graham
Roberts was breathing when he put him down.


                                            225
The second conflict was between the statements of PC Sinclair and PC Wadsworth.


PC Sinclair stated that about 16.15 on the 15 April he went to the Leppings Lane side of
the stadium and was allocated a body. He stayed with the body while Dr Ashton
certified death at 16.25 hours and when it was taken to the gymnasium, until it was
identified at 01.50 hours on 16 April as that of Graham Roberts. This was the evidence
given at the mini-inquest.


PC Wadsworth said that he attended the Leppings Lane End and gave mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation to a casualty with the aid of a resuscitator. He did this for about 10 minutes
whilst an ambulance man and another attendant fitted a drip to the man’s arm. PC
Wadsworth said that the man was put in an ambulance and that, before that happened,
he had a pulse.


In a subsequent statement he purported to identify this person from photographs as
Graham Roberts. This evidence was not referred to at the mini-inquest, and PC
Wadsworth’s statements do not appear on the body file.


It is quite plain in my judgement that PC Wadsworth was mistaken in his identification.
Graham Roberts was never taken to hospital. It is true that some bodies were collected
and taken by ambulance from the Gate C area at Leppings Lane to the temporary
mortuary in the gymnasium. But there is no evidence that this happened to Graham
Roberts. In view of the resuscitative treatment which the person whom PC Wadsworth
describes had received, and the evidence that he had a pulse, it would have made no
sense for an ambulance to have taken him to the mortuary rather than to hospital.


The inconsistency between PC Sinclair and PC Wadsworth was one relied upon by
Counsel for the Family Support Group in their written submissions to me. When
however I pointed out that Graham Roberts had not been taken to hospital and
therefore it seemed that PC Wadsworth was mistaken, I understood Counsel to accept
this. I have had no further submissions from the legal representatives on this matter.


Andrew Sefton

I met Mr and Mrs Sefton, Andrew’s parents, in Liverpool together with their daughter
and son-in-law and Professor Scraton. Counsel for the Family Support Group also
discussed Andrew Sefton’s case in their written submission to me.


Both at my meeting with his family and in Counsel’s written submission to me it was said
that police officers had made inconsistent statements about Andrew Sefton. The two
officers concerned are PC Shipley and PC Kearney.




                                            226
PC Shipley made two statements and I was told that these were inconsistent with each
other. In an undated statement, he said that only when he reached the Leppings Lane
goal area did he become aware that people were dead and dying around him. He tried to
calm and comfort people, and
       “A t some stage I assisted in getting injured supporters onto hoardings for
       transportation towards any available medical facilities”.

PC Shipley then spoke in his statement about trouble between Liverpool and
Nottingham Forest fans. He continued
       “after a short time I continued to assist the injured to reach medical facilities at the
       rear o f the Kop, in the new form ed medical area, ie the gym area”.

In a further statement, dated 13th September 1989, PC Shipley said that he dealt with
several persons who were injured or dead but he could only identify one. That was
Andrew Sefton, whom he identified from photographs shown to him. He identified
himself as being involved, with other people, in carrying Andrew Sefton on a hoarding.
This photograph is timed at 15.30. He did not say that he had performed any
resuscitative measures.

A t the mini-inquest on Andrew Sefton Inspector Sawers summarised the evidence of
Patrick Shannon, a Liverpool supporter who attempted to resuscitate him and later
carried him across the pitch with PC Shipley. Mr Shannon said that as he gave Andrew
Sefton mouth-to-mouth ventilation a police officer gave heart massage. Inspector
Sawers said this officer was “believed to be PC Shipley”. I do not know the source of his
belief and Inspector Sawers was not asked about it by Mr Fraser who represented the
family. It may be the belief was mistaken. But there seems no reason to doubt that some
police officer gave heart massage as Mr Shannon says. I can see no inconsistency
between PC Shipley’s two statements.

Counsel for the Family Support Group said in their written submissions to me that PC
Kearney had given conflicting statements as to where he took custody of Andrew’s
body. In his first statement dated 19th May 1989 he said that he was ordered to move
from the pitch to
      “behind the north stand to the area o f the gymnasium and police room. Whilst at
      this location an unidentified man (Andrew Sefton) was carried into the area on an
      advertisement board. I checked his body fo r signs o f life but none could be found.
      The body was then taken into the gymnasium where it was placed on the flo o r”.

PC Kearney remained with the body until it was identified. In a statement dated 4 July
1989 in which he identified himself beside the body in a temporary mortuary, he said “I
took over this body outside the gym after half a dozen fans had dumped him there. ”

I cannot detect any inconsistency in these statements. Counsel asserted that in his
statement of 19th May PC Kearney had said that he “took custody of Andrew’s body
when it was brought into the gymnasium”. But this is not what he said.

                                              227
In her interview with me Mrs Sefton expressed concern that Andrew had in fact died
much later than the evidence presented to the mini-inquest indicated, because when she
identified his body at 0300 on the Sunday morning (16 April) his face was still warm. I
do not think it is right to draw this conclusion. The Coroner asked the pathologist (Dr
Shortland) about this at the mini-inquest on Andrew Sefton. He said (transcript 19
April 1990, page 3)
       “Q— One o f the things that worried Mrs Sefton was that when she went along to
       identify the b o d y . . . she thought that the body still appeared warm to her?. . .
       A — Yes, I think that there are certain features which you have to take into
       consideration, first o f all, the build o f the individual. . . the ambient temperature is
       important and possibly the proximity with the large number o f bodies, the
       proximity o f the bodies together actually retained heat within them.
       Q— I think Mr Sefton was either in a body bag or wrapped in some form o f blanket
       . . . Would that make any difference? A — Yes, I think it would.
       Q— I f he had been. . . ? A —Enclosed”.


Christopher and Kevin Traynor

Mr and Mrs Traynor had the great misfortune of losing two of their sons, Christopher
and Kevin. In their interview with me they expressed concern about what they
considered inconsistencies or inadequacies in the mini-inquest evidence and body files.


Christopher


At the mini-inquest on Christopher Traynor, Det Sgt McCombie summarised the
evidence relating to Christopher. This included that of Mr N J Langley, a spectator, who
said in a statement dated 3rd May 1989 that he had fallen in one of the pens and had
been helped up by someone he later identified as Christopher Traynor. The problem
with this evidence was that Christopher was undoubtedly in pen 3 and Mr Langley said
that on leaving the tunnel he had gone to his left into pen 4. It is clear that attempts were
very properly made to reconcile the conflict over a period of time, but it had only been
resolved on the evening before the mini-inquest when it emerged that Mr Langley had
been spun round on leaving the tunnel and may have been disorientated. He may in fact
have been facing the tunnel when he said he had gone to his left, which would put him in
pen 3.


All this was explained at the mini-inquest (27 April 1990, p4-6). There is in fact no copy
of Mr Langley’s statement on the body file. I think this was an error. It should have been
there, since Mr Langley identified Christopher Traynor in his statement. However his
clear statement that he had gone into pen 4 makes it understandable that doubt may
have been entertained as to the relevance or accuracy of his identification. In the event
the matter was resolved at the mini-inquest and Mr Fraser, who appeared for the
families asked no questions.



                                               228
    Kevin


    There is a discrepancy between the evidence of PC Turner and that of PC Howell. PC
    Turner helped to remove Kevin from pen 3, laid him on the pitch and a little while later,
    with the assistance of fans, carried him on a hoarding to the gymnasium. He stayed with
    Kevin’s body until it was identified.


    PC Howell thought that he had assisted in carrying a body, which he subsequently
    identified as Kevin, from the pitch in front of the terraces to the Kop end where he was
    placed on the pitch at the corner. Having seen photographs taken of the deceased in the
    mortuary and of his clothing, he said he was 99% certain it was Kevin. PC Howell’s
    statement was not on the body file relating to Kevin. This is obviously because it was
    thought that his identification must be mistaken. There is in my view no reason to doubt
    PC Turner’s evidence.


^   Kevin Williams

    I have discussed the evidence of PC Bruder and WPC Martin in Chapter 4, part 1.


    In her memorial to the Attorney General Mrs Williams, Kevin’s mother, submitted
    transcripts of interviews with two other witnesses conducted by researchers compiling
    the Cook Report TV programme. These people said that they had helped to carry Kevin
    Williams across the pitch on a hoarding.


    I have not been provided with any signed statement by either of these two witnesses, nor
    have I been invited to interview them. The first, Mr O ’Keefe was a qualified first-aider.
    In spite of some persistent questioning by the Cook Report researchers it is extremely
    difficult to discern a clear answer from Mr O ’Keefe as to whether he thought Kevin was
    still alive when he and the others carried him across the pitch and, if so, why.


    At one point Mr O ’Keefe said Kevin appeared to be alive, but the next moment he said
    he didn’t really know. Mr O ’Keefe’s main reason for thinking Kevin might have been
    alive at that time was that he and the others were rushing him across the pitch, and he
    didn’t look as blue as some others.


    The second witness interviewed by the Cook Report researchers is Steven Hart. His
    evidence is equally difficult. When the researchers first ask him what condition Kevin
    was in, he does not really answer the question. Effectively he appears to say that he does
    not know if Kevin was alive, but that he was not off colour and they were anxious to get
    him to the other end of the pitch as quickly as possible. But after what appears, from the
    transcript, to be a break he appears more positive, “He was alive because you knew he
    was alive”. Mr Hart says he could see that some people were clearly dead. Kevin did not
    look like them. This appears to be the basis of his opinion, rather than that there were
    definite signs of life.

                                               229
Mr H art also made a statement to the police, dated 24 May 1989. In this he describes
seeing a policeman giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation to a young lad on the pitch. He
later describes coming back to the lad who was lying alone with his eyes closed. He
thought he was unconscious and with a couple of other supporters placed him on a
hoarding. “As we lifted him on to the board a policeman came forward and pulled the
lad’s jumper up and over his face and I realised then that he was dead”. They then
carried him to the other end of the pitch. It seems clear that this must have been Kevin,
although he never identified him as such, since this is the only casualty that he refers to
as being dealt with in this way.


In my view this evidence adds nothing to the evidence of PC Bruder.


It is, I think, necessary to refer to the evidence that Dr Slater gave about PC Bruder’s
account at the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams (4 May 1990, page 13B):
      “Q. “In the light o f what you heard and what we have heard now, do you feel that
      this lad died, if you like, in the totality sense, I don’t mean that his skin was dead,
      but in lay terms at the point in time when Mr Bruder was with him ?”
      A. “Yes, sir, I am quite confident o f that. When one speaks to lay people who have
      experienced people dying, a word which is recurrent in these descriptions o f death
      is the way that individuals turn grey. In fact, I was very impressed by the content in
      PC Bruder’s statement o f the word ‘grey’, recurring several times. To me as a
      doctor that implied that that was the point o f whole body death. In fact I feel that it
      was probably around that time that Kevin’s whole body died. His brain had died
      twenty/twenty-five minutes before that at the time o f the crushing, but his whole
      body died at the time PC Bruder was with him. ”


Assuming, therefore, that Kevin was alive at 15.35 or shortly thereafter when PC Bruder
and the St John Ambulance people were attending him, I do not think it is possible to
say that his life could have been saved. In a report dated 29 October 1993 which was
considered by the Divisional Court, D r Iain West, Consultant Forensic Pathologist at
Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospital, who was then advising Mrs Williams referred to the
injuries to Kevin’s neck. His report continues:
      “This type o f injury is amenable to treatment in the form o f an emergency
      tracheotomy or a crico-thyroidotomy. Whilst an emergency tracheotomy is a
      relatively major procedure, this crico-thyroidotomy is a simpler procedure which
      involves the passage o f a tube through the membrane between the thyroid and
      cricoid cartilages. It is possible that if one o f these procedures had been carried out
      at the scene then he would not have suffered from the fatal asphyxia which led to
      his death.
      Both crico-thyroidotomy and emergency tracheotomy can be performed in the
      field although, in the latter instance, with, difficulties owing to an increased
       likelihood o f haemorrhage at the operation site”.




                                             230
There is a difference of opinion between D r West and D r Slater. D r West’s opinion is
based upon photographs and Dr Slater’s post-mortem report. He did not therefore have
the advantage of carrying out the post-mortem. Their difference of opinion has been
enlarged upon in letters to me from D r West, dated 12 December 1997, and from
D r Slater, dated 22 December 1997.


It is D r W est’s view that the sole injury was to the neck. He points to the absence of
bruising on the chest. D r Slater accepts that there was an injury to the neck, but
contends that the primary cause of death was the crushing of the chest, with the injury to
the neck being contributory but secondary. He relies on ‘the extensive cyanosis
extending down to the upper part of the chest. This was particularly severe down to the
level of the clavicle and unequivocally present but less severe to a level approximately
below the nipples’. The absence of bruising to the chest was a common finding in those
who unequivocally died of crush asphyxia at Hillsborough. D r Slater supported his
conclusion by a finding of bruising within the heart itself. He also points out that there
was no bruising of the neck muscles. Oedema and swelling of the larynx was also absent;
this might be expected to be present if the sole injury was to the neck. It is unfortunate
that there is this difference of opinion between distinguished pathologists. I am very far
from being persuaded that Dr Slater is wrong.


Mrs Williams considers that D r W est’s view is supported by a change in some
information on the Coroner’s Certificate after the inquest. The original certificate,
dated 28 March 1991, gave the cause of death as ‘Traumatic Asphyxia’. A t that time
certain information was also required for statistical purposes. In answer to the question
‘parts of body injured’—the answer was ‘chest’. As a result of her communications with
D r West, Mrs Williams wanted this changed to ‘neck’. Mr Dorries, who by then had
taken over as Coroner from Dr Popper, raised the m atter with D r Slater. He was not
disposed to dissent. By this time, 1996, the same statistical information was no longer
required and similar questions to those in the 1991 form were not asked.


Mr Dorries was however prepared to issue an amended certificate, dated 4 April 1996.
The cause of death was still given as Traumatic Asphyxia. But in Part V of the form in
answer to the question ‘Details of how accident happened’, the form now reads:
‘Sustained crush injuries at football ground’; Type of injury: ‘Crush’; Parts of body
injured: ‘Neck’. This is not inconsistent with D r Slater’s opinion, since the only visible
external injury is to the neck. But I think that if D r Slater had foreseen the problems
that Mrs Williams was to continue to have on the matter, he might have been wiser to
point out to Mr Dorries that his opinion as to the cause of death had not changed and
that the primary cause remained the crushing of the chest, although the only external
injury was to his neck.
Even if Dr West is correct, in my view there was no realistic possibility that Kevin
Williams’ life could have been saved. The St John Ambulance personnel, in whose
charge he was, were neither trained nor equipped to perform either operation suggested
by D r West. I cannot see that there was any basis upon which a diagnosis could have
been made which indicated the need for such an operation. D r West described the
symptoms which indicate the need for a cricothyroidotomy as “only being apparent in
somebody who was still alive and would be shown by the difficulties that individual is
experiencing in breathing. This would take the form o f increased and exaggerated
respiratory movements involving the chest accompanied by fairly characteristic noises
emanating from the throat and resulting from the individual attempting to draw in air
through a severely constricted airway”.


This is quite inconsistent with the evidence of PC Bruder, who is the only reliable
witness on Kevin’s state.
