                                                           H o m e O ffic e
                                                          QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                          LONDON SW1H 9AT




                                                              18 August 1989




          Thank you for your letter to the Home Secretary of 7 August about
Wffc      publication arrangements for Lord Justice Taylor's interim report
          on the Hillsborough stadium disaster. He has asked me to reply.
          The decision which Ministers tool. on this occasion: was: that
          advance copies of the report should be made available only to
".V'V-    those represented at the enquiry, those directly criticised in
          the report and, as is customary, to a limited number of press.
          It was not intended that others would receive copies before
          publication at 11 am on Friday 4 August- The Superintendents1
          Association and ACPO were also tied to this arrangement. I am
          sorry if there was any misunderstanding.
          I recognise the difficulty you identify, that questions are put
          to you (and others) by the press, immediately they get copies
          tinder embargo. I have some sympathy for your point of view, and
          we will certainly bear this in mind for the future.
                I also say that I am grateful for the measured and
                      comments you made to the media in interviews about
          the report. Thank you.

         - r   ■-




                                            J A CHILCOT


          A Eastwood Esq
                                                            Kr      To/S-.o®     y
                                                                              A-v-'v
                                                              M r
                                                              Mr H o             .\J
                                                              H r     ""S, 2-C       .0
                                                              SU r-
