                                                        <? »/>/fy



LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB
                                   AND ATHLETIC GROUNDS P.L.C.
                                   ANFIELD ROAD, LIVERPOOL L4 OTH
                                           0 5 1-26 3 2361 /2
  Official Sponsor                 Telex 627661 U F C G                       Fax 051-260 8813
                                                        Registered No. 3 5 6 6 8 . England
                                   Match Information Service Only        Match Ticket Office, Enquiries Only
                                          0 5 1 -2 6 0 9 9 9 9                    0 5 1 -2 6 0 B6BO




   Miss E.M. Steel,
   Hillsborough Steering Committee,
   c/o Castle Chambers,
   Cook Street,
   Liverpool,
   L2 9SH.                                                             24th May 1989

   Dear Miss Steel,

            Thank you for your letter dated 9th May.   The information
   you require on stewarding and First Aid provision at Anfield on
   match days, prior to the Hillsborough Disaster, is as follows

            In the Safety Certificate which is issued by the Liverpool
   City Building SurTeyor'* the establishment for first team matches
   calls for a total of 116 stewards.    The minimum number of
   stewards and their function and distribution are given below

                     Exit Stewards                                     41
                     Relief Exit Stewards                              15
                     Crowd Stewards                                    46
                     Safety Stewards                                   14
                                                                      116

             On average the club employ 194 stewards per game. The
    number and Functions are as specified above, with a substantial
    increase in crowd control stewards to a total of 78.

             In addition, there are 2 I/C stewards and 7 head stewards
    controlling the 5 main sections of the stadium, 10 stewards
    attending club car parking and ticket offices, 23 lounge and
    internal room stewards, 6 stewards covering players and other
    V.I.P. entrance areas and 5 administration stewards.   Briefly,
    the stewards'instruction and training includes sessions in the
    months of August and January each year, addressed by representatives
    of the Local Authority, the Police and the Fire Authority.
    Perimeter stewards are used at the close of each match and total
    12 in number.

              On arrival the stewards are briefed by the I/C steward
    before being assigned to the appropriate task and issued with a
     olo£»ecl>-«ytmbered jacket.


                f                                                               contd.
                                K.M. OALGLISH, M.B.E.                       P.B. ROBINSON
I.F.O-                          PLAYER/TEAM MANAGER                         CHIEF EXECUTIVE/GENERAL SECRETARY
 Registered Trade Marks
         After the stadium is open to the public, communication
between chief stewards, club officials, police and duty stewards is
by portable radio (6) and internal manned telephone points (24)
situated in every area of the stadium.    The internal telephone
control and communication centre also houses the crowd control
computer and printer, together with a television screen receiving
CCTV scanning by police personnel from 7 cameras covering inside
and outside the stadium.    The police have 2 separeate rooms for
control within the stadium.

         Two First Aid rooms at Anfield are situated at either end
of the ground in the Paddock Enclosure.   The St. John Ambulance
Brigade cover every event at the ground with 24 officers and
members present, with an ambulance in attendance, with 30
stretchers available.

         With regard to the "make-up" of the supporters entering
the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough this is difficult to
proportion with any accuracy.

         I trust that this information will be helpful to the
Hillsborough Steering Committee and if you require anything further
please do not hesitate to contact me.

                             Yours sincerely,




                                                 ,.< 7




                                          R.E. Jones
                                      Assistant Secretary
