NEWS RELEASE                     50 Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                 (Night line 01 -2 7 3 4595)
                                  Contact N u m b e r:


                      HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

                 STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY


Commenting today on the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's
report, the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP said:-

"i am grateful to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for completing
the first part of his inquiry in time to produce an interim report
before the start of the football season.

nIt is an excellent report which pulls no punches about the causes
of the disaster.

"The Government welcomes the thoroughness of the report and its
recommendations. They include a number of matters which should be
dealt with without delay pending the longer-term findings of the
inquiry which will be published in the final report.

"A Home Office circular* is to be sent out immediately to local
authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned with
the organisation of football matches, urging them to take action
on the report's recommendations so as to put as many of them into
effect as possible before the beginning of the season. Similar
steps are being taken by the Secretary of State for Scotland.

"I am satisfied that the interim report has not identified any
major shortcomings in the law on safety in sports grounds, though
clearly the Government will look at the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act and the Home Office and Scottish Office guide to safety at
sports grounds ( The Green Guide) in the light of the inquiry.

"Most of the problems which contributed to the disaster at
Hillsborough had been recognised in the past. The report reveals
serious shortcomings in applying those lessons on the part of the
police, of the club and of the local authority responsible for
the safety certificate.

"The report reveals clearly that there are major deficiencies in
the layout and organisation of the Hillsborough ground which
should have been recognised and corrected."




* A copy of the circular is attached.
The South Yorkshire Police


"It will be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to
consider the conduct of individual officers and the South
Yorkshire Police collectively in the light of the inquiry and the
investigation carried out by the West Midlands Police. I shall
look to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire initially for a
report on the action he proposes to take."


Supervision of Safety Certificates

"Powers recently proposed by the Government in the Football
Spectators Bill will permit the setting up of a new authority
with powers to supervise the way in which local authorities carry
out their responsibilities for the safety of sports grounds if in
due course this is considered necessary in the light of Lord
Justice Taylor's final report.

"The tragedy would not have occurred if lessons learnt in the
past had been properly applied. It is for everyone concerned to
ensure they are applied in the future."
   Note to Editors

   Following the disaster at Hillsborough stadium on April 15, when
   95 people were killed, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the
   Home Secretary

   "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
   ground on April 15 1989 and to make recommendations about the
   needs of crowd control and safety at sports events."

     Lord Justice Taylor was assisted by two Assessors: Mr Brian
     Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
     Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University
     of Newcastle upon Tyne. The secretary of the Inquiry was Mr Robert
     Whalley from the Home Office. The investigation of the disaster
     and the gathering of evidence was carried out by the West Midlands
^ ^ P o l i c e under their Chief Constable Mr Geoffrey Dear, who appointed
     Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full time charge of
     the investigation. Counsel for the Inquiry were led by Mr Andrew
     Collins QC. Technical tests and studies were carried out at the
     Health and Safety Executive's Research and Laboratory Services
     Division in Sheffield.

   The hearing began on May 15 in Sheffield Town Hall, and continued
   for 31 days concluding on June 29. 174 witnesses gave oral
   evidence. Transcripts of the evidence came to over 3,800 pages,
   and some one and a half million words in all. Lord Justice Taylor
   also received some 1550 letters.
                                                 HOME OFFICE
                                          Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                  Direct line: 01-273
                                                Switchboard: 01-273 3000



Our reference:    FEP/89 35/48/88

Your reference:


       The Chief Executive
       County Councils
       Metropolitan District Councils
       London Borough Councils
       Common Council of the City of London
       Fire and Civil Defence Authorities

       Chief Officers of Police

       Chief Fire Officers

       Chief Ambulance Officers


                                                       4 August 1989




        Dear Sir/Madam

       HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 68/1989

        INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
        Introduction
        The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
        into the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield
        on 15 April has now been published. A copy of the Report is
        attached.  Further copies are available from HMSO bookshops.

        2.   The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the
        contents of the Report and to urge them to take required action
        without delay in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's
        recommendations to improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.

        Government response

        3.   The Home Secretary has welcomed the thoroughness of the
        Report and its recommendations which he believes should be dealt
        with without delay pending the longer term findings of the
        Inquiry which will be published in its Final Report.
Scope of the recommendations

4.   Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed
primarily at football league grounds and the international
stadiums used for soccer and rugby where there are liable to be
large, densely packed crowds on terraces. Recipients should
nonetheless consider their application to other designated sports
grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in
attendance.

5.   The 43 recommendations are in paragraph 316. They are in
two categories: the 28 asterisked are those requiring
implementation before the start of the new football season or
immediately thereafter; the remaining 15 are those which,
although requiring immediate action are likely to take longer to
put into effect. The Home Secretary nevertheless urges
recipients to take urgent action on both categories so as to put
into effect as many of the recommendations as possible before the
start of the season.

The guide to safety at sports grounds

6.   It is anticipated that the Guide will be amended to reflect
the Inquiry's findings in due course after consultation with
appropriate bodies. Any changes will take account of the Final
Report's recommendations.  If there is any doubt as to the
nature of crush barrier testing described in Annex C of the Guide
advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.

The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

7.   Consideration is also being given to any necessary
enforcement of the Report's recommendations by means of a
Statutory Instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) requiring safety certificates to
include mandatory terms and conditions.  Consultation as required
under section 18 of the 1975 Act will first be carried out before
any such Order is made.

Football clubs

8.   A copy of this circular together with the Report has been
sent to all 92 football league clubs and the international
stadiums in the expectation that they will co-operate fully.
Should co-operation not be forthcoming local authorities are
reminded of their powers under s.10 of the 1975 Act for use if
there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of
the ground.

Resource implications

9.   Whilst acknowledging that local authorities will need to
examine current priorities in order to action the Inquiry's
E.R.



       recommendations, it is not envisaged that there should be
       significant long-term resource implications for them. The cost
       of any additional policing and/or provision of ambulance
       services at football grounds is expected to be met by the clubs
       or ground operators themselves.

       Other

       10. Any enquiries about this circular except barrier testing
       (see paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to Mr A Brown
       (01-273 2765).

       11.     Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.

                                   Yours faithfully




                                   A H TURNEY
                                   Fire and Emergency Planning Department
    E.R.
*




           Association of County Councils

           Association of Metropolitan Authorities

           London Boroughs Association

           Association of London Authorities

           Association of District Councils

           Welsh Counties Association

           Association of Chief Police Officers

           Clerks to Police Authorities

           Regional Managers, Health Authorities

           Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

           National Association of Fire Officers

           Fire Brigades Union

           Police Federation

           Police Superintendents' Association

           Association of Chief Ambulance Officers

           Football Association

           Football Association of Wales

           Football League

           Football Trust

           Football Grounds Improvement Trust

           Rugby Football Union

           Welsh Rugby Football Union

           Rugby Football League

           Speedway Control Board

           Cricket Council

           Jockey Club

           National Greyhound Racing Club
» E.R.



         Lawn Tennis Association

         All England Tennis and Croquet Club

         Royal and Ancient Golf Club

         RAC Motor Sports Association

         British Board of Amateur Athletics

         Hockey Association

         British Show Jumping Association

         National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs

         Football Supporters Association

         St Johns Ambulance

         Sports Councils for England and Wales

         Central Council for Physical Recreation
