DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT)                             Building Research Establishment
                                                           Garston Watford WD2 7JR
                                                           Telephone 0923 894040    Fax 0923 664010
                                                           Telex 923220
                                 K.     JtO
                                                           Direct line 0923 66
                                                                      GTN 3532     4206
                                   C\

                                 1 in< '-c                 18 May 1989

 R M Whalley Esq
 Secretary to Hillsborough Enquiry    fcte,                       j        i      tw
 Home Office
 Room 662                                    IV,
                                   •V ,A \aj     —j                                       *>€
^Aeen
    en i
       Anne's Gate
         SWlH 9AT                                     v3
                                                      rwwj

                                                                                 T'wJ,     |H     fi-A/.

    5                                                        0
 BRE CONTRIBUTION TO HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

 We spoke about the invitation, transmitted through DOE's Sports and Recreation
 Directorate, for BRE to indicate areas where the Establishment might be able
 to assist the Enquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy.

 A few words of introduction may be relevant. BRE is the main centre for
 construction-related research in the United Kingdom, and the main source of
 independent technical information for the construction industry. The
 Establishment currently has son© 660 staff, those directly engaged in research
 being organised into five main technical Groups, of which the two most
 relevant to the Enquiry are the Geotechnics and Structures Group and the Fire
 Research Station (FRS). BRE provides technical support to the development of
 Building Regulations and has many representatives on British and International
 Standards and Codes committees. In addition, it has played a leading role in
 the investigation of building collapses and major fires. Thus my colleagues
 are very used to working with administrative divisions to translate technical
 findings into 'official' documents. I enclose copies of the BRE Annual Report
 for 1987/8 (that for 1988/9 will be available in July); this will give you
 some idea of the range and scale of our activities.

 From previous experience (eg Mr Justice Popplewell's enquiry following the
 Bradford FC fire, where FRS took the technical lead), we would expect the
 Enquiry to have three main stages:

        i.   assembly of information on the events at Hillsborough;

        ii. preparation of a description of those events with, as far as the
        evidence will allow, an explanation of the circumstances which led to the
        fatalities;

        iii. formulation of recommendations, for general application.

  The potential contribution of BRE to the work of the Enquiry would fall, for
  the most part, in stage (iii).
For stage (ii), however, my FRS colleagues could contribute to the Enquiry
current information from the UK and overseas on crowd behaviour in emergency
situations, including responses to messages about the nature of the emergency.
This information may, though, be available to the Enquiry from other sources.

In stage (iii), the Enquiry will no doubt wish to consider a wide range of
circumstances in which 'incidents' of different kinds (fire, violence etc)
could lead to injuries. This is likely to require a systematic investigation
   the potential interactions between crowd characteristics (size, segregation

• rangements, density, flow patterns etc); the layout of entrances, tunnels
  etc; fire protection measures and the communications systems available to
  inform and guide the crowd and officials. The performance requirements of
different parts of the crowd management arrangements - barriers, fences,
emergency exits etc - may then be derived. The Enquiry may wish to suggest
design procedures and methods for assessing the adequacy of present stadia.

Both Structures Group and FRS have relevant expertise to offer to this
process. In investigating the collapse or partial collapse of a building,
failure modes have to be postulated in conditions of high uncertainty, and
tests and analytical procedures devised to investigate these. Following such
tests and further analyses, design guidance and methods of assessing existing
structures may be formulated. Fire safety engineering considers the
contribution made by each aspect of the fire protection arrangements to the
overall fire safety of the building, and the interaction between different
aspects, under different fire scenarios. A similar approach would be
appropriate for other hazards, and for the integration of the detailed
studies. Both Groups are accustomed to looking at events where current
practice has failed to prevent injury, identifying failure mechanisms and
devising inproved guidance.

I hope that this brief assessment of the relevance of BRE's expertise to the
Enquiry will be helpful. My colleagues and I would, of course, be very
pleased to discuss further with Lord Justice Taylor and Professor Maunder the
contribution that the Establishment might make.

I am copying this letter to Mr Kinghan (SARD) and to Mr McDonald (CID/SARD).




R G COURTNEY
DIRECTOR

ENC
XX#*
