                  From Brian Johnson, Q.P.M ., D.L., Chief Constable.         H)xZdh
                                            POLICE              HEADQUARTERS
                                            HUTTON,             P R E S T O N , PR4 5SB


CC/JH                                                                   25th September 1989.




Following our last meeting in your office with Sir Peter, I have
prepared some briefing papers on some of the issues that arose
during that meeting.  Please find papers attached in respect of:
The Problem of Ticketless Fans.
The Time Taken to Process Prisoners.
The Psychology of the Football Hooligan.

I will do some further work in respect of The Psychology of Football
Hooligans.  Once the Intelligence Unit has settled down I will ask
them to prepare me a report which might be of interest to us.  In
addition, as mentioned in the attached note, David Phillips, Deputy
Chief Constable of Devon and Cornwall, is the acknowledged authority
as far as A.C.P.O. goes on this subject and I really feel that it
would be in our interests to give him an opportunity of speaking to
Sir Peter.

I also enclose a briefing note for you following the letter from the
                 dealing with events after the Hillsborough tragedy and
in particular with police casualty bureau arrangements.  I trust that
the information will enable you to draft a suitable reply to the




R.M. Whalley, Esq.,
Secretary,
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry,
Home Office,
Queen Anne's Gate,
London,
SW1H 9AT.
THE PROBLEM OF TICKETLESS FANS

There is little doubt that the problem of ticketless fans attending all­
ticket matches continues to be a pressing problem for police commanders.
Perversely,  there may be some evidence that the effects of reducing
capacities of stadia following completion of Phase One of the Inquiry may
have exacerbated the problem.

Considerable police manpower is required to deal with ticketless fans,
particularly when significant numbers are involved.     Often, such manpower
may not be readily available, creating pressure on commanders to allow
such fans access to stadia (see Appendix 'A' - extract from Association of
Chief Police Officers submission to the Inquiry).    However, it is probably
true  to  say   that  this  practice,  which  provides    for  the immediate
resolution of the problem whilst being self-defeating in the long term,
will have been far less prevalent post-Hillsborough.

In addressing the question as to whether it would be possible to isolate
ticketless fans in 'some area' until the match is over, it is necessary to
consider existing powers.   Clearly, no current legislation is designed to
effect this problem per se.   Whilst common law Breach of the Peace may be
a pragmatic option in certain limited circumstances, this could not be
deemed an acceptable basis upon which to progress this idea.    Further, if
consideration  were   to  be     given to the  introduction    of  specific
legislation, or indeed the recommendation of procedures and appropriate
facilities, certain practical difficulties would need to be addressed.

The availability of sufficient police manpower to deal with a detention
situation, temporary though    it may be, would be a prime  consideration.
Even if it was envisaged that the 'corralling' of ticketless fans would be
on the basis of the availability of a facility, as opposed to detention,
the very nature of the people involved would require a police supervisory
presence.   Additionally, the requirement to identify a secure area, or
accommodation, and equip same with the necessary amenities would present
practical difficulties.  It is likely that at many clubs this simply would
not be available.

However, assuming the availability of such accommodation, the problems
associated with holding fans in this way, or alternatively offering this
facility, would be considerable.   The potential for crowd safety problems
on   terraces may   well  bereplicated   within   the  new   holding   area.
Similarly, with the problem of disorder, ensuring the safety of fans so
accommodated would be extraordinarily difficult.    Indeed it could be the
case that, in an attempt to address the problem of ticketless fans, a
second policing, or stewarding, operation would be required to overcome
what may in effect be a 'self imposed' secondary crowd control problem.

From a purely policing viewpoint, the isolating of ticketless fans may be
a viable    option   in certain     limited    circumstances    (e.g.  intelligence
suggesting there to be a potential problem with a small number of fans).
However,  the    'enshrining'   of   this   option   in  legislation,    or   indeed
recommendations for procedures and         the availability of facilities, may
well create considerable operational difficulties.           In addition to those
outlined   above,    it  is   worth    bearing    in  mind    the   suspicion   that
acquiescence by police commanders in the past, understandable though it
may have been, to pressure from ticketless fans requiring admittance to
matches may have provided an encouragement to supporters to repeat this
practice.    Similarly, it may be the case that providing facilities for
ticketless fans in the vicinity of stadia would also prove to be an
inducement, thereby exacerbating what is already a significant problem.
                                                              APPENDIX 'A'




As a sanction against troublesome supporters the FA have insisted that for
some clubs, Leeds United being the best known example, away fixtures
should be "all ticket".   Only approved supporters of the Leeds Club with
Supporters Club Cards are allowed to buy tickets.      This system has in
fairness done something to moderate the reputation of Leeds but largely
by transferring the problem.  ACPO did not support the scheme in principle
although they agreed to st3nd by it. In fact,      on the day, many Match
Commanders faced with a mob outside the ground and insufficient resources
to Police in and out, simply let them in without tickets.      This was a
regrettable reality but underlines the difficulties associated with "all
ticket" fixtures.    No doubt long term and short term solutions are in
conflict here, and no doubt resolve in favour of the long term should be
best practice, but it is only fair to record that on many occasions Match
Commanders have acceded   to the mob at the gate  and let in fans without
t ickets.
    THE TIME TAKEN TO PROCESS PRISONERS

The procedures for the processing of persons arrested at football matches
differ between forces.   They range from the arresting officer presenting
his prisoner at a police room at the ground (where they are photographed
together and brief details provided on a pro forma basis where possible)
to one where the arresting officer takes the prisoner from the ground to a
police station.

It is clearly the case that the problems caused by the abstraction of
officers from their intended duties within the ground are minimised in
those   forces   where procedures are   streamlined and  'pro  formarised'
wherever possible, thus permitting a quick return by the officer to his
post.    Obviously, in cases where there are a large number of prisoners
involved, or where prisoners are violent, the abstraction times of the


♦
officers are increased accordingly.   However, when pre-match intelligence
and previous history suggests that this may be the case, the size of the
dedicated police teams employed in the police rooms at grounds may also be
increased accordingly.

Where procedures are already streamlined in relation to arrested persons,
it is unlikely that further significant reductions of abstraction times of
arresting officers could be achieved.      In that a system utilising a
dedicated police room for the processing of prisoners at the ground was
being employed on the day of Hillsborough, it would seem that the period
quoted by Police Sergeant 1288 Payne during the Inquiry (Transcript of
Proceedings 15, pages 77-81) for which he was absent from his duties
processing prisoners was abnormally long (1 hour 20 minutes).

In brief, the Operational Order required             the    following   procedures   to be
completed in the police room regarding:

i)        photograph (officer and prisoner together);

    ii)   completion of "Form PACE.19" (N.B. presumably "19" is a misprint and
          should probably read "10", as there is no record of such a form as
          PACE 19: PACE 10 is a custody record);

iii) completion of "necessary paperwork";

    iv)   checking of   paperwork   by   the   process     supervisor   in   the   adjacent
          gymnasium.

Sergeant Payne stated that the paperwork included "a summary report or
charge report ...... , a statement and another form, leave and that sort of
thing".   Whilst it is difficult to comment on whether the procedure could
have been further streamlined, this would seem to have been possible in
view of the 80 minutes it apparently took him to complete it.           'Pro
formarised' procedures, as employed by a number of forces, effect the
return  of   officers  to  their  posts,  under  normal  circumstances,   in
significantly less time.   Indeed, the "half an hour to forty-five minutes"
which Sergeant Payne suggested "would be the norm" is also considered to
be excessive.




                                               1
    It is likely that forces which have not streamlined their procedures to
    the same extent as others could achieve reductions     in the time officers
    are away from their posts as a result of processing prisoners.       However,
    it is perhaps pertinent to note that this particular aspect has not been
    identified  as  a   problem  at  annual  conferences   attended   by   police
    commanders with a responsibility for policing football.

    On a slightly wider note, where procedures involve the arresting officers
    accompanying their  prisoners to police stations, the absence of officers
    from their duties at the ground (some could be        absent for the full
    duration of the match) could have a significant effect on policing of the
    match.

    It may be that forces following this procedure believe they are conforming
    to Section 30(1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, in that
    the prisoner is taken to the designated police station by a constable as



•
     soon as practicable after the arrest.     Conversely, those forces using
    police rooms at grounds will also believe they are taking the arrested
    persons to designated police stations as soon as     practicable, it being
    considered imperative that the arresting officer returns to his post on
    the ground as soon as possible.

    Informal contact with the Home Office would suggest that the correctness
    of holding prisoners in police rooms at grounds would depend upon the
    period of time involved and whether this related to practicability or
    convenience.    However, it should be noted that there is no requirement
    under the Act for the arresting officer to be the     actual constable who
    takes  the   arrested   persons to   the designated police  station:    any
    constable may perform this function.




                                           2
                   THE PSYCHOLOGY OF FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM

Endeavours   to   root  out    the   causations   and  psychology   of  football
hooliganism necessarily     must take account of reputable academic sources.
In   this  regard,   'The    Sir Norman   Chester   Football   Research  Centre'
(Leicester University) would appear to represent the most authoritative
body   for  consultation.       They   have   produced  a  number   of  research
publications, not least     'The Roots of Football Hooliganism - a historical
and sociological study'(Eds. Dunning, Murphy,       Wilson -  Routledge, Keegan
Paul, London, 1988) which may be regarded as an academic 'reader' on the
subject of football hooliganism, viewed from a sociological perspective.

However, there is, without question, within the Police Service a wealth of
supportable   intelligence   and   evidence   that  would  point  to a  more
organised,   systematic   and    criminal   structure  for football  related
hooliganism.    It may be said that a view derived from this perspective
would question the relevance of a sociological analysis of the problem,
perhaps even labelling such an approach apologist.

The accredited   authority within Association    of  Chief Police Officer
circles is the current Deputy Chief      Constable of Devon and   Cornwall,
Mr. David Phillips, B.A. (Econ).    As Secretary to the ACPO Sub-Committee
on Hooliganism at Sporting Events, he has been responsible for many of the
police initiatives designed to combat football hooliganism, including the
organising  and   chairing of   annual  conferences   for  police  football
commanders.

Mr. Phillips would contend that, of      all bodies, the police   are best
qualified to speak with real authority about 'the football hooligan'.    In
particular, the successful covert operations for which he was responsible
in his previous post have resulted in police officers observing football
hooligans at first hand through the      infiltration of organised groups.
This unique insight allows these officers to comment directly on the
football hooligan, not just upon the average fan and academic theory.

In support of what, for want of a better phrase, may be termed the 'police
perspective', Mr. Phillips would like the opportunity to produce evidence
based upon his considerable experience of football hooliganism, and indeed
expose the members of the Inquiry to insight gleaned through covert police
operations by some of the officers involved.

There is little doubt that input of this nature from Mr. Phillips would be
of considerable benefit to the Inquiry in its endeavours to come to terms
with the rationale to football hooliganism.
CORRESPONDENCE FROM THE

The                  refers in his correspondence (copy attached) to what
may be summarised as a confused situation following the disaster at the
Hillsborough Stadium, in that a less than organised scene prevailed on his
arrival at the gymnasium where      the deceased had been taken.      Upon
attending the gymnasium, he was asked to go to Hammerton Road Police
Station to assist in establishing a crisis centre for people who were
attempting to find missing relations and friends.    After commenting upon
the decision to set up a centre at the Penistone Road Boys Club, he
returned to the football club where he found an efficient system had been
established inside, albeit there were chaotic scenes outside.

The question appended to the                    letter regarding the need
"to lay down a procedure for coping with a major disaster" is an entirely
understandable response to his observations.   It must be said, however,
that all police forces already have documented force procedures of this
nature,  designed   to  complement  their particular   organisational and
geographical structure.

Contingency plans   for pre-identified    areas of risk can include such
features as mortuaries, casualty reception areas and relative assembly
points, etc., but contingency     plans for hitherto unidentified disaster
scenes such as the rail or aircraft crash can only outline the general
principles  of approach;   the venues    of   specific  details,    mortuaries,
casualty   reception areas, being decided by      divisional officers in command
based on     local knowledge and previously identified     options.     Clearly,
football   stadia would fall into the former      category. For this reason, it
is anticipated that, particularly post-Hillsborough,         'stadia specific'
contingency plans for major incidents would be the norm.

However, what these or any other procedures cannot do is         remove the
inevitable initial confusion that will always be associated with events of
the nature of Hillsborough, though good contingency planning will minimise
this.    Additionally, the particular difficulty at Hillsborough was the
presence of relatives on site, which means that the requirement to deal
with   them was    immediate.    Bearing   in mind  the inevitable  initial
confusion, even the most      efficient  of contingency  plans relating   to
mortuaries, casualty reception, liaison with and care of relatives       and
casualty bureaux, will not be able to provide immediately for all the
various requirements associated with these facilities and services.     This
is particularly the case when relatives are on site and involved in the
disaster.

Dealing further with the remaining part of the appended question, the "co­
ordination of hospital/mortuary information service to relatives" already
forms part of the normal contingency planning for major disasters by all
forces, though the precise details will of course vary.     Essentially, to
enable answers to be given, accurate and credible information must first be
established.   The basis for establishing such an information bank is to
station casualty documentation teams at hospitals and casualty reception
areas.   The information obtained is sent, usually by designated telephone
links, to a Force casualty bureau and is fed into the casualty bureau
system to form the basis of answers to members of the public.     The basic
principles of casualty bureau operations are the same nationwide.
However, the previous comment regarding difficulties associated with the
presence of relatives on site and effectively involved in the disaster
again apply.     Despite the standard casualty bureau  procedures having
proven themselves to be very effective on many past occasions, it is
difficult to envisage any means of providing immediate answers to all
enquiries in the initial stages of a disaster.

In conclusion, there may be merit in encouraging the identification of
specific accommodation within or close by stadia along with associated
administrative   procedures, though   to   repeat earlier   comment,   it  is
anticipated that forces will have already catered for this, if not pre-,
then  certainly post-Hillsborough.       However, it  is   likely   that  any
recommendations to lay down further procedures, or amend those already in
existence, to effect the "co-ordination of hospital/mortuary information
services to relatives" would not prove useful.     Proven procedures already
exist to minimise the initial confusion and supply accurate information as
soon as is practicably possible.
' FROM   FIRE SERUICeS   INSPECTORfiTE/FEU                  09. 13. 1 9 8 9   09:53         NO   1   P   2




                                                                    Sheffield.
                                                                    5th June 1989.
         West Midlands Police
         Hillsborough Judicial Inquiry
          Investigation Team.


         Dear Sirs,

                 Enclosed herewith is a brief statement of my involvement and
          observation of events at the Hillsborough Disaster.                 Although, as you
         will see, it does not relate to the initial incident but to the care of
          those involved, I hope it may still be of sone value to the inquiry and to
          the irrprovement of actions in any future crisis situation.                 If I can be
                            anoifltnnco pl«sca rtn nnt hpsittp to contact IDSi

                 Yours sincerely.
FROf !   F I RE   SERUICES   I NSPECTORO TE/FEU-                   no   IT    1 QOO   •“ 9 V 5 - !




                   On Saturday 14th April 1989           I was     travelling in iry car, after

                   conducting a wedding at Endcliffe Methodist Church, to the Botanical

                   Gardens for photographs en route to the reception, and turned on the

                   radio to see how the FA Cup semi-final               match was going.                   I was

                   surprised to hear an appeal for doctors to go to Hillsborough and then

                   the reporter commented that two people were being carried off on

                   towrrilngn with rm fa nvrir fhrrtr lmrtrfo nrrniiimhlv ripflrt.                   fts rhanlnln
                   to Sheffield Wednesday F.C. I felt compelled to offer any assistance I

                   coulcT give, so I left my wife with friendsarri went to Hammerton Road

                   Police Station to ask if I could help.                    I was directed to the

                   gymnasium at the football ground and made my way there on foot to

                   avoid the congestion of traffic.



                  When I identified myself to police on duty and explained why I had

                  come   I was immediately admitted to the gymnasium.                    On entering,         my

                   initial reaction on seeing so many people laid on the floor was that a

                   lot of people had been injured but suddenly realised to my horror that

                  th«y ware dead.            I aleo looked at the haggard faces of police,

                  ambulance and firemen, many working through their tears,                               others

                  standing bewildered and exhausted.            The first person to recognise me

                  and welcone my presence was the club physiotherapist.



                  I was directed to a young man at the far end who had just identified

                  his 26 year old wife as one of the dead.              I spoke to him briefly but
                  lie re-cujUxl auyrily and abusively at ray, probably clumsy, attempt to

                  offer comfort and walked away from me - I realised he needed that


                                                          -1-
ffSOi* :;■£             imuscTORPTE.i-esu                    Q9.n.me   oe-«<       NO.   1   S.   d




               release and that I could be of no further help to him so I indicated
               to someone else to go to him.



               I was then recognised as the chaplain to South Yorkshire County Fire

               Service by A.C.O. Alan Hornsby of the Fire Service who briefed me on

               the situation and introduced me to the Chief Superintendent of Police

               directing operations in the gymnasium, who asked me to return to

               Hammerton Road Folice Station to assist in setting up a crisis centre

               to a33*'3t        to flnd relations and friends who were missing.



              As I was on my way from the gymnasium I met Archdeacon Stephen Lowe

              and two other clergy and asked them to accompany me. After a quick

              visit to the executive suite where I saw the club secretary, chairman

              and several directors whom I briefed on the current situation and told

              them of my intended actions. I went with the other clergy to Hamrrerton

              Road Police Station where we met the police with other clergy and

         Jsocial workers, and agreed to set up a centre at Penlstone Road Bovs

         'club.       There was a great         deal     of confusion and problems of

              communication, but in spite of this a system of operation was rapidly
              agreed and organised.         Eventually I was asked to return to the

          gymnasium at Hillsborough ground to assist with preparations to
          receive people for the identification of the dead.



          Inside the gymnasium a very efficient organisation had been set up.

          We made some suggestions to accelerate the procedure and curtail the

          wait for the large crowds of anxious relations and friends, which were

          readily accepted and acted on. The suggestion to increase heating was


                                                   -2-
r;.\c   i ! r v , . [ )   illicit   vitHit/ftk                  0 9 . 1 3 . 1 9 8 5*   69! 5s        NO.   1   F .   5




        wisely rejected on the advice of the Hall Manager as                                      it would

        advorsoly affect the atmosphere.                Tte salvation An y provided blankets

        to keep people warm as they waited in the cold outside.



        Outside the gymnasium was chaotic. Hot drinks were readily available

        but otherwise organisation was almost conpletely absent.                                Many police

        stood around bewildered and without direction.                            Cne senior officer,

        who had been previously assisting at Penistone Road Boys Club, was

        single handedly trying to collect names to organise some sequence and

        order for people to go into the gymnasium and tried unsuccessfully to

        persuade people to remain on the buses that had brought them from the

        Boys Club.              It would have been more effective if he had utilised some

        of the many police officers who were hanging about with seemingly

        nothing to do. Others arrived from two hospitals and everyone simply

        attempted to queue at the gym entrance.                As time went on and nany

        began to suffer from cold, shock and tiredness we persuaded some to

        come into the lounge and hallway of the complex, and another attenpt

        was made to list names and arrange a systematic sequence for entry to

        the       identification process.             Hie lack of telephones created added

        stress to waiting anxious people and distress                      to those who wished to

        convey news to relations at home.



        A major defect throughout was lack of information and very poor

        ccrmunlgations.                For example,   it proved       inpossible to get any

        information at Penistone Road Boys Club of the names of any who had
        been admitted into hospital.




                                                        -3-
inf W U S L yffl.7nW      rIUc a curpiuc or pocJU UMarA'i'11U ,   na^nol

   been so involved and were better able to cope.



   I returned to Hillsborough at 8.00 am and was directed to the new

   centre set up in the Roman Catholic Church Hall in Forbes Road where I

   assisted with receiving and accompanying relatives and friends of the

   dead to the Medico-legal centre.   I left at 4.00. pm after becoming

   exceedingly angry with a press photographer who was intruding into the

   grief of bereaved folk by taking photographs and adding to their

 »Vdistress.



 r The remainder of the week I was at SWFC organising the reception and

 I counselling of the bereaved, injured and traumatised people who
   visited the ground.     As club chaplain I was given unrestricted

   facilities by the club and complete co-operation and assistance from

   the West Midlands Police Force investigation team who had charge of

   the ground on behalf of the judical enquiry.         This was greatly

  appreciated by all.



  Constant harassment by an I.T.N Team caused considerable distress to

  visitors and workers.   The police responded immediately to any request

   to remove this intrusion, and we were grateful for their assistance.
criticisms    (Not complaints)



1 Poor communications and lack of information.

    Especially lack of    lists of injured in hospital or any dead

    identified from their possessions which would have facilitated

    earlier identification of waiting relatives and friends.



2 Lack of organisation and no systematic control of people awaiting

    identification of the dead.



3 Apparent superfluous number of police with no purposeful activity

      early hours of Sunday norning.



    "a)~~ Tensions between social workers and their management during

           follow-up counselling.



    b)    Tensions between statutory social    services and voluntary

          agencies.



COMPLAINTS



1   The behaviour of many press photographers and reporters was

    absolutely disgraceful.

2 The intrusion of Television cameras created distress for bereaved

    and   stress for staff and counsellors at SWFC.



Both hindered workers and distressed those involved in the incident.
*“ «? o n   FIRE   SERVICES   1NSFEC70RSTE/FEU                  3 9 .1 3 .1 9 8 9    18)84     NO.   1   P.   8




                   COMPLIMENT.



                   The spontaneous rio-operat-ion of such a   large nusrter of people in the

                   emergency services, statutory services and voluntary organisations as

                   well as many individual members of the public was quite remarkable and

                   the degree of willingness^ to accept direction and to take initiative
                   was exceptional.




                                                                                   Sheffield
                                                                              Tel: Sheffield




                                                      - 6 -
