                                  CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                                   ^       2 4 IAN 199
                                                                   7 MARSH A M          STREET
                   C C (Yls                                        LONDON          SW1P 3EB
                       f \ \ r '"(cxVe.S'
                                                                   01-276 3 0 0 0
                        <N\.C (VlcsrS~CM~tv
                        f W CU x U o f                             My ref:

                                                                    Your r e f :
                       tfVAo                 Srv-xl^V
                       C/w.
                        *V\r~
                       v\ A j "   VVO O^-O
Colin Waters
Private Secretary to
The Home Secretary
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT                                                   January 1990



             vV\                                         >


HOME SECRETARY'S STATEMENT ON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT
     ,                    f




Thank you for getting the draft statement to us yesterday
evening. My Secretary of State has now considered it and there
are a number of amendments which he would like to see made, so
that it reflects fully the points agreed at yesterday morning's
meeting at No.10:

- on page 6, he considers it important that the Home Secretary
should be as positive as possible about taking forward Lord
Justice Taylor's recommendations for anti-hooliganism measures.
He suggests amending the final sentence of the first paragraph to
xead:
     "I welcome these recommendations in principle and will
     consider the most practical methods of giving them effect."

- on page 7, he suggests that the first sentence should begin
     "As I have mentioned, in relation                       to    hooliganism             Lord
     Justice Taylor takes the view..."

And that, for the sake of completeness,                 the second sentence of
the same paragraph should end:
     "an extension of the courts’ powers to                         make           attendance
     orders and to impose electronic tagging."

- pages 7 and 8; replace the paragraphs on the                                         national
membership scheme by those attached to this letter.                                    ^
My Secretary of State takes the view that the paragraphs on the
national membership scheme should come at the end of the
statement, as they do in the draft. H y ^ a U s . that it was agreed1
at yesterday's meeting that the Home Secretary would confirm his,'
indention to implement Part II of the Football Spectators Act
very soon".

My Secretary of State would like to have a word with the Horae
Secretary on the telephone this afternoon before he has to leave
for Nairobi, We have first order questions at 2.30pm. Perhaps Mr
Patten and Mr Waadington could have a word after that, say at
about 3.45pm.




A D RING
Private .Secretary
                         CONFIDENTIAL




          PARAGRAPHS ON THE NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME




      I come now to the proposed Football Membership Scheme. The
 House will be aware that as yet no such scheme exists. Lord
 Justice Taylor therefore addressed himself to the invitation to
 Tender issued by the consultants employed by the football
 authorities. On that basis he felt unablfe to support the
 implementation of ..the provisions of Part I of the Football
 Spectators Act concerning the National Membership Scheme and
 instead proposed the anti-hooliganism measures to which I have
 referred.

      We have decided, in the light of his advice, not to proceed
 with the establishment of a Football Membership Authority to draw
 up a scheme at this time. However, hooliganism in football is a
 notoriously recalcitrant problem. We do not therefore Intend to
 repeal Part I of the Football Spectators Act. It will remain on
 the statute book, and the practical concerns expressed by Lord
 Justice Taylor about its operation will be fully explored in the
  light of advice from the specialist companies who responded to
( the Invitation to Tender on 19 January. If hoolganism. is not
 quelled by the alternative measures proposed in the Taylor report
 we can therefore introduce an effective and tested Membership
 Scheme as quickly as possible.

      The right course at the moment is to implement the Taylor
 proposals as I have indicated, and give the industry and the
 clubs yet another chance to put themselves in order. The public
 will not forgive them if they don't now act.             %




                         CONFIDENT IM.
