  From: Paul Pugh                          cc: Elaine Bass
        Head of Operational Policing
        Policy Unit
        Room 539
        Queen Anne’s Gate
        * 0171-273-3141
        12 March 1998
                                                                          ,D




 Claire Sumner


 HILLSBOROUGH CORRESPONDENCE


 In your note of 10 March you asked for advice on who should be asked to attend the
further meeting which the Home Secretary has promised the Hillsborough families.
Before the Home Secretary made his oral statement we proposed contacting all the
families who had written to, or had contact with, the scrutiny because we were aware
that no all are in sympathy with the leadership of the support group by Mr Hicks. We
wanted to make sure that all those with an interest were invited. Since then (for
obvious reasons) we have had no direct contact with the support group or individual
families, so we cannot really judge how many genuinely support Mr Hicks’s
continuing campaign. In the circumstances I would suggest indicating to Mr Hicks
that all families would be welcome and asking him to invite as many as are free to
attend.

2.     I assume you will also want to inform Merseyside MPs and invite them to
attend if they wish. I do not think there is anybody else who needs to be invited.




                                   PAUL
                                                        \




f:\oppu\hou\nrisc\pp0654pddoc
                                                                                     tN\ *3


                                                                             *0 MAR 19SS

From:      Clare Sumner                                   cc   Mr Michael
           PS/Home Secretary                                   Mr Howarth
           0171 273 4602                                       Permanent Secretary
                                                               Mr Boys Smith
                                                               Mr Pugh—4 * &2f\
           10 March 1998                                       Mr Clifford
                                                               Mr Granatt
                                                               Mrs Bass
                                                               Mr Warner
                                                               Mr Owen


Mr Pyne


HILLSBOROUGH CORRESPONDENCE

The Home Secretary has seen your submission of 5 March and is content with
the draft with the following amendments:

         First paragraph, second page - delete last sentence and replace with:

               "Lord Justice Stuart Smith himself condemned what he described
               as Chief Superintendent Duckerfield's "disgraceful lies" that fans
               had opened Gate C."

         Second paragraph, second page - delete "however" from first line.

         Last paragraph, third page - add at the end of the paragraph:

               "I am, as you may know ready to talk to the families further to
               explain my approach. I met a delegation whilst in Southport on
               7 March and I am arranging a larger meeting in Merseyside."

2.     You will also wish to be aware that while the Home Secretary was in
Southport he agreed to meet the families further. I would be grateful if
Mrs Bass could note this and for Mr Pugh to provide brief advice on who he
thinks we should ask to attend.
                                                                  At psr




                                  CLARE SUMNER


4141CS
