                                                                                                    0
           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 528
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 4046 Fax 4028



                                                                  Your reference:
Dr Ed Walker
                                                                  Our reference:
SHEFFIELD
S25                                                               Date:               July 1997




 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

 I have been appointed by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence
 relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.

 Having seen your letter of 21 May to the Home Secretary, I am writing to ask for your
 assistance. It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of my scrutiny is to establish
 whether there is any significant new evidence which was not previously available to Lord
 Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities. If
 there is significant evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have affected the outcome of
 any of the proceedings. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary by the end of the
 year.

 I have already seen a copy of a statement made by you relating to the events of 15 April 1989,
 which has been submitted to the Home Secretary on behalf of the families of the bereaved. It
 is undated but appears to have been made near the time. I have also seen a copy of a witness
 statement, apparently signed by you and dated 20 July 1989, given to the South Yorkshire
 Police. If you do not have copies of these documents, they can be supplied.

 If you wish to add anything to what is said in these documents, would you please do so before
 1 September 1997, sending any further statement to the Secretariat to my Scrutiny.

 I think it is likely that I shall wish to interview you. If so, this will be in private. My
 Secretariat will contact you about this in due course.

 You suggest in your letter that there is a “large mass of new evidence” which was not
 presented at the inquest. This may have been considered at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.

 If you think there is such evidence which was not considered either at the Inquest or Inquiry, I
would be grateful if you could:

       1.     Identify the witness together with his address.

       2.     Let me have a brief summary of the evidence he or she can give.

       3.     Identify any documentary evidence (including photographs and video films)
               which you believe to exist.

       4.     Say in what way you consider the evidence could affect

               a)     the outcome of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry;
               b)     the verdict of the jury at the Inquest;
               c)     the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions not to take
                      criminal proceedings against any person in connection with the
                      disaster; or
               d)     the decision not to pursue disciplinary proceedings against any
                      police officer.


I am asking the Hillsborough Family Support Group and their solicitors for similar
information and you may prefer to deal with the question of any evidence other than your
own through them.

Please note that the telephone and room numbers shown above are temporary - we will notify
you of our permanent address and telephone as soon as we have them.




LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH
