NOTE OF DISCUSSION WITH MR GODDARD (HOME OFFICE) 16 NOVEMBER



1.   Lord Justice Taylor asked Mr Goddard about the action the
Government had taken in response to Mr Justice Popplewell1s
recommendation,    in his final report, that consideration should be
given to creating an offence of disorderly conduct at a sports
ground (paragraph 4.74, recommendation C12).       In particular, Lord
Justice Taylor questioned whether the inclusion in section 5(1)
of the requirement that the offensive conduct be likely to cause
harassment,    alarm or distress was sufficient to deal with those
cases where spectators' behaviour by itself was increasing the
chance of a disturbance.     Mr Goddard said that the core of the
offence in section 5(1) was the inclusion of the reference to "a
person".    This could be any person,   including a police officer.
It had been thought that without such a specific reference it
would be difficult to gather sufficient evidence to bring
convictions.    Nor was the inclusion of the phrase thought to be a
drawback:     the general view was that section 5 had served its
purpose.    The extent of its use was not known:    it was being
presently reviewed with the police and the Crown Prosecution
Service, whose views were expected in January and December
respectively.


2.   Lord Justice Taylor asked further for the reasoning why the
Popplewell recommendation had not been taken up.      Mr Goddard
repeated the point that an offence with a specific "victim" had
been thought both easier to operate and to defend against the
criticism that a new offence might be thought repressive or
inconsistent.     There would be no difficulty,   in his view, why a
prosecution should not be successful where a missile was thrown
onto the pitch.


3.   Lord Justice Taylor asked whether,     in allowing behaviour to
unfold to the extent of there being a victim, a valuable chance
was being lost to pre-empt activity getting out of hand, bearing
                                                                   t

in mind the repeated stress laid by the police on the need for
preventive strategies.     He outlined the possibilities of a
specific offence in relation to identified behaviour such as
running onto the pitch without reasonable excuse,   throwing a
missile, or racialist or abusive chanting whose impact on
offenders might be stronger than a general catch-all provision.
In reply, Mr Goddard drew attention to the powers which the
Football Membership Authority would have to disqualify,    and the
merit of relying upon a less cumbersome process than reliance on
the criminal law in this particular case:    the question arose
whether the mischief necessitated recourse to the criminal law.
If a wider discretion was to be given to prosecution,   then the
value of a specific offence might be diminished.    On the question
of racialist behaviour, Mr Goddard believed that section 5 of the
1986 Act was being well used, whereas section 18 was rarely used
and rarely effective.


4.   Lord Justice Taylor asked whether the reluctance to
implement the Popplewell recommendation had derived from the
Government's reluctance to make football a special case.    Mr
Goddard believed that that might have been so, and recognised
that specific legislation in the Football Spectators Act to deal
with football had breached that principle.    The question was
whether the breach of the principle should be further extended.
Mr Goddard did not feel that the case on merits had so far been
made out, since there was not to date any indication of a gap in
the law, and there would be a reluctance to bring in catch-all
provisions,   either of the kind proposed by Popplewell or on the
basis of the Scottish breach of the peace, which might be thought
oppressive in the sensitive climate of policing football matches.
