                                                                                                  (1 j
                                                                                                  o Juii m §

WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY                                                    Council House
Clerk                                                                             Dudley
                                                                                  DY1 1HF
A. V. ASTLING LL.M., M.Soc.Sc
                                                                                  Telephone: Dudley 456000

My Reference:

Your Reference:
                                                          '        Cl<U\u>    ^

                             u.                               (U          S/Jo
                                                                                                    Hu
                                  ^                           /U CWW
                  PERSONAL


                                      <W    W    *    W
                  Dear Lord Ferrers,
                              rr6rS.                               tW. B*vJL
                                                Hillsborough Inquiry

                       I am writing you a personal letter following our
                  deputation on 25th May, 1989, because I feel that the
                  issues we put to you at that meeting are not being
                  resolved.

                       The Clerk to my Authority has had a letter of
                  1st June, 1989, from Mr. Addison (copy enclosed) and has
                  exchanged correspondence with the Clerk of South Yorkshire
                  Police Authority (copies enclosed).  I think you will agree
                  that the current position is most unsatisfactory.

                         I know you are to see South Yorkshire in a few days.
                  I hope that as a result of that meeting you will be able to
                  clarify all those issues that we raised with you and accept
                  that the full costs of the Inquiry are a Home Office
                  r e sponsibility.

                                                     ours SLBC


                                           COUNCILLOR              D.M.      AELETT

                                  Chairman to WM Police Authority




                  The Rt. Hon. The Lord Ferrers,
                  Minister of State,
                  The Home Office,
                  7th Floor,
                  50. Queen Anne's Gate, London,                      SW1H 9At.
        s a w p /u /    w .-z i       1Q W Z Z 0 - 7 3 W4 4 Z               S. Y.       J. S.




                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                      POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston H.A., I.P.F.A.             CoPy to:                M r.G. Dear                          P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                      Chief Constable WM Police &        Regent Street
                                                                Mr. L. T. Barnfield                       Barnsley
                        - ror attention                         Solicitor to WM Police    South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
                              AVA/AMD/JB                         7.6.89.                        Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222

our Ref:       P0LET37/RCJ/MR                        Your Kef:          AVA/AMD/JB                   r>au: 7   June 1989
This miuier ht hr.ing dealt with by         Mr R C J 0 h n S t 0 n                                   />tephnne <uf3 41




           FAXIMILE TRANSMISSION


           Dear Mr A s t U n g
           HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
           Thank you for your letter of 6 June enquiring whether the Chief Constable of
           South Yorkshire had invited the Chief Constable of West Midlands to provide
           mutual aid under Section 14 of the Police Act 1964 or indeed any other
           provision.
           The stance of the Police Authority is that the West Midlands inquiry is now
           reporting exclusively to Lord Justice Taylor. While the first Initiative to
           call in an outside force to enquire into the events at Hillsborough was made by
           the South Yorkshire Chief Constable, the circumstances surrounding this action
           could not in any case fall under either Section 14 of the Police Act 1964 (a
           point which Mr Addison appears to acknowledge) or any other section of this or
           any other Act.
           Furthermore, the subsequent action by the Home Secretary in establishing the
           Taylor inquiry, the considerably wider remit of this Inquiry than what would
           have been originally entailed and the lines of reporting observed by the Chief
           Constable of the West Midlands have taken the inquiry completely out of the
           hands of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and the Police Authority.
           I sent you earlier a copy of my note of an officer level meeting held at the
           Home Office on 18 May and now attach a further copy which may be of assistance.
           Yours sincerely



           R C Johjrcton
           Clerk and Financial Officer
           Enc

   r       Mr A V Astling                                                           1
           Clerk to West Midlands Police Authority
           Council House
           Dudley
           DY1 1HF

   L                                                                            J
             Copies to Solicitor, Treasurer,
             Chris Tomlinson & Stuart Harmer
                AVA/AMD/JB             Direct Dial      - Dudley 453201
                 7.6.89.




     AVA/AMD/JB            Mr. Astling                       5201


                                         6th June,   1989.

Dear Mr. Johnston,

                     Hillsborough   Inquiry

      Following my telerhone conversation with Hr. Walker,          I
refer to the letter dated 1st Juno, 19B9, from the Home
Office, to the Solicitor to the West Midlands Police
Authority, a copy of which is already with you.

     At the meeting between the West Midlands Police
Authority and the Home Office on ?5th May. we made the
point very strongly that this was a Home Office Inquiry and
should be paid for entirely by the Home Office (though we
thought that the Home Office was likely to look to your
Authority to pay costs up to » lp preceot limit).

     'i'he main thrust of the argument was to the effect that
the Chief Constable of the West Midlands had b<®en invited
to assist Lord Justice Taylor by the Home Office and was
working under the direction and control n * Lord Justice
Taylor.    He had not been invited on a mutual aid basis by
the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. and w » s certainly
not under the direction ami control o* t-h*» Chief Constable
   South Yorkshire.

      It followed from this that the* West Midlands Police
Authority had no powers to meet the costs incurred as part
o * the Inquiry, nor to seek reimbursement from the South
Yorkshire Police Authority.   Mr. Addison at ♦■he Borne Office
acknowledged that this was not a "mutual aid" situation
under the provisions of Section 34 of the Police Act, 1964,
but "something akin to mutual aid" which he could neither
define nor explain.   He did, however, maintain that the
invitation to Mr. Deer, although transmitted by way of the
Home Office, actually came from the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire.   It was therefor®, his suggestion that all
of the bills be paid by the West Midlands Pr>}ir« Authority,
and that South Yorkshire be respon        for their
reim bu rse men t.


Mr. R. c. Johnston, BA, i p p a .
Clerk and Financial Adviser,
South Yorkshire Police Authority
P. O. Box 37,
Regent Street,
Barnsley,
South Yorkshire,  570 ??0
- Mr. R. C. Johnston.

- 6th June,   1989.


     Mr. Addison's argument was and is totally
incomprehensible to us, and his letter of the 1st June
again seems to miss the point of whether the Chief
Constable of West Midlands is under the direction and
control of Lord Justice Taylor or the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire, nor does it address the difficulty that,
whilst the Chief Constable of West Midlands may have a
contractual obligation to meet the costs incurred, the West
Midlands Police Authority has no powers to meet them.

     The above is an attempt to set out shortly the
background to where we are now.  What I think I need from
you now, is a reply stating whether the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire had invited the Chief Constable of West
Midlands to provide mutual aid under Section 14 of the
Police Act, 1964, or any other provision (whatever that
might be), and whether the South Yorkshire Police Authority
is prepared to meet the total costs incurred by the Chief
Constable of West Midlands in the conduct of this Inquiry,
and to pay the bills direct.

     I shall be pleased if a faxed reply could be sent to
me as soon as possible, so the matter can be put back to
the Home Office.

                        Yours sincerely,




         Clerk to West Midlands Police Authority
                              uopy to:   Lord Ferrers
                                         Home Office    7.6.89.




                                                         HOME OFFICE
                                                 Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                         Direct line: 01-273 - _ A _
                                                       Switchboard: 01-273 ro w


Our reference:
Your reference:




   L T Barnfield Esq
   Solicitor
   West Midlands Police Authority
   Council House
   Dudley
   DY1 1HF                                              1 June 1989




   HILLSBOROUGH : POWER TO MEET COSTS

  At the meeting between the West Midlands Police Authority and Lord
  Ferrers on 25 May, I undertook to obtain legal advice on the
  suggestion that the West Midlands Police Authority had no authority
             is ;incurred during the police inquiries following the
  Hillsborough disaster.                                        *

  We have now consulted the Hone Office Legal Adviser's Branch. Thev
  can understand that the West Midlands Police may be reluctant to
  incur costs which are arguably unconnected with their own policing
  function without a firm undertaking that the costs will be met by
                 4-u Bu u that seems to be a different matter from
  claiming that they have no power to meet such costs; particularly
  when the costs nave already been incurred.    Certainly it would be
  no defence to a claim brought by a Sheffield hotelier in respect of
  accommodation booked by the West Midlands Police that that force
  had no power to pay.

  The      Home      Office
                     Legal Adviser's Branch can see no distinction
                   ^    n ^ C°st,s and other costs arising out of the
                  * 1 f Which can be recovered from the South
  Yorkshire Police Authority.

                  , °f
               ®°urse looking into the other matters which the
  S i !          ! .*with ^        Ferrers and will be in touch in due
                           “eets       Ferrers' undertaking to write as
            ^     ^ about the              it seems to us that the best
  cost^fro™         >KVi^v>U1^^J^*ority to PaY these and to recover the
  costs from the South Yorkshire Police Authority.
t.R.
         ?«nding   copies   of   this   letter   to    the   Clerk     to   the   west
    “ S “ ily «l°?oAM ^ r«r' th* C1#rk 40 th* SOUth Xortehi" ^lice
                                                                       I

                                                       4jv^v* ✓V^.CjC ^ C ^ - j

                                                                             \


                                                      M J ADDISON




#
