                         ”t)                                                ■€ )
                                                                 $ IS _
                                                             cc Miss Bannister
                                                                 Ms Craig
                                                                 Mr Yates
                                                                 Mr Moriarty
                                                                 Mr Turney(o.r
                                                                 Mr Mower
                                                              ’— Mr Boys Smith ~
                                                                 Mr Goddard
                                                                 Mr Mould G1
                                                                 Mr Lidington
           From: R R G Watts
                 G1 Division
                 (x 2764)
0       ,jur^         M a Y 1989
                — - Miss Nicholson
           HILLSBOROUGH - PERIMETER PITCH FENCES

           I attach a draft reply for Lord Ferrers1 signature to the letter
           of 21 April from Mr Chris Smith MP.
           2.   The Home Secretary considered)at his meeting on 24 April, in
           the light of my note ofHfyato       y,
                                              whether clu)(bs and local
           authorities should be advised now to remove pitch perimeter
           fences.   It was decided not to go down that path.    (At that
           meeting the Home Secretary asked us to consider issuing some kind
           of interim guidance to cover the period until the Taylor Inquiry
           reports.   Mr Turney's submission of i$6 April, which is
           currently with the Home Secretary, responded to that.*^
           3.   I think it would be advisable not to go into the merits and
    V      disadvantages of p)^tch perimeter fences in the reply to Mr Smith.
           It would be consistent with Ministerial thinking so far to adhere
           to the status quo and await any recommendation which Lord Justice
           Taylor makes on spefa fences.
                   The attached suggested reply has been draft/f on this basis.



                                                   R R G WATTS




                                               3
                                                                                        If
        DRAFT REPLY TO MR CHRIS SMITH MP

                                                                                                       -~xq
        Thank you for your letter of 21 April to the Home Secretary about
        perimeter fences at football grounds.


        You do of course raise an important issue.                                          As the Home
        Secretary said on 17 April in response to comments made on his
                                                             O f \S L,
        statement that day, it is^for Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry to
        look into.             We shall of course consider very carefully any
        recommendation which he may make on this, but we do not think
        that it would be right in advance of that to amend the advicqwoiv
        13itch P4ils•
                    i.
                     motcl■ XjisgrcwgsMin jwhafc-.feg known-ao—i
                                                               teho-Green ■
                                                                          "Guictoj!the
        Home Office/Scottish Office                                      "Guide to Safety at Sports
                     A     .
        Groundsj^M\-4n ■pcrartri^Tanr^ta^tr^Tr-cjimp’
                                                    b.eg■3rS> (paragraphs'* 2-1-4— -
        ° W              in ^ h a p t-a r   1 ,4 -                                                    © *    ^


  %vi«/N**W                          U ** KpWs'' ^
    JiTfi *:.
      J’fci   _twii
                  .I
                   jv ./. — .,        (jst
      A pitch ^eaaawteer fence is sometimes required by the terms and
|L^7    conditions of safety certificates issued by the local authority
        which must be complied with.                                          In some cases such a fence has
        been erected, not because of § specific requirement in the safety
                                                     fe, ■   l r:'       N j£~-
        certificate, but as a7measure7Lo hely uuiin5cnrM,IiOUll<^Ai\xSfll and
       VirrteriC^". '?* jw. $
                            '■'                          d                            b- &*A/L
                 /
                                                                     nM-s.                   CkJL*   few    iV.4W^
        As you say, a number of clubs are removing their pitch perimeter
        fence.       It is of course open to them to consider this, but it
       would be wise for them to do so in consultation with authorities
        locally; where the fence is a requirement of the safety
        certificate the club would of course need to seek the local

                                                                                  1
♦




    authority's agreement to a change in the safety certificate.


    But, as I have said, this is a matter which Lord Justice Taylor's
    Inquiry will be looking into, and we shall consider carefully
    what he has to say.




                                    2
    DRAFT £8.4.89
                                                cc Miss Bannister
                                                   Ms Crai<? w .

    Miss Nicholson
          t   /-» V ir\1   o /- \-n         T




A   PERIMS;TER( PITCH /3ECRECATI0M FENCES        \   Ms
  ■g^hc lottsHr dated 31 April from Mr Smith nre-
                                                fora*— A-   s roquoate-ed a
  ■draft r o p ^ or Lord Ferrers1 signature is attaohcdl^ Ifo, -tsdJUf «4 21,
   T? (ilflwVv »       | ^                       -^*4 TVs/. CV\<«4
    The point abbut the arrangements at Highbury is a valid one. If
    segregation fencing is not needed there, why should it be ’
^0^ required elsewh^re^ Tl^e answer is not simple. Chelsea, where
    there is a fence ,\ft§*serious crowd disorder problems. So too
    does Millwall. In both cases the pitch segregation fence is
    stipulated in the grbund safety certificate.

    Other grounds which have\this sort of fencing have erected it,
    not because of a safety certificate stipulation but because of a
    police or F.A. demand. SomV k^ithorities and clubs have resisted,
    as far as possible, demands f^r\such fences for safety reasons.
                                      \\\
    Fencing which presents access to tke pitch is, at least, an
    arguable safety measure. If it heljp^ contain violence which, in
    turn, leads to abnormal crowd pressut&f giving rise to safety
    hazards, it could be said to be a safety feature. But it has
    obvious disadvantages.                 V\

    The 'Green Guide' recognises that fencing may
                                                \\ have to be used to
    prevent access to the pitch. We have never lijced this, but have
                                                  \\
    had to recognise that there are competing "safety" demands which
    have to be balanced. The Guide offers an alternative (para 209).
                                                      N>
    These are all arguments which the Inquiry will address.
    Meantime, it is entirely for clubs to decide if they\wish to pull
    down these fences. It would be advisable not to express a view
    on their merits until the Inquiry reports.
Thank you for your letter of 21 April to the
Home Secretary about perimeter fences at football
grounds.

As the Home Secretary pointed out in his statement to
the House on 17 April, perimeter segregation fences are
not a statutory requirement.

This type of fence is sometimes required by terms and
conditions of safety certificates which must be
complied with. In some cases the fences have been
erected, not because of specific safety certificate
requirement, but as a segregation measure.

Sadly, segregation measures are needed to help combat
hooliganism and violence on the terraces. Outbreaks of
violence can lead to pressures within a crowd and, as
                                  I         I
we witnessed at Heysel in 1985, to^death and/ injury of
innocent spectators.

I do not think that the Home Secretary encouraged or
discouraged the use of segregation perimeter fencing.
You may be right in saying that other measures are
preferable. For example, the Home Office/Scottish
Office Guide offers an alternative of smooth surfaced
perimeter walls with manned gates/access points linked
by barrier protected walkways (for use solely by police
and officials).

These are all matters which the Inquiry led by Lord
Justice Taylor will look into. I am sure this is the
best way to proceed. It is a matter for the clubs and
local authorities whether, meantime, they wish to
remove the pitch segregation fences.

I am arranging for a copy of this letter to be passed
to Colin Moynihan at the Department of the Environment.
                     Document Break
           Code39




                                     12345G78901



1. fctfose     Staple   Paper Clip     Binder Clip   Rubber Band   Folder

2. Loose       Staple   Paper Clip     Binder Clip   Rubber Band   Folder

3. Loose       Staple   Paper Clip     Binder Clip   Rubber Band   Folder

4. Loose       Staple   Paper Clip     Binder Clip   Rubber Band   Folder

5. Loose       Staple   Paper Clip     Binder Clip   Rubber Band   Folder

6. Loose       Staple   Paper Clip     Binder Clip   Rubber Band   Folder

7. Loose       Staple   Paper Clip     Binder Clip   Rubber Band   Folder

8. Loose       Staple   Paper Clip     Binder Clip   Rubber Band   Folder

9. Loose       Staple   Paper Clip     Binder Clip   Rubber Band   Folder

   10. Loose        Staple   PaperClip Binder Clip      Rubber Band
                                   Folder
PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR PRIORITY WRITTEN ANSWER ON 21 APRIL
1989

    Mr Brian Wilson (Cunningham North): To ask the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department, what steps have been taken by
    Her Majesty's Government in pursuit of recommendations 34
    and 35 of the report from the working group on the Green
    Guide on football grounds, published as an adjunct to the
    Popplewell Report.


DRAFT REPLY
The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds was revised in 1986.      It
provides guidance on the function of pitch perimeter fences
including the importance of providing gates or access points to
allow full access to the playing area (or perimeter track) where
it is likely to be used as a place of safety in an emergency.
BACKGROUND NOTE


Mr Wilson's question refers specifically to recommendations of a
Technical Working Group (TWG) set up by the Popplewell Inquiry to
look into the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Guide).

The Guide was revised in October/November 1986 taking account as
far as possible of the TWG's recommendations. Recommendations 34
and 35 are at Annex A.

The Guide contains general advice on pitch fence functions -
varying from a minimal "marker" delineating the playing area to
"barrier" fencing intended to prevent access to the pitch by
troublemakers.

The TWG recommendation that guidance should be "preferably" by
standardised specifications was not followed. There is no known
"standard" - which would probably vary according to the function
required. The Guide makes clear however that if spectators are
to lean against it, it should meet the recommended strength for
crash barriers.
                                   APPENDIX

WORKING GROUP ON THE GREEN GUIDE

PITCH PERIMETER FENCES

          E29. The advice on pitch perimeter fences in the
          current Guide deals mainly with the crush barrier
          aspects (GG: 7.9). Access to playing pitches and the
          need for "anti-hooligan" or other protective devices is
          however, referred to in the section on crowd behaviour
          (GG:18).

Rec 34   The Group recommends that the Guide should explain more
         clearly, preferably by reference to standardised
         specifications, the different functions perimeter
         fencing may serve and that appropriate cross
         referencing is incorporated in any future edition of
         the Guide. The Group further recommends that the
          importance of allowing full access to the pitch where
Rec 35   this is likely to be used as a place of safety in
         emergency should be made plain.   (It was noted that
         Scottish Building Regulations required that protected
         zones such as stairways led to a place of safety, ie an
         unenclosed space in the open air at ground level or an
         enclosed space in the open air at ground level with
         access (of defined widths) to an unenclosed space. A
         pitch could be accepted as a place of safety only if it
         met that requirement. If, however, it was subsequently
         fenced off, circumstances could arise, under Scottish
         Building Regulations, where a change of use would be
         deemed to have taken place.)
