From: M J P y n e                                         cc     Home Secretary
      Operational Policing                                       Perm Sec
      Policy Unit                                                Mr Boys Smith
      Room 528, QAG                                              Mr Pugh
      S 273 2433                                                 Mr Granatt
      9 April 1997                                               Mr Rock
                                                                 Miss Whetstone




Mr Maclean


HILLSBOROUGH - EDDIE LOYDEN MP


Issue

Mr Loyden telephoned your office seeking a list of people who were due to give oral evidence
to the Taylor Inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster but who were not called. This followed
several written Parliamentary Questions which Mr Loyden asked in January (copies attached).
Miss Webster’s note of 27 January to Paul Pugh refers.

Timing

2.     This case has been delayed with the Department of National Heritage, who were
originally intending to respond to Mr Loyden, so it would be helpful if we could reply as soon
as possible.

Recommendation

3.      We recommend that you write to Mr Loyden as set out in the attached draft indicating
that the information which he has requested is not readily available.

Consideration

4.     In our reply to Mr Loyden’s Parliamentary Questions about the Taylor Inquiry, we
indicated that information about those who gave or submitted evidence to the Inquiry was
contained in Lord Taylor’s interim and final reports. Mr Loyden subsequently asked for a list of
those who were due to give oral evidence but were not called and, therefore, did not actually
give evidence. We have no indication of whether there were any such cases but we have made
enquiries to see whether it is possible to ascertain this information from the Taylor Inquiry
papers. In the event, it has not been practical to do so.

5.      We understood from the Department of National Heritage (DNH) initially that they held
the papers relating to the Taylor Inquiry. Consequently, they undertook to examine the papers
and write to Mr Loyden to inform him whether the information he requested was readily
available. Miss Webster wrote to Mr Loyden on 31 January, informing him of the position.
6.     We have since discovered that the 106 files relating to the Taylor Inquiry were
subsequently passed to Record Management Services in the Home Office for review, and DNH
have therefore suggested that we should reply to Mr Loyden. The files are now in the Public
Records Office in Kew.

7.     It is not apparent from the titles of the files which ones might contain details of those
witnesses who gave, or who were due to give, oral evidence to the Taylor Inquiry, or even
whether any of the files contain the relevant information. In view of the large number of files, it
would require considerable time and resources to do an exhaustive search of the papers. We
therefore, recommend that you advise Mr Loyden that the information requested is not readily
available.

Handling / Presentation

8.     Although there has been renewed interest in the Hillsborough Disaster as a result of the
Granada television programme and the families’ calls for a new inquiry, we do not believe there
are any particular handling considerations to this correspondence.




                                                               MJPYNE
DRAFT LETTER TO EDDIE LOYDEN MP FOR SIGNATURE BY M of S



My Private Secretary, Catherine Webster, wrote to you on 31 January about your request for
information on those who were due to give oral evidence to the Taylor Inquiry into the
Hillsborough Disaster but who were not called and therefore did not do so.


Although Miss Webster indicated that your enquiry had been passed to the Department of
National Heritage to investigate, I understand that the Taylor Inquiry papers which they once
held are now stored at the Public Records Office and it has been agreed, therefore, that I should
reply.


My officials have made enquiries into this matter but I regret that the information you have
requested is not readily available. Lord Taylor’s report contained details of the evidence
submitted to the Inquiry, including a list of those who gave evidence in person. No information
was given, however, about anyone whom the inquiry intended to call but who subsequently did
not give evidence. It may be possible to ascertain from the Inquiry papers whether there were
any such cases but there are some 106 files relating to the Taylor Inquiry and we cannot readily
identify those files which might relate to the matters which you are interested in. I regret,
therefore, that we have been unable to answer your query.
