  From:        Colin Harnett                                 cc   Mr Michael
               PS/Home Secretary                                  Mr Howarth
               0171 27 3 4 6 0 2                                  Mr O'Brien
                                                                  Permanent Secretary
                                                                  Mr Boys Smith
               19 May 1997                                        Mr Halliday
                                                                  Miss Loudon, PPD, PTU
                                                                  Miss Weston, LAB
                                                                  Mr Evans, ABCU
                                                                  M r P Edmundson/OPPU
                                                                  Mr Granatt
                                                                  Mr Warner
                                                                  Mr Owen




     r Pugh. OPPU




 HILLSBOROUGH

 The Home Secretary and Mr Michael have seen your submission of 8 May. The
 Home Secretary has asked me to express his gratitude to officials for the very
 thorough way in which they have examined this matter.

2.     The Home Secretary's view is that there will have to be some independent
examination of the "new" evidence. Ministers consider that the matter simply
will not be resolved otherwise. The Home Secretary adds that we will need a
respected judge to conduct this examination rather than a senior member of the
Bar.

3.         The next steps are therefore as follows:

           there will be a meeting between Ministers and officials to discuss the
           terms of reference, handling with colleagues and presentation of the
           judicial examinatinn-.

        the Home Secretary is minded to meet Mr McBride, the producer of the
        "Hillsborough" programme;

        there will be a meeting with Merseyside MPs and the Hillsborough Family
        Support Group;

       the Home Secretary will make a statement to the House.




12091-Ch
           4.     We will be in touch to arrange the handling meeting. In the
           meantime, I would be grateful if you could offer early advice on the terms
           of reference, etc for the examination as a basis for discussion at that
           meeting.




                                    COLIN HARNETT




12091-ch
