          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



The Rt Hon Jack Straw, MP                                     Your reference:
Home Secretary
50 Queen Anne’s Gate                                         Our reference:
LONDON SW1
                                                             Date: 1            January 1998




4-CA^                 l •'V /V y t


 You asked me in June last year to undertake a scrutiny of the evidence about the disaster at
 the Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, in 1989. I have done that and now submit
 my Report.

 2.     The Report has seven Chapters and ten Appendices. You said at the outset of this
 exercise that you planned to publish it, and I have written it with that in mind.

 3       You said that you intended to publish the evidence which I considered during my
 scrutiny. Much of this (for instance the transcripts of Lord Taylor’s Public Inquiry and of the
 Inquests) is already in the public domain and I have found that the families are well
 acquainted with it. Other evidence which I have examined - certain parts of which I know
 that relatives are particularly concerned to see - is held by the South Yorkshire Police, some^
 of it on behalf of the Coroner. Some families are also, I know, interested in seeing the BBC’s
 videotapes of the disaster. These are of course the property of the Corporation.

 4.     I list at paragraph 4 of Appendix 1 of my report the people who gave me evidence
 during my scrutiny. You may wish to publish the transcripts of their evidence and also the
 written evidence which, as Appendix 1 says, some of them submitted beforehand. This
 could perhaps be done by depositing them in the House Libraries.

  5.     In paragraph 5 of Appendix 1 1 have referred to the written evidence of various
  witnesses which I have been asked to consider. I can see no objection to publishing, if you
  wished, the evidence of Messrs McDermott, Worsley, (Steven) Williams, Flack and Howes.
  This evidence consists of written statements, for the most part obtained by the West midlands
  Police. The Family Support Group already have these statements.

  6.    So far as Dr James Bums and Dr Iain West are concerned, their evidence is in the
  form of reports which they provided to Mrs Anne Williams, the mother of Kevin Williams

  C:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\HOMESEC.242
who died in the disaster, and (in Dr West’s case) also in the form of a letter to me in answer
to questions I raised with him. I do not think that their evidence should be published as it
relates solely to the death of Kevin Williams.

7.       Mr Noel Bume, whose report to the South Yorkshire Police Authority in connection
with the contribution proceedings, and evidence in those proceedings, I refer to in Chapter 6
(paragraphs 7 to 20) is in a slightly different category. His report would have been
privileged until it was disclosed to the other parties to the litigation (who did not include
survivors or relatives of victims). I would have thought that it remains the property of the
Police Authority and/or Mr Bume and that there might be problems of copyright if you
publish it. Mr Bume’s oral evidence was however given in open Court and is therefore in
the public domain But it is subject to the caveat that it was not agreed by the other parties to
the litigation. The case was settled before Mr Bume was cross-examined on it.

8.      I have been assisted in my Scrutiny by a number of other people, whom I have listed
at paragraph 6 of Appendix 1. The discussions which I have had with them concern the
course of events subsequent to the disaster rather than the disaster itself. There are no
transcripts of my discussions with most of these people. Publication of such transcripts as
there are, and of other written material arising from the discussions, is a matter for you but I
would not myself think it right to put it in the public domain. I have referred to it as far as is
necessary in my report.

9.      Dr Popper, the Coroner who ran the Hillsborough Inquests, falls into the category of
people I refer to in paragraph 8. I think it is a matter for you whether you wish to publish
what he said to me. It is not evidence relating to the events of the day and therefore does not
fall within the type of evidence to which my terms of reference relate.

 10.    I also do not think it would be right to publish the transcripts of the private
 discussions which I have had with relatives of those who died in the disaster, or the
 submissions which they have sent to me. I believe that some relatives might object to that.
 They certainly are not expecting you to publish this material and they are of course free to
 make it public themselves if they wish to. I would have no objection to your publishing the
 transcripts of my open meeting with relatives in Liverpool on 6 October and my meeting on
 30 September with Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group, though I made it
 plain at the time that these were private meetings not open to the public.

 11. I would of course be happy to meet you to discuss my report.         Perhaps your office
 could telephone my Clerk on 0171 936 6503.




  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH


  G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\HOMESEC.242
CONTENTS



Introduction

Chapter 1      The background

Chapter 2      Video evidence about the disaster

Chapter 3      The aftermath of the disaster

Chapter 4      Alleged improper interference with witnesses

Chapter 5      Other matters of concern to the victims’ families

Chapter 6      Miscellaneous

Chapter 7      Summary



Appendix 1     People who helped in the scrutiny

Appendix 2     Map and photographs

Appendix 3     Evidence o f Roger Houldsworth

Appendix 4     Analysis o f police CCTV tapes

Appendix 5     Evidence o f Dr Edward Walker

Appendix 6     Statement by David Frost

Appendix 7     Alterations to police statements

Appendix 8     Correspondence about amendments to statements

Appendix 9     Some individual cases

Appendix 10    Ten ‘unresolved’questions?
The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Secretary of State for the Home Department



     SCRUTINY OF EVIDENCE RELATING TO THE HILLSBOROUGH
                 FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER


                                      REPORT

Introduction

1.     On 15 April 1989 an FA Cup semi-final soccer match between Liverpool and
       Nottingham Forest was to take place at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, the
       home of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Play was stopped after six
       minutes when it became apparent that Liverpool spectators on the standing
       terrace behind one of the goals had been seriously crushed. Ninety-five
       people died and over 400 required hospital treatment. A ninety-sixth victim
       died in 1993.

2.    This tragic incident - in terms of deaths the worst in the history of British sport
      - occasioned a series of investigations and other proceedings. Lord Justice
      Taylor conducted a public inquiry, for which the West Midlands Police, acting
      as an independent investigating force, collected a massive amount of evidence.
      The Director of Public Prosecutions considered laying serious criminal
      charges against police officers and others. The Police Complaints Authority
      considered complaints which had been laid against the chief officer of the
      force and against other police on duty at the ground. There were Coroner’s
      inquests, whose conduct was itself later considered by the Divisional Court.

3.    On 30 June 1997 you appointed me to conduct a scrutiny into whether there is
      any fresh evidence which might have a bearing on the various legal procedures
      and decisions that have been taken. My terms of reference are as follows:

       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
       Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;

               (a)    to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

               (b)    to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
                      Generalfo r the purpose o f discharging their respective
                      statutory responsibilities; or

               (c)    to the Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                      police disciplinary matters;
and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
is o f such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary o f State fo r
the Home Department o f a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
(c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there
is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.

I now submit my report.

My report is divided into seven chapters, with Appendices. Chapter 1 sets
out the background to the Hillsborough disaster and the sequence of events
since. Chapter 2 deals with allegations about video evidence relating to the
disaster. Chapter 3 discusses allegations about the inquest and the rescue
operation following the disaster. Chapter 4 is about suggestions that improper
pressure has been put on witnesses to the disaster. Chapters 5 and 6 deal
with issues that have been put to me by the relatives of victims and some other
miscellaneous points. Chapter 7 summarises my findings.

I should like to record my sincere thanks to my secretary Chris Bone and my
Clerk Graham Catherall who have greatly assisted me throughout my scrutiny.
I should also like to thank Mike Ward who has also helped me from time to
time.
CHAPTER 1 - The background


The sequence of events since the disaster


1.    It will be helpful first to set out the broad sequence of inquiries and
      investigations following the disaster. Two days afterwards, on 17 April 1989,
      the then Home Secretary appointed Lord Justice Taylor (as he then was and
      whom I shall refer to as Lord Taylor) to conduct an inquiry. On 24 April,
      West Midlands Police were instructed to investigate the disaster for the
      purpose of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.

2.    Lord Taylor’s Inquiry held public sessions between 15 May and 29 June
      1989. 174 witnesses gave evidence and much other material in the form of
      statements and video evidence was made available to the Inquiry. On 4
      August, Lord Taylor’s interim report was published. He concluded that
      ‘the main reason fo r the disaster was the failure o f police control’ (interim
      report, para 278).

3.    On 18 April 1990, Dr Popper, the Coroner for South Yorkshire began the
      first of 95 mini inquests to decide the statutory questions as to who each of
      the deceased was and when and where he or she died. He did not deal at
      that stage with the remaining statutory question of how each victim died,
      since that could not be answered pending the decision of the Director of
      Public Prosecutions (DPP) as to whether or not any prosecutions should be
      brought against any of those involved.

4.    On 11 July 1990 the Police Complaints Authority (PCA) directed that
      disciplinary charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief
      Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray. Mr Duckenfield
      had been in overall control of the police operation for the semi-final at
      Hillsborough, and Mr Murray was in control of operations in the ground.

5.    Both officers had been in the police control box with good views of the part
      of the ground where the tragedy occurred. In November 1990 Mr
      Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill-health. Since disciplinary charges can
      only be pursued against serving police officers, this meant that the complaint
      against him had to be dropped. The PCA subsequently announced that it
      would not pursue the charge against Mr Murray on the ground that it would
      be unfair to pursue what was in essence a joint charge against one officer
      only.

6.    In the autumn of 1990 the DPP announced that there would be no
      prosecutions. On 19 November the inquests were resumed at Sheffield.
      These proceedings are often referred to as the ‘main’ or ‘generic’ inquest,
       since they were concerned with the question common to all the (then) 95
       deceased of how they came to their deaths.

7.    Around 200 witnesses gave evidence at these resumed inquests, including 56
       who had done so before Lord Taylor. On 28 March 1991, the jury returned
      verdicts of accidental death in all 95 cases, by majorities of 9 to 2.

8.    In April 1992, a Memorial was presented to the Attorney-General inviting
       him to exercise his powers under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 asking
       him to apply for new inquests on the basis of evidence that had come to light
       since the original inquests. In August of that year the Attorney-General
       announced that he had declined to do so.

9.    On April 6th 1993, six families who had lost relations at Hillsborough were
      granted leave to move for judicial review to quash the verdict of the inquest
      and seek a fresh inquest. On 5 November 1993 the Divisional Court
      dismissed their application.

10.   Civil claims for compensation have been made throughout the period since
      the disaster. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has not contested
      liability for these claims, though he has sought contribution from other
      parties. Paragraph 65 of this chapter gives details in relation to the claims
      which have been settled.

11.   On 5 December 1996, Granada Television broadcast a programme entitled
       ‘Hillsborough’. The programme presented an emotive and powerful picture
      of the plight of the bereaved immediately following and in the aftermath of
      the tragedy. It also suggested that there was fresh evidence which had not
      previously been considered which called into question the verdict at the
      inquests and perhaps also some other decisions.


The scrutiny

12.   Since my appointment to conduct this scrutiny in June, I have had evidence
       either in writing or in person from a wide variety of people. There is a full
       list of those from whom I have taken evidence in person, or otherwise
       consulted, at Appendix 1. As well as the people listed there I have had about
       30 letters about my scrutiny from members of the public.

13.   I have read the evidence given at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and most of that given
       at the Inquest. I have examined many of the ‘body files’ which contain
       information about individuals who died and considered other material, the
       nature of which will be apparent from my report. I visited Hillsborough
       Football Stadium on 24 September.

14.   I have in particular had written submissions from Mr Alun Jones QC and Mr
       Julian Knowles, Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group, which
       represents many of the families of those who died. I discussed these with
       Counsel, who were accompanied by the Chairman and vice-Chairman of the
       Group, in late September. I then visited Liverpool, where I met all those
       families personally who wished to see me. I appreciate the thoughtful and
       constructive way in which the family members whom I met on that occasion,
       and since, have put their points to me.

15.    Since my visit to Liverpool, I have had meetings with a number of other
       people who expressed their concern to me about the disaster, or who I thought
       could help me in my scrutiny. I am very grateful to all those who have
       helped me in the course of my scrutiny.


Evidence

16.    My terms of reference mention evidence which was not available to the earlier
       inquiries into the disaster, and invite me to judge whether any such evidence is
       significant in various ways. In an event of the magnitude of Hillsborough,
       witnessed by so many people, there will inevitably be evidence which is ‘new’
       in the sense that it has not surfaced before. I therefore think that it is
       important at the outset of my report to establish what the concepts of ‘new’
       and ‘significant’ evidence must mean in the context of the Hillsborough
       disaster.


a) - evidence which is ‘not previously available ’

17.    Much of the evidence which I have been invited to consider, including that of
       the two witnesses Dr Walker and Mr Houldsworth upon whom reliance is
       placed by the Family Support Group, has been previously available in the
       sense that their existence was known at the time of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or
       the Inquests and written statements were taken from them. But for one
       reason or another they were not called to give oral evidence to Lord Taylor or
       the Coroner, or their evidence may not have been considered by the
       prosecuting and police disciplinary authorities and the Divisional Court.
       Evidence which falls into this category might in my opinion be regarded as not
       having been previously available, so long as it was not - at the time of Lord
       Taylor’s Inquiry or the Inquests - in the public domain.

18.    I would regard evidence as being in the public domain if the substance of it
       was known to the legal advisers of the parties - including the legal advisers of
       the families. In the case of items such as videotapes, or other ‘exhibits’, I
       would regard them as not previously available if they were unknown to Lord
       Taylor’s Inquiry team or to the Coroner, or if it seemed that Lord Taylor’s
       team or the Coroner did not appreciate their significance. I would also regard
       videotape or other evidence as not previously available if its existence was
       unknown to the legal advisers acting for the families - even if Lord Taylor or
       the Coroner knew about it.
19.   But I should make it plain that I have looked at all the evidence I have been
      asked to consider, whether it was previously available in this sense or not.


b) - ‘significant evidence ’

20.   In order to be significant a piece of evidence must first of course be credible,
      but it must also differ in some important way from evidence which has already
      been given. Over 50,000 people were present in the Hillsborough Stadium
      on the day of the disaster. Many others were involved in the rescue
      operation, including police, ambulance and fire service personnel, doctors
      and nurses. It is highly unlikely that any two had precisely the same
      perception or recollection of the fast moving and horrific events.

21.   The West Midlands Police took 3,776 statements from witnesses. These
      included the people who were most involved, but even so this was only a
      fraction of those who witnessed something of the events. Lord Taylor was
      satisfied from the evidence that he heard that he was able to reach the
      necessary conclusions for the purpose of his report. He said that to have
      heard further evidence would not have added significantly to the picture
      (interim report para 14).

22.    Lord Taylor had to decide a number of controversial issues, for example
       why the police lost control of the crowd outside the Leppings Lane
       turnstiles. The evidence of witnesses who have not previously come
       forward is unlikely significantly to affect the weight of the evidence already
       given on these controversial issues.


(c) - evidence significant enough to justify a new public inquiry

23.    So far as a further public inquiry is concerned, the new evidence needed to
       justify one would in my view have to be such that there would be a real
       possibility that the conclusions reached by Lord Taylor in his Report might
       be different. Neither Counsel appearing on their behalf nor any of the
       families who I have seen in interview had any criticism of Lord Taylor’s
       Inquiry or the conclusions that he reached.

24.    I would also recommend a further public inquiry if I considered that there
       was an important aspect of the disaster or its aftermath which had not been
       sufficiently investigated, and that it was in the public interest that it should
       now be investigated, notwithstanding the long lapse of time.
     (d) -    evidence o f such significance that I should draw it to the attention o f the
             Director o f Public Prosecutions, the Attorney-General or those in charge o f
             police disciplinary matters

     25.     The Director of Public Prosecutions had the responsibility of deciding
             whether criminal proceedings, in practice charges of manslaughter, should
             be brought against any corporate body or individual. In their submissions to
             me Counsel for the Family Support Group have only invited me to make a
             recommendation to the DPP in the case of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray
             (see note 1).

     26.     The DPP, accepting the advice of two very experienced Queen’s Counsel,
             concluded in 1990 that there was not sufficient evidence to justify such
             charges against either of these officers. The fresh evidence therefore would
••




             have to be of sufficient significance that there is in my view a real possibility
             that in considering it the DPP might change her mind and institute
             proceedings for manslaughter, or any other offence, against one or both of
             these officers.

     27.     My terms of reference also mention the Attorney-General. The Attorney-
             General has powers under the Coroner’s Act 1988 in relation to Inquests.
             Section 13 provides that:-

                     ‘.... where on an application by or under the authority o f the
                    Attorney-General, the High Court is satisfied.... where an inquest
                    has been h eld .... that (whether by reason o f fraud, rejection o f
                    evidence, irregularity o f proceedings, insufficiency o f inquiry, the
                    discovery o f new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is necessary or
                    desirable in the interests o f justice that another inquest should be
                    held, the High Court may .... order another inquest to be held into
••




                    the death .... [and] .... quash the inquisition on that inquest’.

     28.     In their written submissions to me Counsel for the Family Support Group
             stated “it is accepted, eight and a half years after the event, that it is
             impracticable and may be undesirable for fresh inquests to be convened.” In
             my view the Courts’ powers under section 13 only arise if it is 'necessary or
             desirable’ in the interests of justice that another inquest should be held. If it
             is impracticable, it cannot be said to be necessary in the interests of justice.
             I agree with Counsel that it is impracticable and undesirable to hold fresh
             Inquests. In their oral submissions to me Counsel accepted that this remedy
             was not available (transcript 30 September 1997, page 3).

     29.     Counsel however submitted that there could be a further application to the
             Divisional Court for judicial review of the Coroner’s Inquest with a view to
             quashing the verdicts of accidental death. He further submitted that I should
             grant leave for such an application. That I cannot do, since no formal
             application has been made, nor am I sitting as a Judge dealing with the
             Crown Office List.
30.    If I came to the conclusion that a further application to the Divisional Court
       for a review of the Inquest would have a reasonable prospect of success I
       would be prepared to say so, in the hope and expectation that the single
       Judge hearing the application might be inclined to grant leave. Since
       however it would be impossible to substitute a verdict of unlawful killing in
       the absence of a fresh inquest, I cannot see what the point of such an
       application would be. As Lord Justice McCowan said in his judgement in
       the Divisional Court in 1993 (transcript page 4IB):

               “As to the ... suggestion o f a mere quashing o f the existing verdicts
              leaving nothing in their place, I would regard that as absolutely
              valueless”.

31.   The effect of quashing the accidental death verdict without substituting any
      other verdict would be the same as if the jury had returned an open verdict.
      (R v St Pancras Coroner ex parte Higgins. 152 JP 637.640). An open
      verdict is only appropriate where there is insufficient evidence to record any
      other suggested conclusion. In practice there were two alternative verdicts
      here - unlawful killing or accidental death. If the jury did not consider that
      the evidence justified a verdict of unlawful killing, then accidental death
      must inevitably be the verdict.


Other action which should be taken in the public Interest

32.   My terms of reference also ask me to advise whether there is any other
      action which should be taken in the public interest. I shall return to this
      later, in Chapter 3 Part 2 and Chapter 4 Part 2.


The previous proceedings

33.    It is necessary to summarise the previous proceedings as briefly as I can in
       order to see what possible impact any fresh evidence might have upon the
       conclusions reached by those making the relevant decisions. It is important
       to bear in mind that each set of proceedings had a particular scope and
       purpose.

Lord Taylor’s Inquiry

34.    Lord Taylor conducted a thorough and wide-ranging inquiry which was in
       some respects - certainly in its effects upon crowd safety at major sports
       events - one of the most important to be held in this country for many years.
       His terms of reference were -
        “To inquire into events at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on
       the 15th April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs o f
       crowd control and safety at sports events”.

Lord Taylor’s interim report was concerned with the events of 15th April,
while his final report dealt with his recommendations. The 174 witnesses
from whom he heard oral evidence included more than 50 Liverpool
supporters, over 50 police officers, 11 representatives of the Ambulance and
Fire Services, including senior officers, 15 employees of Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club together with their consulting engineers, and 5
doctors (3 of whom were Liverpool supporters) who had attended the injured
and dying.

The purpose of the first part of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was to find out what
happened and why, and to consider the response of the emergency services.

It was not difficult to discover what happened. The Leppings Lane standing
terrace on which the disaster occurred was separated from the pitch by high
metal fencing, and divided into pens by ‘radial’ fences which stretched from
the pitch back towards the rear of the terrace. The match was to kick off at
3 p.m. - by about 2.50 pm the central pens 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane
terraces were full or nearly full. At 2.52 the police had an exit gate by the
Leppings Lane turnstiles, Gate C, opened in order to relieve dangerous
crowd pressure which had built up outside the turnstiles. The result was that
some 2,000 supporters came through Gate C into the ground in a relatively
short time. Most went through a tunnel leading into the rear of pens 3 and
4, and the result was a crush of people substantially exceeding the safe
capacity of those pens. Part of a crush barrier in pen 3 collapsed.

The police did not at first appreciate what was happening. When they did,
rescue was difficult because of the congestion and restricted access to the
pitch.

The question of why the disaster occurred was more complex. The first
issue was why the police lost control of the crowd outside the turnstiles.
The police said it was due to the unexpected late arrival of very large
numbers of supporters, many of whom were determined to get into the
ground on time come what may. They said that there was a larger number
than usual affected by drink, and behaving badly. A substantial number had
no tickets, which increased the problems of crowd control. The position
was exacerbated by people not knowing where to go because of poor sign­
posting.

The police said that they could not stop those at the back pushing forward
and crushing those at the front, near the turnstiles. They said that they could
not have anticipated such a large unco-operative crowd in the last half hour
before the game. The policing operation was conducted on similar lines to
that which had been successful during the identical Nottingham Forest-
Liverpool semi-final fixture at Hillsborough in 1988.

The other side of the picture was given by the supporters. Many of them
criticised the policing. The police should have appreciated that many
people would turn up in the half-hour before kick-off, and should have taken
more effective steps such as filtering the crowd well before they reached the
turnstiles, as was done in the previous year. This would have prevented
people without tickets getting in the way and adding to the throng in front of
the turnstiles. If need be the kick-off should have been delayed.

Lord Taylor rejected the view advanced by the police. He summarised his
conclusions on this aspect of the matter at para 268 of his interim report:

         “the need to open Gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the
        turnstiles. That occurred because, as both Club and police should
        have realised, the turnstile area could not easily cope with the large
        numbers demanded o f it unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy
       period. The Operational Order and police tactics on the day failed
        to provide fo r controlling a concentrated arrival o f large numbers
        should that occur in a short period. That it might so occur was
       foreseeable and it did. The presence o f an unruly minority who had
        drunk too much aggravated the problem. So did the Club’s confused
        and inadequate signs and ticketing. ”

Lord Taylor also criticised the police decision not to delay the 3 p.m. kick-
off for the match.

I have heard no fresh evidence relating to what took place outside the ground
before 3 pm. There is no question of reviewing Lord Taylor’s finding on
that.

But the crucial question was what happened inside the ground. Lord Taylor
concluded that the influx of supporters going through Gate C after 2.52
should not have been allowed to go down the tunnel. He said (para 231):

        “It should have been clear in the control room where there was a
       view o f the pens and o f the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had
       to be closed. I f orders had been given to that effect when gate C was
       opened, the fans could have been directed to the empty areas o f the
       wings and this disaster could still have been avoided. Failure to give
       that order was a blunder o f the first magnitude. ”

He also criticised the police response to the situation. He said they should
have appreciated earlier than they did what was happening and summoned
the emergency services earlier. But here we are only dealing with a few
minutes - albeit vital minutes.
47.    Lord Taylor was therefore highly critical of the police. But he also
       criticised others. The Safety Certificate issued for the ground by Sheffield
       City Council was unsatisfactory so far as the capacity of the Leppings Lane
       terraces was concerned once the radial fences had been installed. He
       criticised the Club and their consulting engineers, because the layout of the
       forecourt and turnstiles at Leppings Lane was quite inadequate to cope with
       so many people. There was no method of monitoring how many people
       went into the individual pens on the Leppings Lane terrace except by a
       visual check, which was wholly unsatisfactory. The signposting at the
       ground and the information on tickets for the match was inadequate and
       misleading and the club had no stewards in the concourse directing people
       where to go. The result was that most standing spectators who went in
       through the turnstiles A-G or Gate C did not realise there was any
       alternative but to go down the tunnel.

48.    Barrier 124A which collapsed was of insufficient strength. The crush
       barriers were insufficient and poorly placed and the gates on the perimeter
       fence were too small.

49.    Lord Taylor also considered the response of the Emergency Services. He
       said at para 296 of his interim report:

               “I say at the outset o f this chapter that no valid criticism can be
              made o f the response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by South
              Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service or by the fire brigade on
              15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism o f
              them. ”

50.    He considered the criticisms of two Liverpool doctors in relation to the
       rescue operation, and specifically rejected them.

51.    None of the evidence I have been invited to consider could make Lord
       Taylor’s censure of the police more severe, and it does not add any separate
       or additional ground of criticism in respect of the events leading to the
       tragedy. Nor, save in one respect which I mention in Chapter 6, has it had
       any impact on the responsibility of other parties criticised in Lord Taylor’s
       report.


The decision not to prosecute

52.    I have read the joint opinion of Counsel dated 6th August 1990 which gave
       advice to the Director of Public Prosecutions on the possible criminal
       proceedings against Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield, amongst others.
       Although the material available to Counsel was more extensive than that
       which was placed before Lord Taylor, because by that time the criminal
       investigation carried out by the West Midlands Police had been completed,
       Counsel stated that
        “the criminal investigation, fo r all its thoroughness, has not
       significantly added to or contradicted Lord Justice Taylor’s findings.
       In our judgement, therefore, the Taylor analysis o f the facts is as firm
       a base as any from which to approach the question o f Criminal
       Liability”.

Counsel then set out a full, detailed and careful resume of the facts based on
the evidence then available. I have not found any error or omission in this
resume, nor in my view is any particular aspect understated or exaggerated.
I have also considered the statement of the law set out in the opinion.
Counsel considered both the offences of manslaughter and culpable
misfeasance in public office. They were plainly correct to consider that the
latter offence would be no easier to establish than manslaughter in the
circumstances of the case.

In order to recommend that the DPP reconsider the decision not to prosecute
therefore I must be satisfied that any fresh evidence establishes or may
establish facts not previously considered by Counsel or the significance of
which was not fully appreciated, which makes it more likely that charges of
manslaughter could be established. Essentially this relates to Mr
Duckenfield’s and Mr Murray’s knowledge and appreciation of the risk of
injury in doing what they did or omitted to do (but see note 1 at the end o f
this chapter).

From my meetings with the bereaved families and their representatives I am
left in no doubt that there was widespread disappointment at the DPP’s
decision not to prosecute. They find it difficult to understand in the light of
Lord Taylor’s trenchant criticisms of the South Yorkshire police and the fact
that the force have been paying compensation.

What the Director of Public Prosecutions had to bear in mind, however, is
the significantly different and greater degree of culpability which is involved
in manslaughter, or culpable misfeasance in public office, as against the
degree of negligence which gives rise to liability, and compensation
payments, under civil law. Any prosecution of an individual police officer
would have to establish his individual responsibility. It would not be enough
simply to prove the composite failure of the police operation.

The causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as these two
officers were concerned the prosecution would have to prove to the high
standard required for a criminal conviction that the failure to give the order
to close off the tunnel when Gate C was opened amounted to the serious
degree of recklessness necessary to constitute manslaughter.
Police Complaints Authority

58.   The decision by the Police Complaints Authority not to pursue charges
      against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray was
      not taken on the ground that there was insufficient evidence to charge them
      with neglect of duty. Mr Duckenfield retired from the police on grounds of
      ill health and, as the rules stood (and still stand), such charges cannot be
      pursued against a retired officer. In the case of Mr Murray it was
      considered unfair to pursue a joint charge against the junior of the two
      officers only.

59.   It is clear to me that many of the families of victims consider this to be
      unfair and unsatisfactory. I sympathise with this view. But it is not my
      task to comment on these rules. The issue is a complex one and is a matter
      for Parliament. The Police Complaints Authority commented on it in their
      Annual Report for 1988, and the matter has recently been reported on by a
      Parliamentary Committee. In the context of my scrutiny it means however
      that fresh evidence is unlikely to have any impact on the decision not to
      pursue these charges.


The Inquest

60.   The purpose of an inquest is to find out who the deceased was and how,
      when and where he or she came to their death (Coroner’s Act 1988, section
      11(5) and Coroner’s Rules 1984, Rule 36 - which also prohibits the Coroner
      or jury expressing an opinion on any other matter). No verdict can be
      framed in such a way as to appear to determine any question of criminal
      liability on the part of a named person or civil liability.

61.   The Hillsborough inquests therefore were, or should have been, of much
      more limited scope than the wide ranging Inquiry conducted by Lord Taylor.
      The questions of who the deceased were, and where and when they died
      were dealt with at the mini inquests. At each mini inquest a police officer
      gave a summary of the evidence relating to the deceased. This was based on
      statements taken from witnesses and sought so far as possible to trace what
      happened to each person from the time they left home to go to the match to
      the post-mortem examination on them. A second police officer gave
      evidence based on photographic material in an attempt to trace the
      movements of each individual.

62.    Then the pathologist gave evidence in relation to the post-mortem
       examination and cause of death. Because of the general confusion as the
       disaster unfolded it was not always possible to trace what happened to
       everybody who died from the time they were last seen alive on the terraces
       to the confirmation of their death and subsequent identification. This has
       understandably caused great concern to families who are anxious to trace the
last moments of their children or relatives. I will return to this question in
Chapter 5.

The main inquest began on 19th November 1990 and concluded on 28th
March 1991. As I have explained in paragraph 31 there were in practice
only two possible verdicts, unlawful killing and accidental death. The jury
returned the latter verdict. Again as a result of my meetings with the
families and their representatives I have been left in no doubt that there is
widespread dissatisfaction among them as to the verdict and much criticism
of the Coroner and the way the inquests were conducted. As to the verdict,
as I have already said, Counsel for the Family Support Group has accepted
that it is now impossible to have a fresh inquest with a view to substituting a
verdict of unlawful killing. The Support Group argue that the public
perception is that the verdict of accidental death implies that there was no
fault on the part of the police or any other party. I cannot say what
perception, if any, the general public have. In any event the proposition is
wrong. In his summing up the Coroner correctly stated that a verdict of
accidental death did not mean that the deaths occurred without fault.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has never contested civil liability on
the part of the police to pay damages for negligence to the bereaved and
injured. This was accepted in a letter from Hammond Suddards, solicitors
for the Chief Constable and his insurers dated 15 December 1989 and
recognised as an admission of liability by the Courts (Divisional Court
Transcript, page 40; Lord Keith of Kinkel in Alcock v Chief Constable
[1992] AC 310, 392).

Compensation has been paid. In respect of the fatalities, 37 claims were
made for loss of financial dependency pursuant to the Fatal Accidents Acts.
Of these 36 have been settled. 53 fatal claims were restricted to damages for
funeral expenses and/or statutory bereavement payments. 50 have been
settled. Offers have been made in respect of the other 3 but not accepted.
1473 claims for personal injury were intimated. All claims included a
psychiatric element. The great majority were for psychiatric as opposed to
physical injury. 1035 have been settled, 19 remain outstanding. The
remaining claims have been closed with a nil payment or not pursued. The
Club and Eastwood and Partners, the Club’s consultant engineers, made a
very substantial lump sum contribution to those settlements; so also did the
City Council, although their insurers were the same as those of the police.
The major portion was borne by the police and their insurers. In total
£13.25 million has been paid in compensation and legal costs, not including
compensation to police officers.

I have heard the suggestion that the verdict of accidental death at the
inquests in some way undermined or reversed the findings of Lord Taylor.
But it did no such thing. In order to justify a further application to the
Divisional Court for judicial review to quash the inquest verdict of
accidental death, without an order for a new inquest, any new evidence must
      in my opinion show that had it been presented to the jury they would have
      been likely to reach the only other possible verdict, namely unlawful killing.


The Divisional Court

67.   As I have already mentioned the Divisional Court heard in 1993 an
      application on behalf of six families to quash the inquest verdicts of
      accidental death and seek fresh inquests. It considered ten grounds which
      were advanced on behalf of the six families, but rejected all of them. I will
      discuss some of the points which the Divisional Court considered in more
      detail later.

68.   The main arguments before the Divisional Court were -

      a.       That the Coroner should have disqualified himself on the grounds
      that he was too closely associated with the Sheffield City Council, one of the
      interested parties, who appointed him and paid his salary. This was said to
      give rise to apparent bias. The Divisional Court said the point was far too
      late, since no objection was taken at the time. This ground was raised for
      the first time before the Divisional Court - nobody had mentioned it at the
      inquests. The Divisional Court concluded in any event that the point had no
      merit.

      b.      That the Coroner wrongly conducted the mini inquests by reference
      to summaries of the statements of eye witnesses which were read out and the
      contents of which could not be tested by oral evidence and questioning.
      (Ground 1 of the application). The Court held that Rule 37(3)(C) of the
      Coroner’s Rules 1984 permitted this. It had been done with the complete
      agreement of Mr Fraser who was then acting as solicitor on behalf of the
      relatives. This ground was not pursued by Mr Alun Jones QC who appeared
      before the Court on behalf of the Applicants.

      c.      That there was now (1993) available some evidence that the Coroner
      and his jury were not given the full picture of the evidence of some of the
      witnesses whose statements were partially summarised at the mini inquests
      and the result was that the proceedings were vitiated (Ground 7). Six cases
      were relied upon. One of these was that of Kevin Williams, with which I
      shall deal in more detail later. The Court rejected this ground.

      d.     That the Coroner wrongly introduced a cut-off point of 3.15 pm
      (Ground 3). The Court upheld his decision about the cut-off point, and the
      Coroner’s reasons for making it. I shall deal with this in more detail later,
      because Counsel say that further evidence now shows that this approach was
      wrong.

      e.     That the Coroner wrongly limited his inquiries into how the deceased
      met their deaths so as to exclude inquiry into whether lives could have been
       saved by calling the Emergency Services sooner and providing better
       emergency care for the injured thereafter (Ground 5). This point is clearly
       related to the 3.15 pm cut-off point. The Court held that there was a
       sufficient inquiry to answer the statutory questions of who the deceased was,
       when, where and how they died.

      f.     That the Coroner should have left the verdict of lack of care to the
      jury (Ground 6). After considering the authorities the Court held that

               “the verdict o f ‘lack o f care’ is concerned with the failure to provide
              care in the form o f food, medicine, clothing, shelter, etc., not with
              carelessness, and is appropriate only in cases which are the other
              side o f the coin o f self-neglect such as starvation, hypothermia and
              persistent failure to provide medication. ”

      Such a verdict could not have been appropriate in this case. The law on this
      point has subsequently been affirmed in Reg v N Humberside Coroner ex
      parte Jamieson [1995]QB 1 at 24 and 25. It was not seriously argued before
      me, either by Counsel for the Family Support Group or by Professor
      Scraton, who has taken a keen interest in the Hillsborough Disaster and who
      made written and oral submissions to me, that this was a possible verdict.
      In my view the decision of the Divisional Court on this point needs no
      further consideration. None of the evidence I have been invited to consider
      could make this an appropriate verdict.

69.    Although only six families made the application for Judicial Review, the
       Court’s reasoning applies to the inquest verdicts on all those who died at
       Hillsborough. There was no appeal from the Court’s judgement. A fresh
       application for Judicial Review could only succeed, therefore, if fresh
       evidence undermines the Court’s reasoning, or shows that it may have
       proceeded on an incorrect factual basis.

70.    The Divisional Court also stated that even if any of the grounds had been
       made out, the Court would not have exercised its discretion to order a fresh
       inquest and gave cogent reasons of this decision (per McCowan LJ at pages
       40 and 41 of the judgement). These reasons are even more cogent now and
       as I have already said Counsel did not contend that there should be a fresh
       inquest.



Note 1 (to paragraphs 25 and 54).

The only person who suggested that another officer should have been prosecuted
was Mrs McBrien. In a clear and restrained submission to me she argued that the
sole cause o f the tragedy was the opening o f Gate C when the need to do so had not
arisen and when it was quite contrary to the whole concept o f proper crowd control.
She contended that the fault lay mainly with Superintendent Marshall who called fo r
the gate to be opened, and Chief Superintendent Duckenfield fo r ordering it to be
opened.

Lord Taylor rejected this argument. At para 228 o f his interim report he said that
  “Having lost control and rejected the option o f postponing kick-off, the police were
faced with a serious danger o f deaths or injuries. They were left therefore with no
 alternative but to open the gates. Superintendent Marshall was right at that stage
 to ask fo r it and Mr Duckenfield was right to agree. But the possible effects o f so
 dramatic a step required other action

Moreover, M r Hytner, the QC who appeared fo r the bereaved and injured at Lord
Taylor’s Inquiry, specifically stated that he did not blame Mr Marshall in requesting
the opening o f the gates (transcript day 10, page 112). I have not been asked to
consider any fresh evidence bearing on this issue and there is no basis fo r re­
considering the decision not to prosecute him.
CHAPTER 2


Video evidence about the disaster


1.    At the heart of many of the allegations about the disaster which I have heard
      over the last few months has been the suggestion that video evidence of what
      happened has been distorted or concealed. Several different possibilities of
      this sort have been put to me. Their common theme is that, had the full video
      evidence been available, the culpability of the police would have been even
      clearer than it already is. That might have meant inquest verdicts of unlawful
      killing rather than accidental death, or led to criminal prosecutions of senior
      police officers, or both. It is said that the police themselves concealed the
      video evidence to hide the true facts.

2.    I have found that there is considerable confusion and misunderstanding about
      the video evidence of the disaster. Before moving on to discuss the
      allegations in detail, I think it is necessary to explain what video cameras were
      operating on the day and what has happened to the tapes that were made.

3.    The police and Sheffield Wednesday FC were each operating their own
      separate video systems at the ground. BBC cameras were also present to
      record the game.

4.    The West Midlands Police team which investigated the disaster used footage
      from all these sources to create a ‘compilation tape’, lasting about 2 hours,
      giving an overall picture of the disaster. This tape was shown both to Lord
      Taylor’s Inquiry and to the jury at the Inquests.


The Club CCTV System

5.    Sheffield Wednesday had 19 fixed closed circuit (CCTV) cameras which were
      trained onto the various turnstiles around the ground. There were 19 CCTV
      monitor screens in the club’s Control Room showing what these cameras
      photographed - the club’s Control Room was inside the South Stand, just off
      the players’ tunnel (and had no direct view of the pitch). The club recorded
      the output of all these cameras. One of the club’s CCTV cameras showed the
      Leppings Lane turnstiles, in particular the turnstiles A to G through which
      spectators going to the Leppings Lane standing terrace would normally come.
      It also showed the exit gate, Gate C, which the police opened to relieve the
      pressure outside these turnstiles.

6.    The pictures from this camera were recorded on tape JH2. The West
      Midlands police officers investigating the disaster took custody of this tape
      and used footage from it in the compilation tape.
7.    As well as the 19 screens linked to their own CCTV system, Sheffield
      Wednesday’s Control Room also contained a further screen, linked to the
      police CCTV system. This allowed people in the club Control Room to see
      what was being shown by any of the five police CCTV cameras. But they
      could not record these police pictures.

8.    The club also had a mechanism which automatically monitored the number of
      spectators passing through the turnstiles.

9.    There were three people in the Sheffield Wednesday Control Room as the
      disaster took place. One was Mr Lock, the club’s security officer. Mr Lock, a
      former policeman, gave evidence both at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and at the
      inquests. He left the Control Room at about 2.45 p.m., at about the time when
      Gate C at Leppings Lane was opened briefly so that police could eject
      somebody. He returned just after the kick-off.

10.   The second person in the Control Room was PC Guest, who has since died.
      He was police liaison officer with the club, and gave evidence at Lord Taylor’s
      Inquiry. The third was Mr Houldsworth, the club’s video technician.


The Police CCTV System

11.   The police had five fixed CCTV cameras situated around the ground. The
      police Control Box contained one screen for each of these five cameras.
      The screens are shown in photograph 48 in Appendix 2 (48 was the number
      this photograph was allocated when it was used as an exhibit at Lord
      Taylor’s Inquiry). I need only be concerned with cameras 1, 2, 3 and 5.
      Police camera 4 was situated outside the ground, on Penistone Road, at the
      far end of the ground from Leppings Lane where the tragedy occurred.

12.   Police camera 1 was mounted on the rear of the West Stand. It looked out
       from the ground towards the Leppings Lane turnstiles, in particular
       turnstiles A-G through which the standing spectators would come. It could
       also show Leppings Lane itself, part of the area outside the turnstiles, and
       part of the concourse between the turnstiles and the West Stand. Its
       pictures were in black and white.

13.   Police camera 2 was mounted on the South Stand and it commanded views
       all round the ground. It was in colour. Police camera 3 was also mounted
       on the South Stand, but was nearer the Penistone Road (Kop) end, where the
       Nottingham Forest supporters were standing. It was in black and white.

14.   Police camera 5 is the important one from the point of view of my scrutiny.
       It was mounted near the scoreboard at the south east comer of the West
       Stand and was the closest one to the police control box. It provided views
       of the West Stand and the West Terraces. It was in black and white.
15.   A plan which formed Appendix 1 of Lord Taylor’s interim report showing
      the five police cameras with their numbers forms part of Appendix 2 to this
      Report. All five police cameras were operating continuously from about 12
      noon to 17.20 on the 15 April. They were under the control of PC Trevor
      Bichard. All five could zoom and pan. (PC Bichard in fact referred to
      camera 2 as camera 3, and to 3 as 2. I have adopted Mr Houldsworth’s
      numbering of the cameras).

16.   Additionally in the police Control Box were two video recorders, each
      linked to a monitor screen showing what it was recording. The recorders
      could be operated in one of two ways. They could operate on ‘auto­
      sequence’, in which mode the recording would move around the five police
      CCTV cameras at pre-set intervals. Alternatively, the operator could
      override this and record output from whichever of the five cameras he
      wanted, for as long as he wanted. The monitor screens can be seen without
      numbers on the right in photograph 48, Appendix 2, one above the other.

17.   Both of these tape recording machines could record in two ways, either in
      continuous or normal play, or in ‘time-lapse’, recording a new still frame
      every half second. ‘Time-lapse’ is jerky when played back, but it allowed
      tapes to be used for longer. Police made four tapes from these two
      recorders in the course of the day. One (TB1 - TB for Trevor Bichard) ran
      from 12 noon to 15.04, the second (TB2) from 12 noon to 15.34. These are
      the tapes with which we are primarily concerned. TB3 continued on from
      TB2, and TB4 from TB1 but with a 30-minute gap. TB3 and TB4 both ran
      up to 17.20. The reason why there was a half-hour gap between TB1 and
      TB4 is that PC Bichard forgot, in the anxiety of the moment, to replace the
      tape when it expired at 15.04. TB2 lasted longer than TB1 because of
      greater use of ‘time-lapse’.

18.   PC Bichard sealed the four tapes at the end of the day and handed them to
      other South Yorkshire police officers for safe custody. South Yorkshire
      police later gave them to the West Midlands police investigating team. I
      have inspected the originals of tapes TB1, 2, 3 and 4. They are intact.
      Each of the four tapes is timed throughout and there are no gaps in these
      times. The four tapes were all made available in their entirety to Lord
      Taylor’s Inquiry and the Coroner.


Other video cameras operating on the day

19.   The police had a hand held video camera operating from time to time
      between 11.45 and 17.30. The tapes from this are identified as VRM1 and
      VRM2.

20.   The BBC had a number of cameras, both mounted and hand held operating
      during the day. Tapes from these are identified as MAPI to MAP9.
Theft of two videotapes

21.   Between 4.30 p.m. on the afternoon of the disaster and 9 a.m. the next
      morning two tapes were stolen from the club’s Control Room, which was
       locked. One of these tapes was entirely blank (the club camera concerned was
       wrongly placed and pointing at a wall). The other showed turnstiles 9 to 16 at
      the Leppings Lane end of the ground, which were next to turnstiles A to G.

22.   The theft of these tapes was investigated by the West Midlands Police but
       remains unsolved. There is no proof of who was responsible for their
       disappearance. During the course of my scrutiny I have heard allegations that
       they were taken by South Yorkshire police officers as part of a ‘cover-up’.
       There is no evidence for this suggestion. The loss of these tapes could not
       have hindered Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, the Inquests, or any of the other
      proceedings. They would not have shown anything relevant.


The Compilation Tape

23.   This tape, which lasts about 2 hours was made by the West Midlands Police
      in conjunction with the Treasury Solicitor. It was designed to ‘show what
      was felt to be the most important scenes and sequence of events’ (Inspector
      Layton, inquest transcript, Day 1 page 64).

24.   It consists of extracts from tapes TB1, TB2, and RJH2, together with BBC
      footage. The tape shows scenes in Leppings Lane and at the turnstiles there
      prior to about 15.00, and then scenes inside the stadium up to 16.44. It
      begins with some footage of the layout of the ground which West Midlands
      Police shot specially later on. The compilation tape was shown at the
      Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest. It includes no scenes taken by police
      Camera 5.


The evidence of Roger Houldsworth

25.   Mr Houldsworth was the technician responsible to the club for the working
      of the club and police CCTV systems. The Family Support Group have
      presented him to me as having evidence that what the police said about the
      capacity of their CCTV system and what it showed on the day was false.
      During my scrutiny I have considered a number of written statements from
      Mr Houldsworth and oral evidence which he gave me at an interview with
      him.

26.    First there is a statement in writing which Mr Houldsworth made on 16 May
       1989 to Sheffield Wednesday’s solicitors, which appears in Appendix 3, Part
       1. In this he described the police and club CCTV systems. He said that
       on the day of the disaster he had been called to deal with a fault on police
camera 5. He says he rectified the fault and the camera then worked OK.
He then described his experiences in the club Control Room on the day, in
particular what could be seen on the club screen showing turnstiles A-G
(recorded on tape RJH2) and the monitor screen from the police system,
which was showing output from police camera 1, including the influx of
supporters through Gate C at 14.52. He continues

       “At that point in time I realised, from the numbers already displayed
       on the monitor as having entered from the Leppings Lane turnstiles,
       that a dangerous situation was being created. I left the room and
       went down the players’ tunnel to the pitch and just as I did so the
       Referee stopped the match as I recall. I looked over to the West
       Stand area and I saw fans climbing over the fence and my first
       thought at that time was that it was a pitch invasion, and the match
       had been stopped fo r that reason. ”

Finally in this statement Mr Houldsworth deals with the two tapes missing
from the Club Control Room. I have found an exact transcription of this
statement by Mr Houldsworth in the West Midlands Police computer records
(HOLMES) of their investigation. It is dated 27 May 1989.

There are two written statements by Mr Houldsworth dated 28 April and 5
December 1989 to West Midlands Police. These statements are concerned
with the tapes which went missing from the club Control Room. They are
not material. Thirdly there is a transcript of an interview which Mr
Houldsworth gave for a Yorkshire Television ‘First Tuesday ’ programme
about the disaster, broadcast on 6 February 1990. This is at Appendix 3,
Part 2. It adds very little to his 27 May 1989 statement. But he makes it
clear that it was the scenes from the club camera pointed at turnstiles A to G
and police camera 1 of supporters coming through Gate C that caused him
concern, together with the numbers of spectators shown on the clubs
monitors as having already come into the ground.

Fourth, in an affidavit sworn on 25 November 1996 Mr Houldsworth
exhibits, as ‘GH2’ certain comments on the evidence which PC Bichard and
PS Goddard gave to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Inquest, and the evidence
of PC Ryan given at the Taylor Inquiry. I set out the material parts of this
document in Appendix 3, Part 3. The most important statement here is
numbered 1, where Mr Houldsworth says

        7 was able to see what the police could see on their monitors and I
       specifically remember checking to see the state o f Pens 3 and 4 when
       the order was given to open the gate. I could see very clearly that
       the pens were fu ll to the point o f overcrowding. ”

Mr Houldsworth says in this affidavit that he disagrees with the police
evidence that the pictures from their Camera 5 were less than perfect or that
      the zoom capacity on cameras 2 and 5 were not sufficient for clear
      identification of spectators.

31.   Finally, I interviewed Mr Houldsworth on 14 October 1997. He repeated
      the points I have just mentioned. The transcript of his evidence is at
      Appendix 3, Part 4.


The submissions and allegations made bv the Hillsborough Family Support
Group.

32.   Two of the most important issues both at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the
      Inquest were

      a) whether the police in the control box, and particularly the two senior
      officers Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray, realised that pens 3 and 4 were
      already full when the order was given to open Gate C so that a dangerous
      situation would arise in them if a large number of supporters were to enter
      them through the tunnel in a short space of time; and

      b)   if they did not realise this, whether they should have done so.

33.   In the light of this, Mr Alun Jones QC, Counsel for the Family Support
      Group made a number of submissions to me. These were

      1.      that the police blamed their failure to see the overcrowding in pens 3
      and 4 on the fact that Camera 5 was defective (paras 12 and 23 of Counsel’s
      written submissions of 27 September 1997). Their argument is that what
      the police said about this was deliberately false, and that this is shown both
      by Mr Houldsworth’s evidence that Camera 5 was working perfectly and by
      the ‘discovery’ that the police tapes show footage taken by camera 5, which
      demonstrated that it was working (written submissions para 46(viii); oral
      submissions page 12 lines 15 to 22);

      2.      that the evidence from the video tapes of what was filmed byCamera
      5 was deliberately suppressed and concealed, presumably by the South
      Yorkshire and/or West Midlands Police, because it would have revealed the
      falsity of the police claim in submission 1. This would, prima facie, be a
      perversion of the course of justice (written submissions paras 52 and 55 and
      56);

      3.     that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of the
      ‘missing footage’. He ought to have summoned West Midlands police
      officers to explain its disappearance (written submissions para 52);

      4.    that PC Bichard, PC Ryan and PS Goddard all gave deliberately false
      evidence that camera 5 was not working properly and that cameras 5 and 2
      were not good enough to show distress on the faces of those in pens 3 and 4
      (written submission para. 46); and finally

      5.      that Mr Houldsworth in the club Control Room could see and
      appreciate from the screen monitoring the police cameras (in particular
      Cameras 5 and 3) that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded and that a dangerous
      situation was likely to arise because of the influx through Gate C. The
      allegation was that this evidence was withheld from the jury, presumably
      deliberately.

34.   The first and second submissions are particularly serious. If they are made
      out they might affect the verdict of accidental death and the decision of the
      DPP not to prosecute for manslaughter. The third submission is a grave
      allegation against the Coroner even taken on its own. If it is to be taken in
      conjunction with the first and second submissions it could affect the verdict.

35.   On its own the fourth submission would not affect any of the prior
      proceedings. But consideration would have to be given to prosecuting the
      officers concerned (Bichard, Ryan and Goddard). If the last submission is
      made out, the failure of the police to appreciate that a dangerous situation
      had arisen because pens 3 and 4 were already full to their safe capacity when
      gate C was opened could be further criticised if Mr Houldsworth realised
      this simply from seeing scenes depicted from Cameras 3 and 5.

36.   I must examine these five submissions in detail.


Submission 1

37.   The central allegation here is that the police blamed their failure to see the
      overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on Camera 5 being defective when in fact it
      was not. In his oral submissions to me Mr Jones accepted that this was
      crucial to the Group’s submissions in relation to the video evidence
      (transcript 30.9.97 page 12). The submission involves the proposition that
      the police in the Control Box were saying that they could not see with their
      own eyes through the windows of the control box the state of the terraces,
      but were dependent on camera 5 which was not working properly.

38.   Mr Jones originally put this submission to me with respect to the evidence
      given by police officers both at the Taylor Inquiry and at the Inquest. As to
      the former, it was said:

               “ILord Taylor] accepted the police evidence that they were unable to
               see the terraces [were overfull by 2.50] because o f the faulty camera”
               (written submissions para 12).

39.   This is not correct. Lord Taylor made the following findings:
       “ [The police box] has windows commanding views across the pitch
       and straight along the west perimeter fence” (Interim Report para
       49).

       “The cameras [operated in the police control box] have a zoom
      facility to close in on any point o f interest. Specifically there were
       good camera views o f the west terracing         ” (para 50 and see also
       para 170).

        “It should have been clear in the control room where there was a
       view o f the pens and o f the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had
       to be closed” (para 231).

       “[Officers in the control room] had a direct view (ofpens 3 and 4)
      from an elevated position through their window.... In the event pens
       3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place, fans
       were shouting and signalling distress. None o f this was seen or
       recognised in the control room” (para 244).

At paragraph 38 of the written submission, after references to the evidence
of PC Ryan, PC Bichard and PS Goddard, none of whom said that defective
pictures from Camera 5 was the reason why they failed to realise that there
was a dangerous situation, Counsel said that

        “Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.... did not refer to any faults with
       the camera system. On the 25 May 1989 at page 129 he said that he
       did not use this zoom facility but mainly (my emphasis) looked out o f
       the window”.

The implication is that Mr Duckenfield was saying that he was partly reliant
on the cameras. This does not accurately represent his evidence which was:

       Q. “Did you use or was the zoom facility used at all to have a close
       look at the situation in pens 3 and 4 once it was apparent somebody
       was climbing over the fence? - A. Not that I am aware of, sir, that
       may have been the case, but I looked through the window”.

There was abundant evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry that the police in the
control box had a good view out of the windows (Inquiry transcript, day 8
pages 10 and 47, day 9 page 35, day 20 page 13, day 18 pages 76 and 88 -
references are to evidence by Duckenfield, McRobbie and Goddard). PC
Ryan said he very rarely looked at the TV monitors because they were over
his head (day 18 page 59). Superintendent Murray never suggested that he
was reliant on the TV cameras. He had an excellent view out of the
window.

In the course of his oral submissions to me Mr Jones accepted that the
submission was not correct so far as the police evidence at the Taylor
Inquiry was concerned (page 15). But he submitted that the effect of the
evidence of those officers at the inquest was quite different and supported
the submission that they had lied about Camera 5 being faulty.

In my judgement this submission is equally ill-founded. So far as Mr
Duckenfield is concerned, he never said anything about a faulty camera 5,
still less that that was the reason he failed to appreciate the overcrowding.
Although he pointed out that he was standing behind the officers seated at
the front of the Control Box and did not have quite such a good view
through the windows (inquest day 68, page 59) he never suggested he could
not see the terraces sufficiently to form a judgement. On the contrary at
(Day 69 page 23C-E) he said:

        Q. “You had the vision from the Control Box, which we have all
       been to, through the windows? - A. Yes.

       Q. You also were able to see the video cameras, the cameras which
       were showing the terrace? - A. Yes.

       Q. They have a zoom facility, do they not, as fa r as the Leppings
       Lane terrace goes? - A. Yes, they do.

        Q. You still say that in that period between 2.52 and 3 o ’clock you
        never noticed even this huge surge into the terrace? - A. Let me just
        direct you to where I was and what I was doing. Yes, I was in the
        Control Box and I was standing towards the back o f that Control Box
        and when you stand in the back o f that Control Box and look across
       you have a view. As you rightly say you have the other facilities, but
       I did not see anything untoward on those terraces from my position,
       from my viewing position and from the angle at which I was in the
        Control B ox”.

At page 45 (inquest day 69) he gave substantially the same evidence as he
gave to Lord Taylor, to which I have already referred. He said specifically
he was “looking with my eyes at the scene on the terraces” - not at the
television screen.

So far as Mr Murray was concerned, he was seated in the front row of seats
in the Control Box, on the left hand side. He would therefore have an
excellent view out of the window. This is shown in photo 52 (Appendix 2).
He would not be well placed to see the CCTV monitor screens, which were
above his head. At Inquest day 67 (page 48F-49B) he said

       Q. “You in the police Control Box had access to the following, didn’t
       you? First o f all you were able to look out o f the windows to view
       specifically the state o f the Leppings Lane Terraces? - A. Yes. Q. I
       think everybody has visited the ground who needs to visit the ground
       and I need not ask you questions about what you can see because we
       can observe them, but in addition to that you have access to I think it
       is five monitors, do you not? - A. Yes, that is correct in the Control
       Room”.

He was then asked about the cameras that show the terraces. There is no
suggestion that they were not working properly; still less that that was the
reason he failed to realise there was a danger of overcrowding. At page
50C-D:

       Q. “So you are in a position in the Control Box not only to see that
       which you can see with your own eyes o f the terrace, but also, if you
       so choose, to have the cameras so operated that you can look at a
       particular part o f the terrace if you want to do so? - A. Yes, I can
       identify, or the operator can identify, a particular part that we should
       look at. ”

Then at page 78E he says:

       Q. “You were in a position from the Control Box to see the state o f
       the Leppings Lane terraces and Mr Duckenfield was too? - A. I
       would think we could both have looked at the terraces and seen the
       state o f them, yes. ”

In further written submissions to me Counsel for the Family Support Group
stated that Mr Murray told the inquest jury specifically that he could not see
what was happening on the terraces because of the allegedly faulty cameras.
They cite an answer he gave at inquest day 67, transcript page 79F.

In my view this answer is taken out of context. The passage when looked at
as a whole does not support the assertion that is made about it. Mr Murray
was being asked about photograph C326A. This photograph appears at
Appendix 5 of Lord Taylor’s interim report. It is a still photograph taken at
2.59 p.m. from the North Stand looking across the Leppings Lane terraces
towards the police box and Camera 5. The relevant extract reads in fall
(inquest day 69, page 79 D to G):

       Q. “I f we can move to C326A we get an even better view o f pen 6 at
       some five minutes later? A. - Yes.

       Q. Going back to the position ju st before the order was given to
       order the gates to be opened, because we know gate C was opened at
       2.52, if one looked at the west terraces it would be clear that pen 6
       had marked empty spaces in it? - A. From where that photograph is
       taken, yes.

       Q. Even without the photograph, the position on the photograph, it
       must have been obvious, must it not, from your use o f the cameras
       you had from the Control Box that pen 6 was markedly empty? That
       was not difficult to see, was it? - A. From the views that we were
       getting from the cameras, from the views that I could see from the
       Control Room, it wasn’t obvious.

       Q. At the end o f the day that will be a matter o f evidence. You are
       saying that from the Control Box with your use o f the videos, the
       cameras, and you had the ability to look along as we have already
       described? - A. I think you have got to look at the individual
       cameras. I think the colour camera was unfortunately focused on the
       problem area in the Kop and that is where it stayed until about three
       o ’clock. The camera on the gantry next to the Control Box was
       unfortunately not working up to its potential. I do not know how that
       affected it but I can see from the angle that that photograph is taken,
       326A, yes, there is a lot o f room on the front o f pen 6 but I didn’t
       have that view and if I had had that view it might have affected my
       decisions”.

It is true that Mr Murray says that Camera 5 was not working up to its
potential. But he does not claim this as a reason for his failure to see that
pen 6 was relatively empty. On the contrary he says that he does not know
how that affected it. His point is that although one can see from photo 326A
- taken from the other side of the ground - that there is a lot of room in pen
6, that is not the view he had from the police control box. But at Day 68
pages 26D-27B the Coroner specifically raises this question with Mr Murray
at the instance of the jury. This very important passage runs:

        Q. On the day o f the disaster were you able to monitor the different
       parts o f the terrace at random? I think what the Jury is asking is
        with the cameras, not with the eyes. - A. The camera that would be
       best equipped fo r that was the one that was in the centre o f the South
        Stand, which would show a slightly oblique picture o f the terraces
        and the Kop. Unfortunately fo r most o f the event that was trained on
        the problems that we had in the Kop, particularly after some
        ejections and arrests had been made from that area. What we
        normally use the cameras fo r is evidence gathering and you can only
        gather and preserve the evidence o f what you are actually looking at,
        at the time. When we foresee problems in a certain part o f the
        Ground we will record that particular area fo r the whole o f the
        event, and that gives us the chance to then take still photographs
       from the video and blow them up later, and utilise them as evidence
        and identify people who are wrongdoers.

       Q. The next question is a supplemental one on that really. Did you
       rely more on your own physical view from the Control Box or on the
       monitors, and I think we must be talking about the terracing still
       because you could not, o f course, see outside, could you, without
       looking at the monitors? A. No. We had a good view o f the
       terraces from the Control Box. We could see the terraces, had a
       good view o f the terraces. I probably relied more on what I could
       see with my own eyes than anything else. I f I had seen a particular
       problem I would have tried to get the video operator to zero in but
       their capabilities are only as good as the actual lens, and the better
       the lens the much more expensive they are. They seemed to be all
       right fo r our purposes. ”

I find it surprising that Counsel did not see fit to draw my attention to this
passage. Along with Mr Duckenfield, Mr Murray was much the most
important officer in the Control Box, since they were the decision makers.

There is nothing in the evidence of PC Ryan or PS Goddard which supports
the submission that the police could not see what was happening because of
faults on Camera 5. I will come in due course to what these officers said
about the quality of the pictures from Camera 5.

PC Bichard, of all the officers in the control room, might be expected to be
watching the screens rather than looking out of the window, since he was the
video operator. He was asked (inquest day 71 page 82D)

       Q. “Did you see it through a window or did you see it on a monitor?
       -A . It is very difficult to remember. The view is partially obscured
       o f what is happening out on the terrace because o f people walking
       across the front o f my position. I am not sure. ”

I should add that Mr Houldsworth also said, in evidence to me, that the
police would not rely on the cameras to see what was happening in the pens.
They had a good view out of the window. (See transcript of my meeting
with him on 14 October 1997, page 23 line 33 to page 24 line 38).

The Coroner’s jury had a view of the scene. They went to the police control
box. They could see for themselves the view which each police officer had.
Mr Houldsworth also demonstrated the CCTV cameras to them during this
visit, so they could see their capability for themselves.

The evidence of all the police officers in the control room was that they
could see the west terraces but they did not realise that the central pens were
becoming dangerously overcrowded. They thought the numbers were
normal for a big match. The matter was accurately summed up to the jury
by the Coroner (inquest day 77, page 127 of the transcript of his summing-
up).

The submission that the police tried to blame their failure to see the
overcrowding on a fault in Camera 5 seemed to me to be so at variance with
the evidence given at the Inquest that I asked Mr Timothy King QC about it.
Mr King was Counsel for the families at the inquest. He said that so far as
he was concerned it had never been the police case that they could not see
that pens 3 and 4 were full because their CCTV was not working correctly.
      The issue was not whether they could see the state of the pens, but whether
      they appreciated that they were full and what steps they took to deal with the
      situation once Gate C was opened.

59.   In his further submission put forward on 11 December 1997 Mr Knowles,
      junior Counsel for the Family Support Group, advanced another argument in
      support of this submission. He said:

               “In his evidence to Lord Taylor M r Duckenfield admitted that he was
               concerned about the disparity in the numbers o f supporters in the
               centre pens compared with the numbers in the side pens. This caused
               him to request that a Tannoy announcement be made asking
               supporters to move forward (Day 8, p9-14)....

               It is significant that the Tannoy announcement ordered by Mr
               Duckenfield coincides with a shot from Camera 5 at 14.18.07 (shown
               on the footage supplied by Yorkshire TV), which shows young people
               standing in space at the front o f the Leppings Lane terraces. It
               would therefore appear that the Tannoy announcement was made as
               a result o f what had been observed on the video, and that Mr
               Duckenfield was, in fact, using the cameras to assess crowd build up
               inside the ground. ”

60.   In my view this argument is not well founded. The passage referred to at
      Day 8 p l2 referring to the Tannoy announcement relates to 14.30 (though
      according to Lord Taylor the announcement was at 14.15 - paragraph 59 of
      his interim report). It does not relate to 14.18 and has nothing to do with
      the scene captured by camera 5 at that time. There was never any
      suggestion from Mr Duckenfield that he depended on Camera 5 to see the
      state of the Leppings Lane terraces. Indeed the contrary is the case as I have
      already pointed out. The argument advanced by Counsel is a non-sequitur
      even if the timing was correct.

61.   In my judgement the submission that police blamed their failure to
      appreciate the overcrowding onto a faulty CCTV camera is quite untenable.


Submission 2

62.   The allegation here is that evidence of the video tapes taken by camera 5 was
      deliberately suppressed and concealed. It appears to be based on the
      following propositions:

               1 - that the compilation tape had no footage from Camera 5.

               2 - that footage from Camera 5 had disappeared and was not
               available at the inquest. This is based on the following exchange
between PC Bichard and the Coroner, at inquest day 71, page 80A-
E:

      Q. The film we saw this afternoon o f the Leppings Lane end,
      which came from what I have called camera 1, I don’t know
      the camera number. -A . I would know it as camera 5.

       Q. The one beneath or near the Police Box? - A. Yes, sir.

       Q. That scene began at about 15.02? - A. Yes, sir.

       Q. Where was that camera looking before 15.02 as fa r as
      you can recollect? -A . My recollections are that the
      particular camera had been faulty and in fa ct you saw some o f
       the problems that occurred. You were getting what is called
      flare. It is reflection o f light coloured objects and you lose
       the picture. The camera was not really being used as much as
       it would normally be because o f the sub-standard picture. It
       was just left in position. That is why the picture never realty
       moved at all because it was set and left in that position.

      Q. That is what I am coming to. Given that it started at
      15.02, let us assume I am right on that time, was that the time
      you moved it and located it and then left it to take that shot? -
      A. No, that probably would have been done before that.

       Q. Would it have been recording before that? - A. Yes.

      Q. So there ought to be a film o f it, prior to that? - A. I
      would have thought so, yes.

       Q. O f that same scene? - A. Yes.

      Q. I f I tell you we cannot find it would that make any
      difference to your answer? - A. I have no idea at all where it
      could have gone to. It was part o f the tape and the tapes
      were all sealed up at the end o f the day. ”

      (The film which the Coroner says was seen by the jury that
      afternoon was not included in the compilation tape. The jury
      saw it in addition to the compilation tape, in circumstances I
      shall refer to later).

3 - that between 14.18 and 14.23 there is footage taken from Camera
5 which shows a number of fans in pen 2 of the Leppings Lane
terraces. Pen 2 lay between Camera 5 and pen 3. The footage
clearly shows Camera 5 zooming and panning. Prior to 1400 there
were other scenes taken by camera 5 and recorded on tape TB2 as the
       tape flicked from one camera to another. This footage indicates that
       camera 5 was operating satisfactorily. It was never shown to the
       jury. It was only discovered when the Family Support Group saw
       the video material shown to them by Yorkshire Television.

       4 - that the purpose of the ‘concealment’ was to prevent the exposure
       of the falsity of the claim in submission 1, to the effect that the
       reason why the police could not see the overcrowding was because
       camera 5 was faulty.

Since, as I have already pointed out, submission 1 is misconceived, it can be
said that this submission must also fail. There would have been no point in
the police suppressing or concealing the video evidence unless they had a
reason for doing so. But in fact there was never any disappearance or
concealment of video footage from camera 5.

The facts are these. At the end of the day of the disaster the tapes from the
police monitors were secured. They were made available to Lord Taylor’s
Inquiry and appear on its exhibit list as documents 109 (TB1) and 110
(TB2). Lord Taylor’s Inquiry had a detailed schedule of the contents of
these two tapes. TB1 has no scenes from camera 5. It ends at 15.04.

Tape TB2 is automatically switching at intervals between the five police
cameras, including camera 5, until 1400. There is nothing of note.
Between 14.18 and 14.23 TB2 shows scenes taken by camera 5 of fans on
the Leppings Lane terrace. The camera zooms and pans. The police trained
Camera 5 on this small group of people because they thought someone in
that area had been misbehaving (though there is no sign of that on the tape).
The schedule for Lord Taylor’s Inquiry described this scene as a ‘view of
Leppings Lane and terraces, plenty of room in the pen in view, insufficient
detail to identify which pen’. But it is almost certainly pen 2.

Tape TB2 shows scenes from Camera 5 again from 15.02 until 15.25. This
sequence shows supporters climbing over the fence from pens 3 and 4 onto
the pitch. The camera, once focused on this scene, remains static. The
sequence is in ‘time-lapse’, and is described in the schedule which the West
Midlands Police provided for Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.

The incident between 14.18 and 14.23 is referred to in PC Bichard’s
evidence at the Taylor Inquiry (Day 19 page 45) and also in the evidence of
Chief Inspector McRobbie (Day 20 page 20). Mr McRobbie was asked
about his statement­

       s ' “You say “Police Constable Bichard operated the camera and I
       watched him to be able to zoom onto him which I thought was a
       super facility fo r spotting troublemakers in the crowd. ”
       A. That is correct sir.
       Q. No difficulty with the picture at all? - A. Well when you say “no
       difficulty ” it certainly brought this person closer to us than I think it
       would have been possible fo r a Police Officer to select the correct
       person that Control were identifying without any problem”.

All the exhibits which the West Midlands Police had prepared for the Taylor
Inquiry - including Tapes TB1 and TB2 - were made available to the legal
representatives at the Inquest. The evidence required for each day was
placed in a side room at the hearing. The rest of the unused material
including tapes TB1 and TB2 and the schedule were kept locally at a police
station where access was given to any legal representative who required it.

I have tried to find out whether the legal advisers then representing the
families, namely Mr Hytner QC, Mr Tim King QC, Mr Fraser and Miss Steele,
can recall whether or not they saw TB1 and TB2. Not surprisingly after this
lapse of time they cannot. However, I think it very likely that some or all of
them did so. This is because they were exhibits at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and
they were obviously potentially important evidence. I would certainly expect
the legal advisers to have seen the videotapes relating to the build up to the
disaster, TB1 and 2. Mr Fraser recalls watching many hours of video footage.
That being so, he must have looked at those tapes.

I have asked the Hon Mr Justice Collins (then, as Andrew Collins QC,
Counsel to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry) about this. He cannot recall any specific
occasions when the families’ lawyers viewed these tapes. He told me that
since they were exhibits and freely available, he would have expected the
lawyers to have looked at them. I agree.

None of the camera 5 scenes on tape TB2 were included in the compilation
tape which the West Midlands Police and the Treasury Solicitors made up for
Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. It is quite plain that no-one considered the footage
from pen 2 at 14.18, or any of the earlier views from Camera 5 of the Leppings
Lane terrace, to be of any help in illustrating the sequence of events leading up
to the disaster.

The footage from Camera 5 after 1502, showing fans climbing over the
perimeter fence to get out of the fatally crowded pens 3 and 4, is also not
particularly helpful from the point of view of illustrating what happened.
There was much better coverage of this part of the disaster from the BBC
cameras, so the compilation tape uses that instead.

During the inquest (Day 69, page 53) the Coroner said that the jury had
twice asked about video evidence of the terraces. He said that the videos
(clearly a reference to TB1 and TB2) had been looked at and there was
actually next to nothing on them because not everything was recorded.
There was a tiny bit showing the terraces on the compilation tape, and
another bit from 15.03 for a few minutes. He had had that ‘clipped’ and
      would show it to the jury. He said it was of poor quality and he did not
      think it would help very much. It became exhibit C539 at the Inquest.

74.   The jury saw exhibit C539 on day 71 (transcript page 61). The footage
      they saw was the material from 1502 onwards from tape TB2 (though
      Sergeant Killock of the West Midlands Police incorrectly identified it as
      coming from tape TB1). It extended only to 15.16, whereas the camera 5
      footage on TB2 continued to 15.25. The sequence was in time lapse. I
      have seen the original and I agree with the Coroner’s comment that it is of
      poor quality and not much help. It is this film that PC Bichard is referring
      to in the passage which I have cited above.

75.   It is plain in my judgement that PC Bichard was mistaken in thinking that
      there was tape from camera 5 of the same scene prior to 15.02.

76.   It has been put to me on behalf of the Family Support Group that the vital
      parts of tape TB2, namely those showing scenes taken by Camera 5, were
      concealed from Lord Taylor, the Coroner, and the families of victims, but
      were later on made available to the families by Yorkshire Television.
      Yorkshire Television have kindly let me have the tapes they have, and which
      they previously showed to the Family Support Group. They are copies
      which they made of tapes TB1 and TB2 (also TB3 and TB4). The police
      had given these to them to help them make their “First Tuesday” programme
      (transmitted in February 1990). It seems to me to be a bizarre way to
      conceal or suppress evidence to make it available to a television company.

77.   In my opinion the allegation that police hid videotape evidence is completely
      unfounded. There was no suppression or disappearance of footage from the
      vital tapes TB1 or TB2 which were at all times, together with the schedule
      of their contents, available to be seen by the legal representatives of the
      families.

78.   It is entirely understandable that the compilation tape contains no footage
      from Camera 5. It would be surprising if it did, since footage from Camera
      5 was not helpful or relevant in illustrating the causes of the disaster.


Submission 3

79.   The allegation is that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of
      the ‘missing footage’. This submission is unfounded for the reasons I have
      just explained. There never was any missing footage from the relevant
      tapes. The two missing club tapes have nothing to do with this. The
      Coroner dealt perfectly properly with the jury’s request to see the camera
      footage of the terraces. He was right to regard the incident in pen 2 at 14.18
      as irrelevant.
Submission 4

80.   The allegation is that Constables Bichard and Ryan and Sergeant Goddard
      deliberately gave false evidence that camera 5 was not working correctly.
      Their evidence to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was as follows:

               PC Bichard (day 19 page 43)

                      Q. "We have heard that on the day in question there was
                      something wrong with that one; is that correct? - A. For a
                      number o f weeks we have had difficulty with the camera and
                      they have been looking into having the camera replaced or
                      improvements made. In fact, on the day when I arrived at the
                      ground Mr Roger Houldsworth, who is the Technical Officer
                     fo r the Club, was in fact working on that camera to try and
                      upgrade the picture that we were actually getting.

                     Q. What was the trouble? - A. When the system had been
                     switched on, after an amount o f time, the picture would go
                     white - you would lose actually what you could see. We
                     believed initially it was in relation to the lighting inside the
                     ground but we seem to think that it may be a problem with the
                     electrical supply to that camera.

                     Q. What was the effect o f that on the day in relation to your
                     ability to look properly at the terraces, the West terraces? -
                     A. On that particular day, the picture had been —the quality
                     had been improved. It was not up to mark but it was a lot
                     better than it had been. We were getting pictures, that is the
                     best way o f describing it.

                     Q. Could you zoom in in the normal way on to the terraces if
                     you wanted to? - A. The actual control facilities were fully
                     available. ”

81.   PC Rvan. who was sitting in the front row next to PS Goddard and could
      therefore not easily see screen 5 (which was overhead) said (day 18 page 53)
      in relation to camera 5 :

                     A. “Roger Houldsworth, yes. He attended and came out and
                     worked on that camera fo r some time. Quite how long he was
                      there I do not know. He was certainly there working on it fo r
                     some considerable time. The picture was never satisfactory as
                     fa r as I recall that day although that was not my specific duty
                      to look at that.
              Q. I follow that. When you say the picture as fa r as you can
              see was not satisfactory what was wrong with it? - A. It was
              not as clear as you would hope the picture to be.

              Q. Did that mean the zoom facility was rendered in any way
              inoperative or less adequate than normal o r ... - A. As fa r as
              I recall the zoom was operative. It was the quality o f the
              picture that was the problem. ”

Sergeant Goddard did not deal with this point.

None of this evidence from Bichard or Ryan persuaded Lord Taylor that
there was anything wrong with Camera 5, since he made the specific
findings to which I referred earlier in this Chapter when I was discussing the
Support Group’s first submission (paragraph 39).

At the Inquest PC Bichard’s evidence on this point is that to which I have
already referred (paragraph 66 above). PC Ryan gave no evidence at the
Inquest and Sergeant Goddard, who did, did not deal with this point. As
against this Mr Houldsworth, in his statement of 16 May 1989 (Appendix 3,
Pt 1 page 3) says that after he had made the necessary adjustments the
camera was working OK. In his later comments (Appendix 3, Pt 3) he says
it was working perfectly.

I have interviewed PC Bichard. He told me that while he was operating a
particular camera his concentration would be mainly on the screen relevant
to that camera and not on the recording monitors. He said that if he was
operating a camera to film some point of interest, he would record this. He
also told me that after he had operated a particular camera he would
normally leave it parked in the position where it was last focused. This is
what one would expect. He maintained that the quality of what he was
seeing on screen 5 was not as good as that on the other screens - he
described it as misty or foggy - though he accepted that the footage recorded
from camera 5 at 14.18 was perfectly adequate.

An examination of tapes TB1, 2, 3 and 4 does show that Camera 5 was
being used (in the sense of moved about) less than the other cameras.
Before 14.00 the scenes recorded from Camera 5 were static, as the
recording flicks from one camera to another, though the position of the
camera is moved so that three different views of the West Stand are shown.
After 14.01 the only time Camera 5 is zoomed, panned, or changes position
in any other way is between 14.18 and 14.23 and for a few seconds at 15.02
when it focuses on the perimeter fence at pens 3 and 4 (shown to the
Coroner’s jury as C539). It stayed there, static, until 15.25.

Although there is a half-hour gap between the end of tape TB1 and its
replacement tape TB4, it is clear in my view that PC Bichard is operating
Camera 2 (the colour one) during this time, except when he turns Camera 3
onto the Leppings Lane terraces and leaves it in the parked position. This
can be seen on tape TB2 at 15.25. Camera 3 stays in this static position
until 15.59 (seen on tape TB2 until 15.34 and thereafter on TB3). Moreover
it is quite clear that PC Bichard’s attention prior to 14.58 (when Camera 2
swings from the Kop end to the pens at Leppings Lane end) is concentrated
on Camera 1 and what was happening at the turnstiles. It was not directed
to Camera 5 and had not been since 14.23. There is a full analysis of the
movement of the police CCTV cameras between 14.30 and 15.34, as
recorded on videotape, at Appendix 4.

I have some doubt whether the pictures from Camera 5 appearing on screen
5 in the police Control Box were substandard to any material extent, though
there are certainly examples of Camera 5 flaring on tape TB2. But in any
event this is largely a matter of opinion and degree. No-one other than PC
Bichard and Mr Houldsworth is likely to have looked at screen 5 in the
police control box. Mr McRobbie, not surprisingly, could not recall
whether he saw the incident at 14.18 on screen 5 or the monitor. The
Coroner’s jury saw the Camera 5 extract from 1502 onwards for themselves,
though the quality of the copy they saw is not as good as the original.

In my opinion, even if PC Bichard did to some extent exaggerate any defect
in what Camera 5 was showing, it is of no consequence. As I have already
said Lord Taylor took no note of it and the only circumstances in which it
might be relevant, namely if any of the submissions 1-3 above were made
out, do not arise.

There is a difference of opinion between Mr Houldsworth and PC Bichard as
to the degree of definition it is possible to get with the zoom on cameras 2
and 5 for the purpose of identification. I do not regard this as significant.
The Coroner’s jury had the cameras demonstrated to them and they could
see for themselves what the situation was. There is a great deal of
difference between identifying a single person or a small group, each of
whom stands out individually, and trying to pick out individuals in a large,
compact crowd where there is almost constant movement and only a partial
sight of the face and body.

Moreover having seen the original of tape TB2 at 15.02 when Camera 5 is
focused on pens 3 or 4 1 am inclined to agree with PC Bichard on this point.

At 14.58 Camera 2 swings down towards the Leppings Lane terraces. It is
possible to identify some of the people on the pitch, for example WPC
Richardson, who has a distinctive pony-tail and is seen ushering people into
pen 2 via its perimeter gate. However I do not think it would be possible to
identify a person in the centre pens from their face and it is certainly not
possible to see their facial expressions. Moreover even if the police had
focused either of these cameras onto those at the front of pens 3 and 4 at the
material times, that would not have enabled them to pick out the distress
which was being experienced.
93.    The other matters raised by Mr Houldsworth on the evidence of PC Bichard
      and PC Ryan are in my view of little consequence for the same reason. In
      my opinion the evidence is wholly insufficient to warrant consideration of
      criminal proceedings against any police officers.


Submission 5

94.   The allegation here is that Mr Houldsworth in the club Control Room could
      see from pictures on the Control Room monitor from police cameras 3 and 5
      that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded at 14.50, and that the influx of extra
      spectators through gate C would create a dangerous situation. I have no
      doubt that it is true that there were times when Mr Houldsworth and others
      in the club control room switched their monitor on to see what the police
      cameras would show of the Leppings Lane terraces.

95.   This accords with the evidence of PC Guest to the Taylor Inquiry. At Day
      19 page 121 he said:

               Q. “But it was obvious at twenty to three that the two wing pens
               were virtually empty, was it not? - A. Yes, sir. As fa r as I am
               aware, I don’t know, sir, because I wasn’t looking at that particular
               screen. I was only looking at Leppings Lane on the outside; I was
               not looking on the inside o f the ground.

               Q. Are you saying you never saw ... ? - A. I did, yes. I did
               actually look on the inside o f the ground but this was later. This was
               after the gates was broken — well, either broken or opened, and once
               the crowd had got in. It was after the crowd had got in, then when I
               turned to that camera that would cover the West Stand and the
               Leppings Lane.

               Q. Are you saying that prior to the quarter to three, ten to three,
               you never saw on the monitor the inside o f the ground at the
               Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, I did look at it earlier on, before
               twenty to three, yes, and at that stage it was quite normal.

               Q. When did you last see the terraces on the monitor? - A. I
               couldn’t be exact, sir, but I would think it would be something in the
               region o f probably halfpast two, probably twenty-five to three.

               Q. At twenty-five to three? - A. Something like that.

               Q. At twenty-five to three the wing pens were virtually empty, were
               they not? - A. They were, sir. ”
I do not however accept Mr Houldsworth’s evidence that he realised from
looking at coverage from police cameras 3 and 5 that pens 3 and 4 were
overcrowded and that the influx of people through gate C would create a
dangerous situation. I reject this evidence for the following reasons.


1.    It is hard to believe that if this were so Mr Houldsworth would not
       have said as much before 1996 (see his comments at Appendix 3,
       Part 3 para numbered 1). I do not accept that he can have been
       inhibited either in making his statement to the club solicitors or in his
       interview with Yorkshire Television. I do not find convincing Mr
       Houldsworth’s explanation as to why it was only in 1996 that he
       realised this evidence was important, (see transcript of his evidence
       to me, page 20 lines 18 - page 21 line 17 - Appendix 3 Pt 4). There
       is no record of any interruption by the police officer until the end of
       the interview.

2.    What Mr Houldsworth now says is in fact inconsistent with what he
      said before. In his written statement he attributes his concern to what
      he could see on the police monitor in relation to Gate C and the club
      monitors of the numbers. (See Appendix 3, Pt 1 pages 5 and 6). In
      the television interview the references to the police cameras are
      throughout to camera 1. It was submitted to me by Counsel that Mr
      Houldsworth’s references to Camera 1 in the first paragraph of page
      1 of Appendix 3, part 2 was in fact a mistake for Camera 5. The
      context shows that this is obviously not correct, and Mr Houldsworth
      confirmed this to me when I interviewed him. The same reasons are
      given for his concern, namely what is seen in relation to gate C and
      club monitors of the numbers (page 1, last para) and an appreciation
      that people coming through gate C would be likely to go into the
      centre pens (page 3, last answer).

3.    It was not until 15.05 that Mr Houldsworth got onto the pitch. It
       took less than half a minute to get there from the control room. Even
       so, like almost everyone else observing the situation, he thought he
       was looking at a pitch invasion. He could not have thought this, if
       what he now says about noticing overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
       terrace before Gate C was opened at 2.52 p.m. were correct.

4.    The last shots from police Camera 5 which are recorded before 15.02
       are those at 14.23 when it is focused on pen 2 and does not give a
       view of the centre pens. It is unlikely in my view that it was changed
       from this position until 15.02 when the recording shows it trained on
       the perimeter fence, picking up the fans climbing out. This accords
       with PC Bichard’s evidence to me. It is also consistent with PC
       Guest’s evidence which I have quoted above (paragraph 96). If he
       could see that the wing pen at 2.35 was virtually empty, this strongly
       suggests that he is seeing the same area that was filmed by Camera 5
at 14.18 - 14.23. Camera 3 was trained on the Kop end, for which it
was primarily designed. I think it likely that it remained there till it
was swung round to show the Leppings Lane terraces at 15.25. Mr
Houldsworth does not suggest that he saw the state of the pens from
Camera 2. That too was focused on the Kop end until 14.58, when it
is focused on the Leppings Lane end (TB1). In my opinion it was
probably not until Mr Houldsworth saw the scenes from Camera 5 at
some time after 15.02 that he realised that there was a problem and
went to investigate. This fits with the timing of his arrival on the
pitch and his belief that there was a pitch invasion.

At a very late stage of my Scrutiny (11 December 1997) junior
Counsel for the Family Support Group submitted that Mr
Houldsworth’s evidence about spotting the overcrowding from the
monitor of the police CCTV system in the club Control Room was
supported by that of PC Guest. He referred to PC Guest’s statement
of 10 May 1989 (which is in identical terms to an earlier one dated
29 April but on the standard Criminal Justice Act statement form).
Counsel did not cite the relevant passage. It reads:

        7 then turned to the camera that was inside the ground and
       covered the area o f the West Stand and it was obvious that the
       situation was getting out o f hand and people were being
       pushed up against the fencing on the perimeter o f the ground.

       I could see that all available officers were being sent to this
       area o f the ground to assist with the injured and dying.'

This makes it quite plain that what is being shown by the camera
inside the ground is occurring after 15.00. (This description might
be thought to describe more accurately what was shown by Camera 2
(colour) after 14.58. But Mr Houldsworth said what he saw was on
cameras 5 and 3). What is cited by Counsel (in fact wrongly, the
incorrect words are in square brackets) is a passage from a later
undated statement by PC Guest, where an additional passage has been
inserted between the first and second sentences quoted above from
the earlier statement.

         ‘At the [this] point where [while] things seemed to be getting
        out hand outside the turnstiles I tried to use my personal radio
        in order to contact Police Control that further Police
        assistance was required urgently at the Leppings Lane end o f
        the ground, but each time I tried to use the radio I was
        blocking others already using the radio, so I did not try
       further to use it.

       I then tried to use the internal telephone system to contact
       Police Control but again each time I tried the line was
       engaged and could not get through. At this point Mr Lock
       then left the video room in order to organise some safety
       measures with the security personnel.

       Also present during this time in the video room was a Mr
       Roger Houldsworth, he is the person who installed all the
       videos and computer system.

       As he could also see what was taking place he also left the
       room in order to assist in any way he could. ’

This passage was inserted because of comments made by Hammond
Suddards, solicitors to South Yorkshire Police, when the force sent
PC Guest’s original statement to them for comment (I shall have
more to say about this in Chapter 4, Part 2 of this report). In a letter
dated 25 May 1989, after referring to PC Guests’s statement on page
2 of the earlier statement that ‘it was obvious that looking at the
crowd outside trying to get in, that there would not be sufficient
room for all to be accommodated’, the solicitors said:

        7 wonder why he did not use either Club radio or the internal
       telephone system to reach the control box, if he did not wish
       to interrupt transmission by using his personal radio. It may
       be helpful if PC Guest recalls, as accurately as possible, the
       actual figures fo r the north stand, west stand and Leppings
       Lane, when he studied these at, or shortly after, 2.40pm. ’

Unfortunately the inserted passage dealing with this point breaks the
continuity and chronology of PC Guest’s original statement.
Moreover the final sentence of the inserted passage makes it clear
that what was being looked at was after 15.00, because we know that
Mr Houldsworth did not leave the control room until about 15.05.

Analysis of tapes TB1 and TB2 from 14.30 until they finish shows
quite clearly which cameras PC Bichard was manipulating and
concentrating on. In particular from 14.35 to 14.49.02 he is
operating Camera 1. There is then a brief point at 14.49 when
Camera 2 is operated on the Kop end before at 14.49.38 he reverts to
Camera 1 which is more or less continuously used until 14.58.42
when Camera 2 pans from the Kop down into the West Stand
Terraces. Thereafter he is operating cameras 1 and 2 until 15.02.53
when he operates Camera 5, which after a very short while is fixed
on the perimeter fence (the part shown in C.539). This analysis
(Appendix 4) supports the conclusions which I have set out in sub-
paragraph 5 above.

If Mr Houldsworth is correct in what he now says, it is to say the
least surprising that he did not draw the attention of PC Guest to the
             reasons for his concern, namely that he could see the serious state of
             the terraces on the monitor screen. It is clear from PC Guest’s
             statements and evidence at the Taylor Inquiry that he did not do so.
             PC Guest has unfortunately since died.

      8.     It was submitted to me at a late stage in my scrutiny by Miss
             Adlington, Solicitor to the Family Support Group, that a comparison
             of three photographs showed clearly that Camera 5 had been moved
             between 14.52 and 14.59 and that this supported Mr Houldsworth’s
             evidence to this point.

             The photographs in question were taken by supporters in the North
             Stand. They show the scoreboard on which Camera 5 was mounted,
             together with the scoreboard clock. The first two, with the
             scoreboard clock showing respectively 14.52 and 14.54, are taken
             from about mid-way up the top of the North Stand, about a third of
             the way along the pitch from the west (Leppings Lane) end of it.

             The third photograph is timed at 14.59 by the scoreboard clock. It is
             the one which appears at Appendix 5 in Lord Taylor’s Interim
             Report. It is taken from a position higher up the North Stand and
             nearer to the Leppings Lane terraces. Both in the copy of this
             photograph at Appendix 5 of Lord Taylor’s report, and in the copy
             of it submitted to me by Miss Adlington, it is almost impossible to
             distinguish Camera 5. However I obtained the negative and enlarged
             the relevant area.

             Bearing in mind that the photographs are taken from different
             positions they do not in my opinion show that Camera 5 was moved
             between 14.52 and 14.59 - still less do they show this, as I was told,
             ‘clearly’. On the contrary, although I do not attach much weight to
             the point because it is not sufficiently clear, I am inclined to the view
             that the three photographs show that Camera 5 was not moved and
             that it was at 14.59 still trained onto the same comer of pen 2 as it
             was when it was used to take the shots recorded at 14.18 to 14.23 on
             tape TB2.


Conclusions about the video evidence

97.   In my opinion the importance of Mr Houldsworth’s evidence has been
      exaggerated out of all proportion. Mr Houldsworth’s existence, and his
      evidence, were known both to the Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner.

98.   There is no reason why he should have been called to give evidence, since
      what he was then saying as to the police and club systems was dealt with by
      other witnesses, notably PC Bichard and PC Guest.
99.    The only sense in which Mr Houldsworth’s evidence is new and might have
       an effect on the previous proceedings is in relation to submission 5. For the
       reasons I have given I am unable to accept that his recollection of events
       now is accurate. Even if it was correct it would not have any effect on the
       previous proceedings.     It would simply have been the evidence of one
       more person who thought that the central pens were full at 14.52.

100.   The propositions advanced in submission 1, 2 and 3, which are by far the
       most serious, are in my view untenable.

101.   There is nothing in any of the submissions about the video evidence that
       calls for any further inquiry or consideration by the prosecuting or
       disciplinary authorities or further resort to the Divisional Court. The
       evidence is quite insufficient to consider any proceedings against PC
       Bichard, PC Ryan or PS Goddard.
CHAPTER 3


The Aftermath of the Disaster


1.    During my scrutiny I have heard serious criticisms made of the Inquests into
      the deaths of those who died at Hillsborough. It has been suggested to me
      that they were seriously flawed, because they did not go into the important
      question of whether more could have been done to help the victims or
      whether the rescue operation following the disaster could have been better.

2.    In the first part of this Chapter I describe the conclusions which I have
      reached about the inquests. In the second part I consider whether there
       should now be a fresh public inquiry into what was done, and not done, to
      rescue those who were crushed. The first issue I must discuss is the so-
      called ‘3.15 cut-off point’ at the Inquests.


The Inquests and the 3.15 cut-off point

3.    I have given a brief description of the Inquests in Chapter 1 of this report.
      The inquests on 95 of the victims were conducted by Dr Stefan Popper, who
      was at that time Her Majesty’s Coroner for South Yorkshire, in two stages
      between April 1990 and March 1991. (The 96th victim, Tony Bland, lived
      until 1993).


‘Mini-Inquests’

4.    The first stage, the so-called ‘mini-inquests’, ran over a two and a half week
      period in April and May 1990. The law governing inquests is the
      Coroners Act, 1988 and the Coroners Rules of 1984. As I explained in
      Chapter 1 these require the inquest to answer four separate questions about
      the deceased - who they were, and when, where and how they died.

5.    It was not possible in April 1990 for an inquest to reach a decision about
      how any of the Hillsborough victims had died, because there was the
      prospect that one or more of the senior police officers who had presided
       over the police operation at the ground might be prosecuted. It is lawful
       and perfectly proper for an inquest to be adjourned in these circumstances to
       await the decision of the prosecuting authorities as to whether anybody
       should be tried in connection with a death and - if a trial takes place - its
       outcome.

6.    However the Coroner could at that stage usefully establish the answers to the
      remaining statutory questions of who the victims were, and when and where
      they died. The mini-inquests resolved these questions. For each of the 95
      victims the West Midlands Police, who had investigated the disaster on
      behalf of Lord Taylor and the Coroner, presented the Inquest with a
      summary of the facts about them, based on the very many interviews that
      had taken place and analysis of photographs and other material about the
      match.

7.    The Coroner therefore went into very considerable detail at the ‘mini-
      inquests’ into the precise circumstances of where and when each of the
      deceased died.


The main Inquest

8.    The remaining question, of ‘how’ the victims died, fell to be answered by
      the main (or ‘generic’) inquest. This began on 19 November 1990 and
      concluded, after 80 days of hearings, on 28 March 1991 when the jury
      brought in a verdict of accidental death in respect of each of the victims.

9.    At the beginning of the main inquest the Coroner ruled that he would cut off
      the inquiry at 3.15 p.m ., by which time he considered that all those who
      died had received the injuries which caused their deaths. This ruling by
      the Coroner has been subjected to a good deal of criticism, not only during
      my scrutiny but also during the application by six of the bereaved families
      for judicial review of the inquest in 1993.

10.   The Divisional Court, which heard the application in 1993, upheld the
      Coroner’s decision about the 3.15 ‘cut-off point’. But it has been
      submitted to me by Counsel for the Family Support Group that fresh
      evidence discovered since 1993 undermines the Divisional Court’s decision.
      Before considering this evidence and the submissions based upon it, it is
      necessary to examine the Coroner’s reasoning in more detail since it has
      been widely misunderstood and misinterpreted.


The Coroner’s reasoning

11.   The Coroner’s reasons for introducing the 3.15 ‘cut-off point’ can be
      summarised as follows:

      (a)    in considering the question of how someone died an unnatural violent
             death it is not usually relevant to consider matters subsequent to the
             infliction of the injuries which obviously result in death. It is not
             relevant whether the person died instantly at the scene or some time
             later, after medical or other unsuccessful treatment. Accordingly it
             is not appropriate for a Coroner to conduct an enquiry into the
             response of the emergency services or consider in any given case
       whether had it been quicker, differently organised, or with other
       facilities a person who died might have been saved;

(b)    there was no evidence that any of those who died did so from any
       cause other than crush or traumatic asphyxia as a result of being
       crushed in the pens (see note 1 to this chapter). There was no new
       intervening cause which might break the chain of causation between
       the crushing injuries and death. The Coroner rejected the submission
       of Mr King, who appeared for the families at the Inquests, that there
       might have been an intervening cause.

(c)    all those who died received the injuries from which they died before
       3.15 at the latest. This did not mean that they were all dead by then
       - they may have respired and had a heartbeat for some period after
       that time, running to hours or days;

(d)    the effect of the pathological evidence which the Coroner had
       received was that once the chest of the victim was fixed so that
       respiration could no longer take place, irreversible brain damage
       would occur after between four and six minutes.

(e)    that it was necessary to keep the Inquiry within reasonable bounds
       and to this end a time cut-off had necessarily to be imposed.

It should be noted that the Coroner did not say that all those who died did so
before 3.15, or that the medical evidence was to this effect. In this respect
he has been widely misrepresented. Nor did he say that all those who
became unconscious subsequently died. The evidence was that it was only
those people whose chests were in a state of permanent fixation as a result of
the crush for four to six minutes, so that they could not breathe at all for that
time, whose condition was irreversible.

In upholding the Coroner’s decision on this point the Divisional Court said
that the Coroner cut off the evidence at a reasonable and sustainable point,
particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public enquiry which had already
been conducted by Lord Taylor (McCowan LJ at page 12 of the transcript
of the Divisional Court’s judgement). The Divisional Court also rejected the
grounds advanced on behalf of the applicants that the Coroner wrongly
limited the inquest so as to exclude inquiry into whether lives could have
been saved by calling the emergency services sooner or providing better
emergency care for the injured. It concluded that these questions were not
relevant to the inquiry into how - i.e. by what means - the deceased had
come to their deaths.
Further evidence

14.   In the light of the Divisional Court’s reasoning it is difficult to see the
      relevance of further evidence that person A was alive at 3 .15pm but died
      subsequently, or that spectators B, C and D became unconscious in the crush
      but subsequently recovered, whether because of resuscitative treatment
      received at the ground or in hospital, or that an ambulance driver, E, found
      a particular policeman ignorant of the situation and unhelpful, or that a
      particular doctor, F, had criticisms as to the availability of drugs or other
      resources. Still less is it arguable that such new evidence affords grounds
      for quashing the verdicts of accidental death at the inquest.

15.   Nevertheless this is the nature of the new evidence which I have been asked
      to consider during my scrutiny. I must describe it in some detail before
      dealing with the submissions which Counsel for the Family Support Group,
      and others, have based upon it. It falls into three groups - evidence from
      Dr Ed Walker, evidence from supporters who became unconscious but
      survived and who, in some cases, believe they were considered to be dead at
      the scene, and evidence from ambulance men. I was also asked to examine
      an article by Mr Wardrope in the British Medical Journal.


D r Ed Walker

16.   Dr Walker’s evidence can be summarised as follows. He was a House
      Officer in Anaesthetics at Rotherham District Hospital. At about 3pm on the
      day of the disaster he happened to turn on the television at home and saw
      scenes of disturbance at Hillsborough. He realised there might be casualties
      and thought he might be of assistance, so he went to the Northern General
      Hospital to see if he could help.

17.   On arrival at the Accident and Emergency Department, no one seemed to
      know very much about the situation. The first casualty arrived soon after he
      did. This was Lee Nicol, who was in cardiopulmonary arrest. Dr Walker
      intubated him, gave him external heart massage, and his heart started beating
      again. Lee Nicol was taken to the Intensive Care Unit, but was declared
      dead two days later.

18.   The second patient arrived shortly afterwards. This was Philip Hammond,
      who was also in cardio-pulmonary arrest. Dr Walker carried out
      resuscitative treatment and the heartbeat was restored. In a statement which
      Dr Walker made near the time he said that he established venous access for
      drug therapy, but in subsequent comments on Dr Slater’s evidence, he said
      that the drugs which had been administered had been delivered via the
      endotracheal tube. In his evidence to me he could not recall which was
      correct. Philip Hammond’s pupils were fixed and dilated, and shortly
      afterwards he was certified dead.
19.   These are the only two patients treated by Dr Walker whom it has been
      possible to identify. In his statement near the time, Dr Walker dealt with the
      resuscitative treatment he gave to six other patients. Three died. He
      believed that one made a good recovery but did not know what the outcome
      was for the other two. Thereafter he went to Ward 60 at the Hospital,
      where he assisted, particularly with two patients who had deteriorated
      neurologically and had to be transferred to the Cardiac Intensive Therapy
      Unit. The effect of his evidence therefore was that he treated five patients
      who subsequently died, most of them later that day. He treated others who
      were seriously ill, but one at least, and possibly more, recovered.

20.   Dr Walker made a written statement in the form of an aide-memoire shortly
      after the events. Apart from these matters to which I have referred, he made
      a number of criticisms about the availability of drugs and other equipment at
      the hospital and the delay in activating the major accident procedure. In
      evidence to me, he said that these points were mainly for internal
      consideration by the Hospital. On 20 July 1989, he made a witness
      statement on West Midlands Police Criminal Justice Act witness statement
      paper, which was later put on the computer system (Holmes) which the West
      Midlands Police were using for their investigation. He wrote this statement
      out in his own language, and he confirmed to me that he said everything in it
      which he wished to. It forms Appendix 5, part 1.

21.   Dr Walker gave evidence to me on 22 October 1997 and a transcript of his
      evidence appears at Appendix 5, part 2. Dr Walker also made written
      observations to me dated 28 September 1997 and in later letters. Much of
      this is in the form of comment and does not add significantly to his factual
      evidence. He did not give evidence at the Inquest.


Spectators who were unconscious but recovered

22.   Counsel asked me to consider evidence about Ian McDermott, Steven
      Williams, Roger Ball and Edward Spearitt.

23.   M r McDermott’s evidence is contained in a signed statement dated 3
      September 1997. I can summarise it as follows. He was in pen 3 and was
      crushed. He was in agony and could not breathe. He lost consciousness and
      felt he was going to die. He recovered consciousness while being given the
      kiss of life on the terraces. He drifted in and out of consciousness. He was
      carried onto the pitch and given further mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and
      heart massage.

24.    Mr McDermott was taken to the gymnasium and given oxygen and a drip.
       He was checked by a doctor and sent to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital,
       where he was treated and discharged a few days later. His case attracted
       some publicity in the press when he was visited by the Prince and Princess
       of Wales. He did not give evidence at the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest, but
he had made a statement to the West Midlands Police dated 29 April 1989.
He appears to have forgotten about this but it is in substantially the same
terms as his recent statement, though with less detail. His earlier statement
was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Coroner.

Steven Williams’s evidence is contained in a signed statement dated 12
October 1997. I can summarise it as follows. He was in pen 3. At about
15.04 (when Beardsley’s shot hit the cross bar) he was pinned for 5-10
minutes against a crash barrier unable to move and in pain. He was
subjected to crushing for at least 30 minutes and eventually lost
consciousness. He recovered consciousness on the ground, vomiting and in
shock and pain. He was taken to the Northern General Hospital. X-rays
showed fractures of two ribs. He was in hospital for three days. In addition
to his physical injuries, he suffered post traumatic stress disorder. He did
not give evidence at the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest.

Counsel for have also put to me the evidence of Andrew Worsley, who
dragged Steven Williams out from underneath his father. Mr Worsley says
he thought Steven Williams was dead because he was blue in the face and his
eyes were staring. He dragged him out of the tunnel at the back of the
Leppings Lane terrace to a place where there were 15 to 25 bodies dead or
unconscious. He there handed him over to a police officer “who dropped
him uncaringly on the floor”.

That appears to be the last Mr Worsley saw of him. It would seem that
Steven Williams must have regained consciousness fairly soon afterwards,
since he was conscious when he was put in the ambulance. But it is not
known what, if any, resuscitative treatment he received or whether he was
seen by a doctor. If Mr Worsley’s evidence is correct, it shows a callous
attitude by the police officer in question. But there were doctors and
ambulance personnel at the Leppings Lane end who were dealing with those
brought out through the tunnel from the terraces. The fact that Mr
Worsley may have thought that Mr Williams was dead does not mean that
those more expert did so, or that they abandoned him.

Roger Ball is the father of Kester Ball, who died in the disaster. He came
to see me in London on 31 October 1997. Mr Ball gave evidence at the
Inquest to the effect that he was in pen 3 and became crushed. Shortly
before the game was stopped he must have lost consciousness. He regained
consciousness near Gate C, with someone slapping his face. He fully
recovered, and was not taken to hospital but searched for his son.

There has been put before me also a letter from solicitors acting for a Mr Ian
Wier to Mr Ball’s solicitors. It is stated that Mr Wier found Mr Ball
collapsed on the ground and apparently dead. The man next to Mr Ball was
dead. Mr Wier says that Mr Ball was going blue in the face and another
supporter trod on his chest to get out of the ground. He revived Mr Ball by
slapping his face.
30.   It seems that Mr Ball recovered consciousness without any resuscitative
      treatment such as mouth-to-mouth ventilation or heart massage and thereafter
      seems to have made a complete recovery. The fact that a wholly untrained
      person (Mr Wier) thought he was dead does not suggest to me that the
      emergency services were making similar erroneous assumptions.

31.   Edward Spearritt is the father of Adam Spearitt, who died as a result of the
      disaster. Adam died in intensive care at 16.45 on 15 April. Edward
      Spearritt gave evidence at the Inquest. He was in pen 4 and was crushed.
      He lost consciousness and was taken to hospital. He too was taken to
      intensive care, but made a full recovery. Counsel for the Family Support
      Group told me that there is no evidence as to what happened to Mr Spearritt
      between the time he lost consciousness at 3.06 pm or thereabouts and 5 pm
      when he arrived at Hospital. Counsel submitted to me that it was reasonable
      to conclude that Mr Spearritt was also left for dead because of what
      happened to other bodies (presumably a reference to Mr Ball)

32.   I have been unable to ascertain at what time Mr Spearritt reached hospital,
      though according to Mr Wardrope it was before 5 p.m. Most of the serious
      cases, of which Mr Spearitt’s was one, were taken to hospital well before
      this. No detailed inquiry or evidence was collated in respect of victims who,
      like Mr Spearritt, were crushed but survived. I do not think that it is
      possible to conclude on the evidence that Mr Spearritt was at any time ‘left
      for dead’.


Ambulancemen

33    I have been asked to consider evidence from three ambulancemen - Anthony
      Edwards, John Flack and Peter Howes.

34.   Anthony Edwards was employed by South Yorkshire Metropolitan
      Ambulance Service (SYMAS). He was on duty on the day of the disaster.
      He has made four signed statements. The first, dated 7 May 1989 to
      SYMAS solicitors, was put on the West Midlands police Holmes computer
      and was available to the Taylor Inquiry and the Coroner. The second is
      dated 25 October 1989. The third is dated 5 September 1995 and the fourth
       is dated October 1997. In addition he has written me a number of letters.

35.   Mr Edwards was very anxious to speak to me and he came to see me on 11
      December 1997. He did not give evidence at the Taylor Inquiry or the
      Inquest but his part in taking Victoria Hicks to hospital is referred to in the
      mini-inquest into her death (24 April 1990, page 9).

36.   In his first statement, of 7 May 1989, Mr Edwards describes the arrival of
       his ambulance at the Penistone Road end, being ordered onto the pitch by
       Mr Hopkins, the Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer, but being told by
police that he could not get through. After the intervention of Mr Hopkins,
his ambulance was driven onto the pitch as the St John Ambulance was
leaving. On the way to the Leppings Lane end progress was slow. Fans
were screaming for the ambulance to stop.

On arrival at that end there was much confusion. Mr Edwards went to assist
a casualty and whilst doing so he was deliberately kicked in his rib. His
ambulance was eventually loaded with a boy and girl (Victoria Hicks) and
another body.

The ambulance left with two policemen, a nurse and two spectators (one of
whom was Trevor Hicks, Victoria’s father), and proceeded to the Northern
General Hospital. The ambulance returned to the ground and Mr Edwards
assisted with casualties at the gymnasium. By this time the serious casualties
had been dealt with, he was exhausted and was told to go to Casualty at the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital because he had been kicked. Mr Edwards said
that he was unaware of any Hillsborough plan or the role of the gymnasium
as a casualty clearing centre or temporary mortuary until he was told on the
day.

Mr Edwards’s statement of 25 October 1989 is immaterial, because it simply
states that he does not wish there to be any prosecution in respect of the
assault on him. In a letter to me dated 10 November 1997 he says that the
two officers who interviewed him on 21 October 1989 (sic) showed him
video tape and photographs of his ambulance on the pitch. He points out
that they must have forgotten this when they interviewed Mr Bruder on 3
May 1990 and gave evidence at the Inquest on 4 May. I refer to this later,
in Chapter 4.

Mr Edwards’s statements of September 1995 and October 1997 add little of
substance to his previous account of his arrival and departure from the pitch,
save to point out that his ambulance experienced no difficulty getting down
the ramp. This was different from the experience of the first two
ambulances to go on the pitch. When treating patients in the gymnasium, he
described the scene as chaotic. There was a shortage of orofarangeal
airways, and he noticed how few bodies had these airways in them. The rest
of the most recent statement is comment.

John Flack was a leading ambulanceman employed by SYMAS and was on
duty on the day. He made four signed statements. The first dated 5 May
1989 was available to the Taylor Inquiry. The others, dated 10 August, 23
October and 29 November 1989 were additionally available to the Coroner.
Mr Flack did not give evidence at the Inquiry or Inquest, but his part in
taking Lee Nicol and Carl Lewis to hospital was referred to in the
summaries which police gave at their respective mini-inquests.

In his first statement Mr Flack describes the arrival of his ambulance at the
Penistone Lane end, contact with Station Officer Eason, driving onto the
pitch and taking a boy (Lee Nicol) who was receiving resuscitative treatment
and was accompanied by a doctor to Northern General Hospital. Apart from
the St John Ambulance this was the first ambulance on the pitch. He
returned to the ground and collected another casualty, but on arrival at the
hospital, the casualty was examined by a doctor and declared dead.

He returned to the ground, this time being directed to Leppings Lane
(outside the ground). There were three ambulances already there. He
described the scene as bedlam with police and fans everywhere. He had
difficulty in finding an ambulance officer in charge or deciding where the
casualty clearing point was. He took a third casualty (Carl Lewis) to the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital accompanied by a local doctor and a Derbyshire
ambulance man (Peter Howes). After that he reported to the Herries Road
bus depot which was being used as the assembly for ambulances.

Mr Flack’s remaining statements are concerned with identification of the
casualties, and add nothing of substance.

Peter Howes was a qualified para-medic employed by Derbyshire
Ambulance Service. He was on duty on the day and his ambulance was
called to assist. He has made two written statements. The first dated 15
September 1989 was available to the Coroner and his part in helping to
resuscitate Carl Lewis and take him to the Hallamshire Hospital was referred
to in the mini-inquest. The second is dated 15 October 1997.

In his first statement he described arrival at the Leppings Lane end. He was
unable to get any clear information and there was no obvious ambulance
point. There was a large number of casualties, some conscious, some not.
He described resuscitative measures on a patient who was lying face down
with a shirt over his head. He intubated the patient and instructed a police
officer on heart compression. He was joined by a doctor who used a
defibrillator carried in the ambulance and inserted a canula. He was then
asked to accompany Carl Lewis to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital with Mr
Flack and the doctor.

His second statement adds little to the previous one. He comments on lack
of police help in finding the location and the fact that they did not receive a
major incident call which might have prepared him for the horrific scenes.

I did not think it necessary to interview any of these witnesses other than Dr
Walker, nor to append their statements to this report. Their statements
were available to the police and are available to the Family Support Group
and I am prepared to accept what is said in them.
Mr Wardrope’s article in the British Medical Journal

49.    Counsel also referred me to an article published in the British Medical
       Journal (BMJ) in November 1991 by Mr Wardrope - the Accident and
       Emergency consultant at the Northern General Hospital - and others. This
       showed that all 13 Hillsborough patients admitted to the hospital in cardiac
       arrest died (two after a period in the Intensive Care Unit), as did the one
       patient admitted to Royal Hallamshire in cardiac arrest.

50.   The significance of the article as far as the Support Group were concerned
       was that it also said that ten patients who were unconscious or convulsing on
       admission and five who were confused were admitted to Intensive Care and
       survived, though the outcome in some cases involved severe neurological
       deficit including two in a persistent vegetative state (one of whom, Tony
       Bland, has since died).

51.   The article also said that of 15 other patients who were admitted with a
      history of unconsciousness, 12 were admitted to the wards and three sent
       home. All except one made a good recovery.


Arguments for quashing the inquest verdicts

52.   Based on the evidence which I have described above, Counsel submitted to
      me that a further application to the Divisional Court for judicial review with
      a view to quashing the verdict of accidental death would have a reasonable
      prospect of success. Counsel cited the following reasons, which I have
      done my best to summarise.

              1.      The medical evidence adduced by the Coroner suggested that
              all the deceased had died quick and painless deaths and that they
              were all dead by 3.15 pm. For this reason the Coroner ruled that no
              evidence after 3.15 could be considered. The 3.15 pm cut off was
              predicated on a number of unrealistic assumptions about the time it
              took for the deceased to be asphyxiated and unconscious. The
              evidence now put forward shows these conclusions and assumptions
              are false. Reliance is primarily placed on the evidence of Dr Walker
              (written submissions, paras 58 &59).

              2.     The fresh medical evidence undermines the justification for
              the 3.15 cut off point and shows that people could have been saved.
              The evidence shows that:

                     (a) some of those who died were alive at 3.15 pm. This is a
                     reference to Dr Walker’s evidence (written submission para
                     76 and oral submission para 81, line 31 - the reference to
                     Houldsworth is an obvious mistake for Walker).
                     (b) At least one supporter who would otherwise have died
                     was saved by proper medical treatment (this appears to be a
                     reference to the cases of Ian McDermott and Stephen
                     Williams, the evidence of Dr Walker that some of those he
                     treated survived, and the BMJ article by Mr Wardrope -
                     written submission para 76).

              3.      That the justification for the 3.15 cut off point was that one
              can be confident that when people became unconscious their deaths
              would have followed, normally within six minutes, or in some cases
              later. But this had been falsified by new evidence that not all those
              who became unconscious died. Reliance is placed on the evidence of
              Dr Walker that some patients treated by him survived, the cases of
              McDermott, Williams, and Mr Wardrope’s article in the BMJ. Had
              this evidence been given or the facts known the whole of this cut off
              point would have been completely undermined (oral submission p66,
              line 17 and p75 p25).

              4.     The jury at the Inquest were not allowed to know that two
              people (Lee Nicol and Adam Spearritt) died after 3.15. The jury
              were not told that people who became unconscious and were taken to
              hospital, recovered (oral submission p77).

              5.      That the evidence previously referred to together with the
              evidence of the ambulance men Edwards, Flack and Howes as to the
              inadequate response to the disaster by the police and emergency
              services was relevant to the question “how” the deceased died and
              the Coroner should have admitted this evidence and not imposed a
              cut off time.

              6. That it would be open to the Divisional Court to hold that the
              verdicts had been procured by fraud, suppression of evidence or
              insufficiency of inquiry (oral submission p69). That the evidence of
              Dr Walker (like that of Mr Houldsworth) was central and its non­
              presentation could amount to fraudulent concealment (oral
              submissions p81).


Conclusions on these submissions

53.   In my judgement these submissions are unfounded.

54.   I now set out my reasons for this conclusion. It is convenient to consider
       the reasons advanced in sub-paragraphs 1 to 4 together, since they raise
       different aspects of the same argument. Sub-paragraph 5 is slightly
       different. Sub-paragraph 6 applies to all evidence said to be new.
Arguments about the 3.15 cut-offpoint

55.    The arguments advanced in sub-paragraphs 1-3 of paragraph 52 above show
       a complete misunderstanding of the Coroner’s reasons for imposing a cut-off
       point at all or choosing the time of 3.15 pm. I have set these out in
       paragraph 11 of this Chapter, particularly sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and
       (e). I do not need to repeat them here. But essentially they were that it is
       not necessary or appropriate when considering the question “how”, i.e. by
       what means, the deceased came to their death to consider what happened
       after the injuries which resulted in death were inflicted. This reasoning was
       upheld by the Divisional Court. To adduce fresh evidence that some of
       those who died did so after 3.15, or that some of those taken to hospital in a
       state of unconsciousness survived does not affect this reasoning.

56.    The answer to the question how the deceased came to their deaths was that
       they suffered from traumatic or crush asphyxia (see note 1 to this Chapter)
       as a result of being crushed in pens 3 and 4 through dangerous overcrowding
       with the result that they were unable to breathe for a continuous and
       sufficiently long period of time to cause death. They did not come to their
       deaths because first-aid or medical attention failed to resuscitate them.

57.   It was well known to the Coroner and legal representatives of the families,
      and also to the inquest jury, that not all those who died did so before 3.15.
      So far as the Coroner was concerned he said as much in the course of his
      reasons for imposing the cut off (inquest transcript, day 1 pl6). Mr Tim
      King QC, Counsel for the families, confirmed to me that this was so, as is
      apparent from his submissions to the Coroner (day 1, p9) which referred to
      the case of William Pemberton and the evidence of an ambulance man that
      resuscitation at 15.50 appeared to be successful.

58.   So far as the jury was concerned, they had heard evidence in the mini-
      inquests that Lee Nicol died on 17 April, and they heard of the attempts that
      were made to resuscitate him both before and after arrival at hospital. The
      jury also heard that Adam Spearritt and Philip Hammond did not die until
      after attempts to resuscitate them both before and after arrival at hospital
      failed. They also heard the evidence of Mr Wardrope, which I summarise in
      paragraphs 62 and 63 below.

59.    It was well known to the Coroner and the legal representative of the families
       that not all those who were unconscious as a result of the crushing died. At
       Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, evidence was given of successful mouth-to-mouth
       resuscitation being given to those who were unconscious (Bradley, day 1
       page 97).      Other witnesses gave evidence to Lord Taylor that they had
       been unconscious. Mr Hennessey (day 2, page 49) recovered consciousness
       in hospital. Mr Clarke (day 2, page 70) was crushed, blacked out,
       recovered consciousness on the pitch after mouth-to-mouth resuscitation by a
       policeman and was later taken to hospital. Mr Moody (day 3, p98) lost
       consciousness and recovered on the pitch. Mr Smith (day 4, pl36) was
trapped for some minutes, passed out, and recovered consciousness while
being put over the fence.

Evidence was given at the Inquest by many witnesses who said that they
became unconscious because of the crush. Two said they recovered
consciousness in hospital (Mr Spearritt [day 34, p i 1] and Mr Baron [day 35
p l2 and 18]). Others regained consciousness at the ground. Mr Garrett
(day 22 p48) said he temporarily lost hearing and sight. Others were Messrs
Crawford (day 25 pl8), Anderson (day 27 p33), N J Langley (day 26 pl23),
Oyitch (day 32 p97), Jolly (day 35 p96), Ball (day 40 pl09 - whom I have
already mentioned above), Gray (day 42 pl2), L D Lloyd (day 45 pl02),
and T W Lloyd (day 45 p i 17, who lost consciousness twice). Mr King also
confirmed to me that he was well aware of this.

Mr Wardrope, the Consultant in the Accident and Emergency Department at
the Northern General Hospital, gave evidence at the Inquests. His evidence
can be summarised as follows.

He arrived at the hospital at 15.33 and took charge. By then six patients had
already arrived. At first he gave help resuscitating some patients but soon
took over the job of triaging patients as they arrived. 87 patients were
received in the first hour. 13 of these were suffering cardiac arrest. Some of
these were triaged dead on arrival. It is not quite clear how many this
applied to, but it seems to have been not more than four.

Other patients received resuscitative treatment but died. These patients were
not dead on arrival, otherwise resuscitative treatment would not have been
attempted. Two patients, Lee Nicol and Adam Spearritt, were admitted to
the Intensive Care Unit but subsequently died. Of the 87 patients, 17 were
admitted to the Intensive Care Unit.

Although Mr Wardrope’s article in the BMJ is somewhat more detailed, it
does not differ significantly from this evidence. What is apparent from Mr
Wardrope’s evidence is that a substantial number of patients were not dead
on their admission to hospital, but died subsequently; and that of the 17
patients who were taken into intensive care, and were therefore almost
certainly unconscious and seriously ill, the great majority lived.

In his summing up (day 75, p72) the Coroner told the jury:

       “In order to avoid any possible misunderstandings, o f course, you
       have to understand particularly with asphyxiaI deaths and
       particularly in the light o f what the various pathologists said, if you
       could have got to a particular person or if one had got to a person
       before the irretrievable damage had been done then, provided one
       did resuscitation correctly, that person might well not only have
       recovered but might have been perfectly alright. That is undeniable.
       Indeed, we have seen several people who were unconscious, who told
              us so, and who are here and who seem perfectly alright because the
              cells in their case fortunately had not been so severely damaged as to
              the irretrievably harmed. That, if you like, is the beauty o f the body,
              that you can assault it like that and retrieve it before it is too late and
              the people themselves ju st recover. ”

66.    The fact that Dr Walker had treated Lee Nicol was referred to at the mini­
       inquest on him (1 May 1990, p9). It is clear that the rest of the evidence
       which I have seen from Dr Walker, Ian McDermott and Stephen Williams
       adds nothing to the evidence given at the Inquest.


Arguments about the response to the disaster

67.    I now turn to consider the submission (5 in my summary of the arguments at
       para 52 above) that the inquest verdicts should be quashed because the fresh
       evidence, particularly that of the ambulance men, shows that lives could
       have been saved by a more prompt and efficient response from the
       emergency services.

68.    The fact that evidence was available, from ambulance men who were not
       called at the Taylor Inquiry, about confusion, lack of comprehension by
       some police officers and other difficulties, does not in any way undermine or
       affect the Coroner’s decision not to have a wide-ranging inquiry into the
       response of the emergency services or his decision to have a cut-off point
       into the inquiry as to how the deceased came to their death. Indeed it is only
       to be expected that evidence relating to the rescue operation existed. Had
       the Coroner embarked on such an inquiry, which was wholly unnecessary
       for the purpose of answering the question of how the victims met their
       deaths, it is quite evident to me that the Inquest, which lasted an extremely
       long time as it was, would have become totally impossible.

69.   As the Divisional Court pointed out, it was a matter for the Coroner’s
      discretion at what point he chose to confine the inquiry. Even if there had
      been no prior investigation into the response of the police and emergency
      services, the Coroner would have been perfectly entitled to limit the inquiry
      as he did. But again, as the Court pointed out, the decision was “reasonable
      and sustainable, particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public inquiry
      which had already been conducted by Lord Taylor” (per McCowan LJ,
      transcript p3). I shall return to this matter in the second part of this chapter.


Fraud or suppression o f evidence?

70.   The suggestion that the evidence now put before me on this aspect of the
      case was deliberately suppressed and concealed and those concerned acted in
      bad faith, is, in my opinion, wholly irresponsible. The evidence of Mr
      Edwards and Mr Flack was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. There is
nothing surprising in the fact that they were not called to give evidence since
they did not add materially to that which was given.

Dr Walker’s evidence was available to the Coroner and the fact that he had
treated Lee Nicol was referred to at the mini-inquest on him. It would be
unusual for a junior doctor to be called to give evidence of treatment, even if
he was the first anaesthetist on the scene. The matter was dealt with, as one
would expect, by Dr Appleyard, the Consultant Anaesthetist in charge of the
Intensive Care Unit who was called to give evidence. For reasons I have
already given, Dr Walker added nothing of any significance.

So far as the evidence of Ian McDermott and Stephen Williams is concerned,
the West Midlands Police took a very large number of statements from
Liverpool supporters including Mr McDermott. More than 50 were called
at the Taylor Inquiry and over 100 gave evidence at the Inquest (only 8 of
whom had done so before at the Inquiry). I think it is worth quoting what
Lord Taylor said about the West Midlands Police.

        “I pay tribute particularly to the West Midlands Police fo r their
        speed and dedication in gathering the evidence and to all those
        responsible fo r processing it. The most eloquent tribute to fairness
        and thoroughness o f the police investigation came from the Secretary
        o f the Football Supporters’ Association. He said there had been
        initial anxiety at Liverpool as to whether that investigation would be
       fa ir and objective. His Association therefore collected 200 witness
        statements themselves. Having heard the opening statement by
        Counsel to the Inquiry based upon the evidence gathered by the
       police, he found that it accorded entirely with his Association’s
        evidence and the initial anxiety was wholly dispelled. ” (interim
        report, para 16).

It is obvious that the police could not take statements from all those who
were in pens 3 and 4 who survived the ordeal. As I have pointed out the
evidence of these witnesses did not differ materially from that of witnesses
who were called to give evidence. The suggestion, if indeed it is made in
respect of those witnesses that their evidence was concealed or suppressed,
is completely unfounded.

In my opinion it is quite impossible on the basis of the evidence and
submissions now advanced to impugn the verdict of accidental death or
suggest that the Divisional Court should again be invited judicially to review
that verdict.
Note 1 (to paragraph 11)

There is a semantic argument based on the difference between traumatic and
crush asphyxia.

 Before Hillsborough the expression traumatic asphyxia was generally used to
 describe asphyxia due to the application o f externalforce. It covers a wide
 range o f cases from instant death due to crushing by some enormous weight,
 strangulation where unconsciousness occurs fairly quickly but death only after
 some period, to cases like the present where the chest is fixed in position fo r a
period o f about 4-6 minutes, so that throughout that time the victim cannot
 breathe. As in the case o f strangulation, i f the pressure is released before
 death occurs recovery can take place, though it is not necessarily always
 complete. I f death has not already occurred, resuscitative treatment in the
form o f oxygen or mouth-to-mouth ventilation together with external heart
 massage is the appropriate first aid treatment.

 The problem at Hillsborough was that those who died were unable to breathe
fo r too long a time, because it was not immediately recognised what was
 happening to them and the extreme difficulty o f access. It may be that crush
 asphyxia is a somewhat more specific description than traumatic asphyxia to
 describe the cause o f their deaths. But the Coroner used the terms
 interchangeably and in my view he was right to do so.
The Rescue Operation


75.   Should there now be a fresh judicial inquiry into the response of the police
      and the emergency services, with a view to ascertaining whether lives could
      have been saved? In my interviews with some of the families, this appeared
      to be what they wanted.

76.   I also had some submissions on this topic from Professor Scraton, Director
      of the Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice at Edge Hill University
      College. I was not initially clear as to what further investigation or inquiry
      Professor Scraton thought ought to occur, but in due course it appeared that
      this was one of the two aspects that he urged ought to be inquired into. It
      became one of the main points in the final written submissions which he sent
      me on 3 December 1997.

77.   I cannot agree that there should be a new public inquiry into the rescue
      operation. It was extensively inquired into by Lord Taylor. He reached
      certain conclusions and made recommendations. I will set out as briefly as
      I can the nature of the evidence that the Taylor Inquiry heard, and the
      findings and recommendations made in relation to this matter.


The evidence heard bv Lord Taylor

78.   Liverpool supporters spoke of the slow reaction of the police in appreciating
      what was going on in the pens, the failure to open the perimeter gates earlier
      and their closure in the early stages. Police officers who had been
      stationed on the perimeter track, in the West Stand and in the Control Box,
      gave evidence as to why they did not appreciate sooner what was happening.

79.   Many police officers and supporters gave evidence to Lord Taylor of
      attempts to extricate casualties from the pens and the difficulties involved,
      attempts at resuscitation by police and supporters, and the chaotic conditions
      in the pens and on the pitch.

80.   St John Ambulance personnel who were on duty on the day gave evidence
      about the rescue work. Mr Wells was the Divisional Superintendent in
      charge. Mr Hytner QC who appeared for the families at Lord Taylor’s
      Inquiry expressly stated (day 19 pl9) that having read hundreds of
      statements of supporters there was no word of criticism levelled against the
      St John Ambulance Brigade. The other St John personnel who gave
      evidence were Divisional Superintendent Towler, Mr Godley and Mr
      Saxton.

81.   Two South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) officers,
      Station Officer Higgins and Mr Eason, who were present at the disaster gave
      evidence to Lord Taylor. They spoke of the confused situation, difficulty of
      access and problems with the radio. Mr Hopkins, the Deputy Chief
      Metropolitan Officer took over command on the ground at the Penistone
      Road end. He dealt at length with the arrangements for use of the
      gymnasium as a casualty station, access for ambulances, equipment carried
      and the operation generally. He was not cross examined by Mr Hytner. Mr
      Clarke and Mr Page, Senior ambulance officers, gave evidence about the
      control of the operation at Headquarters.

82.   Lord Taylor’s Inquiry considered at length the questions of when
      ambulances were summoned, why they were not summoned earlier, when
      the major accident plan was put into effect and why it was not done earlier.
      This involved the evidence of the police officers who had been in the control
      box and SYMAS personnel at Headquarters. The question of why there was
      no request for doctors and nurses to attend the injured until late on was dealt
      with, together with the impact on casualties.

83.   The Taylor Inquiry also looked at the question of when emergency
      equipment was asked for and why it did not arrive until it was too late.
      The Inquiry went into these issues with the police and the fire brigade.
      Altogether five fire officers gave evidence of the part the brigade played in
      the rescue operation.


Doctors

84.   Five doctors, three of whom were Liverpool supporters present at the match
      as spectators, gave evidence as to the parts they played in the rescue
      operation. In the light of the submissions now made, it may be helpful to
      refer to some of the evidence given by these doctors.

85.   Dr Byrne was a Consultant Anaesthetist. He went down to the pitch at
      about 3.20. He saw that cardio-pulmonary resuscitation appeared to be
      being carried out efficiently and that he could be more use elsewhere. On
      the directions of the police he went to the gymnasium. There were already
      two doctors there. He assisted in treating patients and later gave formal
      confirmation of death in relation to 16 bodies. His cross examination by Mr
      Hytner is important and I set it out in full (Taylor Inquiry day 25 p24).

             Q. Dr Byrne, I am not sure that I got an answer o f yours down
             accurately. I f I did, I would like you to help us about explaining it; if
             not, I will not have any questions. I think you said that an earlier
             call fo r help would not have done very much good. Have I got that
             down accurately or inaccurately? - A. No, that is correct.

              Q. Just fo r the benefit o f the bereaved, I think I ought to ask you to
              explain that a little. Can I take it stage by stage. In the crush, there
would have been those who immediately or after a while stopped
breathing? -A . That is correct.

Q. There will be those who got on to the pitch still breathing but
gasping fo r breath, maybe with rib injuries or something o f that sort?
- A. I believe there were a few.

Q. By the time any doctor would have got to the pitch, however
quickly, there would have been those who were already clinically
dead - is that right? - A. That is correct.

Q. No good could have come from any doctor getting to them
because they are dead? - A. Some o f them may have been able to be
resuscitated from the cardio-vascular point o f view but would have
suffered such lack o f oxygen to the brain that had they been
resuscitated, they would have severe lack o f oxygen brain damage.

Q. When I say “clinically dead ”I mean not capable o f being
resuscitated. - A. Well, capable o f being resuscitated from the
circulation point o f view; I am sorry.

Q. In between, would there have been those who were either finding
it difficult to breathe or who, though alive, had ceased temporarily to
breathe? - A. There would certainly be some perhaps finding it
difficult to breathe fo r a number o f reasons. Most o f those reasons
would involve slightly more sophisticated equipment than would have
been available or one would expect to be available at a football
ground.

Q. You see, the comment that earlier medical attention would not
have done any good would seem to imply logically that once the
doctors got there they could not do much good. Are you saying that
really however heroically people were behaving in attempting mouth-
to-mouth resuscitation and so forth, they did not actually do any
good? - A. I think that is my overall impression, yes.

Q. So people who appeared to be revived by mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation or other means o f resuscitation, are you suggesting that
if they had not had medical attention eventually they would have
started breathing o f their own accord? - A. I believe there are odd
patients who have recovered after mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, but
they would have had to be resuscitated very, very quickly.

Q. You appreciate I have no medical instructions to challenge
anything that you are saying. I am simply trying to get some
clarification. - A. Yes.
86.   Dr Byrne was re-examined by Mr Collins QC, Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry
      (page 29) -

            Q. D r Byrne, can I explore something a little more o f Mr Hytner’s
            questions? Am I right in thinking that broadly there are two
            categories. There are those who have already died in the sense that
            they have stopped breathing as a result o f crushing, and those you
            think probably would not have been saved by an earlier call fo r
            medical assistance? - A. Yes, that is correct.

            Q. Because they would have been crushed on the terraces and would
            have been likely to have suffered, effectively, death before they were
            able to be got out? - A. They would have suffered severe brain
            complications.

            Q. And the only way o f resuscitating those sort o f people would have
            been to have got them either mouth-to-mouth or oxygen or whatever
            in the terraces themselves or immediately upon being brought out? -
            A. That is correct.

            Q. I suppose a doctor present immediately on them being brought
            out might have assisted but he could not, I suspect, have done a great
            deal more than a trained ambulanceman or a trained St John’s
            person could have done, is that right? - A. Yes, in that situation.

            Q. So fa r as the other sort are concerned, there are those who have
            suffered some sort o f crush injuries, perhaps fractured ribs or
            whatever and who as a result have difficulty in breathing. Is that
            right? - A. Yes.

            Q. And if they are not given treatment, they might cease to breathe
            altogether? - A. There is a condition called tension pneumothorax
            where the rib punctures the lining o f the lung and if it happens on
            both sides, then you cannot breathe and you need a seal putting in
            the chest, involving inserting a special needle in.

            Q. That I can see, but what I am getting at is there may have been
            people presumably brought out from those terraces who had difficulty
            in breathing, who had not ceased breathing but who had difficulty in
            breathing? - A. There was certainly one patient that I saw.

            Q. And there may well have been others? - A. Yes.

            Q. Lord Justice Taylor: On the pitch? - A. No, in the
            gymnasium.

            Q. Still having difficulty then? - A. Yes. He had clinically obvious
            rib fractures.
       Q. Mr Collins: And those sort o f patients would have needed
       medical attention? I am sorry, that is the wrong question. Such
       patients could have been assisted by medical attention - is that right?
       - A. My view would be that you would get a patient like that quickly
       to hospital.

       Q. I see. That is really all that sensibly can be done? - A. Unless
       you have this special equipment fo r relieving tension pneumothorax.

       Q. We know that oxygen was administered to a number o f people. Is
       that simply to help them when they have difficulties in breathing? -
      A. The use o f high inspired concentrations o f oxygen in this situation
       is, I think, probably not very well proven. It is more as a device to
      force something into the lungs. There is 20 per cent oxygen in the air
       and that is usually sufficient, but it has to be got into the lungs. This
       device that has been mentioned is in fact ju st a way o f inflating the
       lungs but, instead o f with air, with 100 per cent oxygen. So I don’t
       think in that situation it’s been proven that 100 per cent oxygen is
       necessarily any better than air.

      Q. So does it boil down to this - that although obviously the
      presence o f a doctor helps to tend to a patient to diagnose fractures
      and to treat the patient in the correct manner, what really matters is
      getting patients in this sort o f situation to hospital as quickly as
      possible? - A. That is my belief ”

Dr Ashton was a Liverpool supporter. He answered the call for doctors and
nurses and went to the back of the West Stand. The police did not seem to
know what was wanted or who was in charge. He assisted with the
resuscitation and sorting out priorities as to who should go to hospital. He
was critical of the absence of equipment. He was asked (Taylor Inquiry,
day 25 p i 15):

       Q. Well now do you think looking back on it and seeing what was
       there, that if equipment o f this nature had been available it would
       have made any practical difference to the number o f people who
       survived? - A. I think it is a very difficult question because o f the
       nature o f the injuries. It seems to me that a lot o f people were
       actually dead when they were brought out from the ground so we are
       really in the realms o f speculation. What I would say is if there had
       been equipment there then at least the various medical and nursing
       people who were there and who became involved, many o f whom
       have contacted me, could at least have had a go at trying to do
       something with the equipment.
       Q. Well we have heard today that those people who were not
       breathing had something like four minutes before they were going to
       be in serious trouble if not dead? - A. That is correct.

Dr Ashton arranged for serious cases to go to hospital. Those who were left
were either dead or had minor injuries. He and another doctor confirmed
those who were dead at that end of the ground.

Dr Curpen was a Liverpool supporter. He realised there was trouble and
went to help. The police diverted him to the gymnasium. This was just
after 3.20 and he was the first doctor there. There was very little equipment
at that stage. But later, about 3.30, a team of para-medics arrived and there
was then all the equipment needed. He then examined bodies and confirmed
those that were dead.

Dr Phillips was also a Liverpool supporter. He went onto the pitch at about
3.10 and assisted with resuscitation. After that he looked for people who
were dangerously ill; but he could not find any, they were either dead or
slightly injured. He gave evidence during day 25 of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry,
when he said (p 95):

       Q. So fa r as that is concerned, can you say if there is anybody who
       might have been saved but was not as a result o f what you perceived
       as to the inadequacies o f the equipment from your point o f view? -
       A. I can only say that there may have been because it may well be
       that the delay in getting people out o f the terrace was too great and
       by then it was probably or possibly too late fo r them and it concerns
       me not that people would have been harmed by a de-fibrillator, that
       in actual fact maybe some severely brain-damaged people may have
       been revived and we would now have a great number o f still
       unconscious, permanently brain-damaged fans.

At page 96 of the transcript he says “I f they had not been breathing fo r [4
minutes], then it was hopeless, I agree ”

All this evidence was entirely in accord with that given by the pathologists
and Mr Wardrope at the Inquests. Even if Dr Walker’s evidence was at
variance with it, which in my view it is not, it would not justify the issue
being reopened. Mr King told me that he had advised the families that if the
evidence of the pathologists at the Inquest was to be challenged, medical
evidence would be required to support the challenge. This was obviously
correct advice. No such evidence was forthcoming then or now.

In addition to those who gave oral evidence to Lord Taylor a considerable
number of statements from ambulance personnel, firemen and doctors who
responded to the call for help were available to his Inquiry. Lord Taylor
made it clear that he had taken into account many written statements in
addition to oral testimony and that he would not have been assisted by
       calling any more witnesses to give evidence in person (interim report,
       paragraph 14). I have looked at the written statements which were then
       available, some of which can be found on the body files. In my opinion
       their effect is not significantly different from that of the witnesses who gave
       oral evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry though they are of course all dealing
       with the particular part which they played.


Lord Taylor’s conclusions about the rescue operation

94.    Lord Taylor dealt with the rescue operation in Chapter 5 of his Interim
       Report. At para 89 he said

               “Those capable o f survival mostly came round o f their own accord.
              The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and
              treated. ”

95.    In Chapter 14 of his interim report Lord Taylor dealt with the response of
       the police. He criticised the slow appreciation of Mr Duckenfield and Mr
       Murray of what was happening.       He continued (para 251 and 252)

              “ Until Chief Superintendent Nesbit arrived, there was no effective
              leadership either from control or on the pitch to harness and
              organise rescue efforts. No orders were given fo r officers to enter
              the tunnel and relieve pressure. Some officers did this on their own
              initiative. Apart from the Tannery request to clear the pitch, no
              attempt was made to clear and mark o ff a casualty area where first-
              aid could be given without hindrance by fans and photographers
              milling about between the bodies. There was no co-ordination o f the
              early provision o f first-aid or o f stretcher parties or o f the rescue
              effort through gates 3 and 4. No request fo r help was broadcast to
              doctors and nurses in the crowd until about 3.29 pm when it was too
              late. Probably, there was little that could have been achieved in
              most cases however soon doctors had been summoned, but there were
              marginal cases where earlier attention might have made a difference.

               The plight o f those behind the fencing and the existence o f injuries
               were known to officers at the scene from 3 pm. But the Major
              Disaster Plan was not started until 3.06 pm at earliest when the
               ambulance service was called. No request fo r cutting gear or fo r the
              fire brigade was made until 3.13 pm. Again, it is unlikely that these
               services could have saved lives if they had been called promptly, but
               it is possible”

96.    In Chapter 21 of his interim report Lord Taylor reported on the first-aid and
       emergency services. He said (paras 296 and 297)
               “/ say at the outset o f this chapter that no valid criticism can be
               made o f the response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS
               or by the fire brigade on 15 April. Indeed, no represented party
               ventured any criticism o f them. The only attack on SYMAS came
              from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances did not
               arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack
               o f triage. He was proved to be wrong in all three aspects.
               Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on television on 15 April when he
               said more lives could have been saved if staff and equipment had
               arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fa ct as to the
               times o f arrival o f ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was
               not possible to say whether lives could have been saved. His
               comments on television were irresponsible. The other doctor
               complained o f the absence o f defibrillators. I am satisfied on
               overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the
              pitch with people milling about would have been highly dangerous
               owing to the risk o f injury from the electric charge.

              I fin d that all three o f the emergency services named above responded
              promptly when alerted, that they brought appropriate equipment and
              that their personnel operated efficiently. ”

97.   Lord Taylor made comments on what it was reasonable to expect in the way
      of equipment. He criticised the lack of co-operation between police and
      emergency services and dealt with problems of access for ambulances. In
      his final report Lord Taylor made specific recommendations in relation to
      co-ordination of the emergency services with the police (para 228), and the
      sort of first-aid, medical facilities and ambulances that should be available at
      football stadia.


M r Edwards’s evidence

98.    I discussed earlier in this Chapter the written statements about the
       emergency services response from Mr Tony Edwards, a former South
       Yorkshire ambulanceman. I think it is convenient at this point to discuss
       the oral evidence that he gave me. I had not thought it necessary to
       interview Mr Edwards, for reasons which I have already described. But he
       was anxious to come to see me and he did so on 11 December 1997.

99.    Although he had never mentioned this before, Mr Edwards told me that he
       was critical of the response of the ambulance service. He said that, in his
       opinion, ambulances should have gone onto the pitch and triaging should
       have taken place at the Leppings Lane end of the pitch. He blamed himself
       for not triaging patients at this end of the pitch. He said this was his duty as
       the only ambulance man there. Specifically, he said that Victoria Hicks
       should not have been put in his ambulance as she was already dead, whereas
       he believed that her sister Sarah was not. But he did not take Sarah’s pulse
       or see if her pupils reacted to light.

100.   Mr Edwards said that his ambulance should have stopped before leaving the
       ground for triaging to take place. He said he had never mentioned these
       criticisms - and others which he had - before, because he expected to be
       called to give evidence and cross-examined on them. Mr Edwards did not
       understand that he could not be cross-examined with a view to eliciting
       matters he had never mentioned. It seems to me that his criticism of the
       operation ignores the fact that there were both doctors and St John
       Ambulance personnel at the Leppings Lane end of the pitch, as well as from
       time to time Mr Higgins, Mr Carpenter and Mr Eason from SYMAS, even
       though these people may not have been there during the relatively short
       period when Mr Edwards himself was there. Mr Edwards’s criticism also
       ignores the fact that the triaging was taking place at the gymnasium in
       accordance with a pre-existing plan agreed between the ambulance service
       and the police, and that the quite chaotic conditions on the pitch would have
       made it extremely difficult to do it there.

101.   It is clear that Mr Edwards has been racked with guilt, at least apparently
       since the Cook Report television programme about Hillsborough shown in
       June 1994, because he feels that he himself could and should have done
       more. I do not think he should blame himself. He was obeying Mr
       Hopkins’ order in going down the pitch to pick up casualties and take them
       to hospital as quickly as possible. He would have faced a very difficult task
       in trying to persuade Mr Hicks that his daughter Victoria should be left
       behind, even if it meant taking Sarah instead. He had already sustained an
       assault in the course of his duty and valuable time would have been lost.


Conclusion about the rescue operation

102.   In the light of Lord Taylor’s very full and detailed inquiry, and the specific
       findings and recommendations, I cannot see that any useful purpose would
       be served by having any further inquiry into the rescue operation. Even if
       some ambulance men, notably Mr Edwards, feel that they or the service
       generally could have done more in spite of the very difficult conditions, I do
       not think this could affect Lord Taylor’s findings and recommendations.

103.   It would clearly be quite impossible to say about any given victim of the
       disaster that if more sophisticated or competent aid had reached him or her
       at some unspecified earlier moment, they would have survived. Any wide
       ranging inquiry such as advocated by Professor Scraton and some of the
       families I have spoken to, would clearly impose enormous burdens on the
       police, the emergency services and the hospital and medical staff. But these
       burdens would in my judgement be to no purpose.
104.   In my opinion there is no evidence of want of care by the emergency or
       medical services. In any event the extent of the legal duty of care on rescue
       services towards those who are injured is limited. Their duty is not to
       create or increase the danger created by others. They are not liable for an
       ineffective response to an emergency caused by others, at least until they
       have assumed responsibility for the care of a particular patient (see Capital
       and Counties PLC v Hampshire County Council [1997] 3WLR 331).

105.   I have not understood Counsel for the Family Support Group to invite any
       further inquiry into these matters. Instead they made it plain that they
       accepted Lord Taylor’s findings and the sufficiency of his Inquiry.
CHAPTER 4


Alleged im proper interference with witnesses


1.     During the course of my scrutiny I have heard allegations that the evidence of
       witnesses to the disaster was tampered with. There are two types of allegation
       of this sort.

2.    The first is that the West Midlands Police, who investigated what happened at
      Hillsborough on behalf of Lord Taylor, the Coroner, and the Director of Public
      Prosecutions put pressure on three named witnesses - Derek Bruder, Debra
      Martin, and Paul Taylor - to change their evidence in various ways. I
      consider these allegations in the first part of this Chapter.

3.    The second concerns the way in which the South Yorkshire Police obtained
      evidence about the disaster from their own officers. I consider this in the
      second part of this Chapter.


Part 1 - allegations against the West Midlands Police

4.    In their written submissions to me Counsel for the Hillsborough Family
       support Group stated (para 103) that:

               “Evidence has come to light which tends to show that some witnesses
              were pressured into changing their evidence (or prevented from
              adding to their evidence) by officers from the West Midlands Police.
              In the main, this pressure was brought to bear in order to prevent
              evidence being put before the jury which tended to contradict the
              theory that all the deceased were dead by 3.15pm. This evidence
              demonstrates the biased and incomplete nature o f the investigation,
              and the desire on the part o f those investigating the disaster to keep
              to a minimum the scrutiny o f South Yorkshire Police’s reaction to the
              disaster. ”

5.     Counsel cited three witnesses who they said had been pressured in this way.
       Two of them - Derek Brader and Debra Martin - made written statements
       relating to the death of Kevin Williams. The other, Paul Taylor, had
       evidence about the death of Victoria Hicks.


The Kevin Williams case

6.    Kevin Williams’ case was one of the six that the Divisional Court considered
      in 1993 during the application for judicial review (see Chapter 1, para 66
(c)) in connection with the seventh ground of the application, namely that
there was evidence available to show that the Coroner and his jury were not
given the full picture in the summaries at the mini-inquests and the omission
of certain relevant facts vitiated those proceedings. The factual issue in
Kevin Williams’ case was whether he was dead when recovered from the
pen or whether he died a little later, at some time after 15.32 or possibly as
late as 15.55.

At the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams on 2 May 1990 Dr Slater, the
pathologist, said that in his opinion his death had occurred very quickly.
Kevin’s case was unusual because there were four fractures of the larynx,
and it was in Dr Slater’s view a case of very severe traumatic asphyxia due
to crushing of the neck and chest.

Dr Slater’s view that Kevin had died quickly was at variance with the
evidence of two witnesses. The first was an off-duty Liverpool policeman,
Derek Brader, who had been sitting in the stand watching the match but
came down to the pitch to help in the rescue operation. The second was
Debra Martin, a South Yorkshire Police Special Constable who was on duty
at the ground.

In a statement dated 27 April 1989 PC Brader said that he had seen a man,
who was later identified as Kevin Williams, lying on the pitch near the Kop
End of the stadium. As Mr Brader approached him the man had
convulsions and his head moved as if he was being sick. Together with a St
John Ambulance man, Mr Brader attempted to resuscitate him with mouth-
to-mouth ventilation and cardiac massage. He could feel a slight pulse in his
neck.

Attempts were made to stop an ambulance, but it continued down the pitch.
PC Brader and the St John man continued to attempt to revive Kevin
Williams without success. They were then joined by a St John Ambulance
woman and shortly after this the ambulance man said the patient was dead.
Mr Brader agreed that he was.

Kevin’s body was then taken to the gymnasium, which was being used as a
temporary mortuary, by a number of other people. One of these was
Special Constable Debra Martin. In a statement dated 8 May 1989, she said
that Kevin had stopped breathing while he was in the gymnasium. She gave
him the kiss of life and heart massage and a doctor helped. Kevin started
breathing, opened his eyes and said “Mom” and then died.

A doctor confirmed Kevin Williams as being dead at 16.06.

During the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams on 2 May 1990 Dr Slater was
asked about these matters. He said he thought Mr Brader may have been
mistaken in believing he found a slight pulse. So far as WPC Martin’s
statement was concerned, there was no way in which someone with the
severe injury to his voice box which Kevin had could have said “Mom”.

The Coroner caused further enquiries to be made. Inspector Sawers of the
West Midlands Police took a further statement from PC Brader on the 3rd
May 1990. In it he said that since Hillsborough he had had further training
in first aid. In relation to his earlier statement when he described Kevin
Williams as having convulsions, he said:

        “I have thought about this carefully today and with the added benefit
       o f my training I can say that this was not a process that lasted fo r
       any time. It certainly wasn’t anything similar to an epileptic fit, fo r
       example. It was an impression that I had which I originally
       associated with the lad vomiting. I will say that I did not see the
       casualty vomit nor did I see any sick on the body or grassed area
       around him. I will correct further references to vomit as they occur
       in my original statement.

       I refer to feeling fo r a carotid pulse in the neck and said originally
       that I thought I could detect a slight pulse, however, I now feel that I
       am able to correct this. I fe lt fo r the pulse with my first two fingers
       o f my left hand, I believe, to the carotid artery. I cannot say
       absolutely that I felt fo r the pulse before I started mouth-to-mouth or
       after; nor indeed whether I did both simultaneously. Whilst I would
       now have much more skill, on the day I cannot say with absolute
       certainly that I went accurately straight to the carotid artery.

       For all those reasons, I can say that I felt fo r a pulse in the region o f
       the carotid artery, but I may have also touched the area o f the
        ‘Adams Apple’ or felt something in the neck region which I originally
       thought was a pulse but may have been mistaken. ”

Inspector Sawers also asked Mr Bruder about the reference in his previous
statement to trying to stop an ambulance. Mr Brader maintained that the
ambulance in question was on its way into the ground and going to the
Leppings Lane end.

WPC Martin had been seen on 17th March 1990 by WPS Appleton of the
West Midlands Police, who took a further statement from her. In this
further statement Miss Martin described how upset she had been on the day
and that her recollection of events was vague and confused. By the time she
came to deal with Kevin Williams’ body, which she was told to stay with in
the gymnasium, she was in a state of shock and felt like a ‘zombie’. She
said:

        “I didn’t know what to do. I didn’t want to believe the boy was dead.
       I didn’t know if he was dead or not but I decided that I had got to
       attempt to revive him. I started to give him mouth-to-mouth but
       someone, I don’t know who, touched me on the shoulder and told me
       he was dead. By this time my head had gone, I wasn ’t aware o f what
       I was doing or what was really happening. ”

The Coroner resumed the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams on 4 May 1990.
Sergeant Killock told the jury the substance of Mr Brader’s first statement.
Inspector Sawers then told the jury about Mr Brader’s second statement. He
said that he had pointed out to Mr Bruder that there appeared to be a
discrepancy between what he was saying about the ambulance which they
had tried to stop, and the known times of the first two ambulances on the
pitch. At that point it seems to have been overlooked by everyone that in
fact a third ambulance - driven by Mr Edwards - had come onto the pitch.

The Coroner recalled Dr Slater. He affirmed his opinion that Kevin was
brain dead at the time when he was removed from the pen, but accepted that
his body was not dead until later, when Mr Binder was trying to resuscitate
him. He said (transcript, page 13 B-D):

       Q. “In the light o f what you heard and what we have heard now, do
       you feel that this lad died, if you like, in the totality sense, I don’t
       mean that his skin was dead, but in lay terms at the point in time
       when Mr Bruder was with him?

       A. “Yes, sir, I am quite confident o f that. When one speaks to lay
       people who have experienced people dying, a word which is recurrent
       in these descriptions o f death is the way that individuals turn ‘grey’,
       recurring several times. To me as a doctor that implied that that was
       the point o f whole body death. In fa ct I feel that that it was probably
       around that time that Kevin’s whole body died. His brain had died
       twenty/twenty-five minutes before that at the time o f the crushing, but
       his whole body died at the time PC Bruder was with him. ”

Dr Gumpert, a Consultant Clinical Neurophysiologist and Neurologist, was
also called. He agreed with Dr Slater’s opinion. He accepted the possibility
that Mr Binder might have felt a carotid pulse (pl7A).

In his judgement in the Divisional Court, Lord Justice McCowan reviewed
this evidence at considerable length. He said (page 28G of the judgement):

        “We were told that some while after, Mrs Williams, the deceased’s
       mother, made contact with Police Constable Bruder and Woman
       Police Constable Martin, and they alleged that they had been
       pressurised into changing stories and that they now stuck by their
       original versions. Where does the truth lie? I see no fault in the
       Coroner in this matter. He made fu ll inquiry. He was not asked by
       the applicant’s representative to do more. There was overwhelming
       medical evidence that the deceased was in fact dead by 3.15pm. In
       my judgement it would not be right to quash the verdicts and order a
               new inquest on the strength o f these allegations made against the
               investigating police officers. ”

22.   The Divisional Court did not find it necessary to investigate the allegation
      that the West Midlands police investigators had put Mr Binder or Miss
      Martin under improper pressure.      The proceedings before the Court
      concerned the conduct of the Coroner, not the police. No criticism could be
      made of the Coroner, who had investigated Kevin Williams’ case with great
      thoroughness.

23.   I have investigated the allegation of improper pressure. This is not because
      it could affect the verdict of accidental death on Kevin Williams. It plainly
      could not alter that. Nor could it affect the 3.15 cut-off point. The
      Coroner had sound reasons for making his decision about that and these
      would not have been affected by the question of whether Kevin Williams
      died before then as Dr Slater originally thought, or afterwards as PC Brader
      and WPC Martin thought.

24.   I have looked into this in great detail because an allegation of improper
      pressure against a police officer to persuade a witness to change his or her
      evidence contrary to that witness’s recollection and belief, is a very serious
      matter. But there is all the difference in the world between such conduct
      and seeking to reconcile, if one can, apparent inconsistencies between
      witnesses.


Derek Bruder

25.   I interviewed Mr Binder on 6 October 1997. He told me how he came to
       make his second statement on 3 May 1990. He said Inspector Sawers came
       to see him on that day because he (Sawers) wanted to clarify certain medical
       issues which had been brought up in Mr Brader’s first statement. Mr
       Brader told me that because they were both having difficulty understanding
       points, Inspector Sawers telephoned the Coroner’s office and spoke to
       someone there and explained the difficulty. The telephone was handed to
       Mr Binder who discussed what he had seen with the person on the
       telephone, who must have been Dr Slater. There was a discussion about the
       movement of the body which Mr Brader had described as a convulsion, the
       question of vomit and the possibility of mistaking the pulse. But he said that
       there was still some confusion in his mind about the medical points.

26.   He then said that Inspector Sawers suggested he might have been mistaken
      about the ambulance, because the video footage did not show it at that time.
      But he, Mr Brader, insisted that he was right about that.

27.   I took Mr Binder through his second (3 May 1990) statement. He
       confirmed to me that everything in it was correct, save for where he said
that he may have been mistaken about the pulse. He said (transcript page
10, line 5):

        “What I am saying is: I went to the lad, felt a pulse and o f that I am
       not mistaken. I t’s as simple as that. As I say, I hope you don’t think
       I ’m being forward but that was the case.

       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: You are an experienced police officer
       and, I have no doubt, you have taken statements from people in the
       past and you know how these things are taken, and sometimes things
       are put to a witness: are you sure about that or may you have been
       mistaken about that because o f something else. What I am at getting
       is that in this statement you actually say: ‘But I may have been
       mistaken about that’.

       Mr Bruder: Yes, I may have been mistaken as to the region I took
       the pulse from, i.e. within an inch or two o f an Adam’s apple is the
       carotid artery on the neck.

       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: But you did not mean that you were
       mistaken about feeling a pulse?

       Mr Bruder: Most definitely not. ”

Mr Binder said that he was quite satisfied that Kevin was dead when he gave
up trying to resuscitate him. He also made it perfectly plain to me that he
was not put under any pressure to change his statement. At page 15, line 15
of my interview with him he said:

       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: So fa r as the alteration or so fa r as the
       amendment o f your statement is concerned, correct me if I am wrong,
       I do not get the impression that you are suggesting that you were
       subjected to any improper pressure to alter your statement?

       Mr Bruder: L et’s say I wouldn’t say I was bullied or cajoled
       certainly because I ’m not that type o f chap, I would have shown him
       the door had that been the case to be quite honest. The fact that he
       was an Inspector didn’t really mean anything to me, he was here to
       do a job, to take a statement.

And later:

       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: I am concerned, you see, because there
       have been suggestions that you were subjected to improper pressure
       to change the statement.

       Mr Bruder: I disagree that I was put under pressure to change the
       statement.
My conclusions about Mr Binder’s evidence are these: I did not find his
explanation as to why he had said in his second statement that he might have
made a mistake about the pulse, entirely convincing. I doubt whether he
really meant that he might have been mistaken as to the precise region where
he took the pulse. However, I am satisfied that he now genuinely believes
that he did feel a slight pulse and so believed at the time of his first
statement. This was accepted by Dr Slater, who said that Kevin’s whole
body died when Mr Bruder was with him, (inquest transcript 4 May 1990,
page 13 B-D). It was also accepted by Dr Gumpert (page 17 A).

Having seen Mr Brader I am quite satisfied that he was not subjected to any
improper pressure in making his second statement, which in every respect
save one he confirmed was correct. As he himself said, he is not the sort of
person to be bullied or cajoled.

For this reason I have not thought it necessary to take the matter further with
Mr Sawers or Dr Slater. Dr Slater wrote to me. He said he had spoken to
Mr Brader with the full knowledge and approval of the Coroner. The object
was to enable him to assess the strength of his own evidence, in relation to
Mr Brader’s, having regard to the difficulty in deciding when a person is
alive or dead, particularly the distinction between somatic and brain stem
death. Although it may be somewhat unusual for a pathologist to speak to a
witness about his evidence I see nothing improper about it, especially if, as
Mr Brader says, he and Inspectors Sawers were having difficulty in
understanding the medical point involved.

There is nothing whatever wrong in the Coroner attempting to reconcile the
evidence of Dr Slater with that of PC Brader and WPC Martin. Indeed he
would probably have been criticised if he had not. If the witness adheres to
his or her original statement, then the conflict cannot be resolved without the
decision maker hearing the evidence. But if the witness expresses doubt, or
gives an explanation as to why they may have been mistaken, or if he or she
says that they were confused at the time or may have been, any conflict is
likely to have been resolved. Mr Brader told me he thought he should have
been called as a witness. This was entirely a matter for the Coroner. In the
light of Mr Brader’s second signed statement, as the Divisional Court said,
no possible criticism can be made of the Coroner.

 It is unfortunate that Inspector Sawers appears to have overlooked the fact
 that there was a third ambulance on the pitch as Mr Brader had said.
 Indeed this seems to have been overlooked by the Coroner and the legal
 representatives who were in Court, including Mr Fraser who was
 representing the families.

 There is in fact a problem reconciling the times involved. There is a timed
 photograph of Kevin Williams being carried across the pitch, through the
 centre circle, at 15.32. This is plainly before Mr Brader’s attempt to
       resuscitate him, which took place further down the pitch, between the
       centre circle and the gymnasium. The timings given in PC Brader’s
       statements suggest that it was not until about 15.43 that he saw the
       ambulance coming onto the pitch and attempts were made to stop it. Yet
       there is video evidence that Mr Edwards’ ambulance was on the pitch at
       15.36.

36.   I think there cannot be any doubt that the ambulance Mr Brader is referring
       to is Mr Edwards’. But this confusion about timings perhaps goes some
       way to explain why the connection was not made during the Inquest. In
       any event no one has ever doubted that Mr Brader attempted to resuscitate
       Kevin Williams. The only question was whether in truth he felt a pulse. It
       is quite wrong to suggest that PC Brader’s evidence at the Inquest was
       discredited. It was not and I see no evidence of any attempt to discredit it
       - merely to clarify it.


Debra Martin

37.   I interviewed Miss Martin on 18 November 1997. She made a statement
       dated 27 February 1995 in the presence of Miss Adlington, the
       Hillsborough Family Support Group’s Solicitor. In this she said that WPS
       Appleton came to see her on 17 March 1990 and tried to convince her that
       her original statement of 8 May 1989 was untrue. After exerting
       considerable pressure on her, WPS Appleton produced a dictionary which
       she referred to while she, WPS Appleton, compiled the second statement.
       Miss Martin was unable to read this because of her distress. She said she
       signed it because of the pressure exerted on her and because she wanted to
       put Hillsborough behind her.

38.   In her interview with me I asked Miss Martin about the pressure exerted on
       her. She said WPS Appleton had harassed her with telephone calls at her
       work and when she couldn’t get through, at her home. She visited her
       three or four times, sometimes accompanied by male officers - Miss Martin
       said she was literally brow beaten. When WPS Appleton came to her home
       on 17 March she accused her (Miss Martin) of lies and said she had never
       been at Hillsborough.

39.   Debra Martin told me WPS Appleton kept on calling her a complete liar
      and that she needed to take a second statement. She didn’t read this
      statement because she was in such a state she had to go and speak to her
      parents. Miss Martin said that although she had taken statements from
      witnesses in her work as a Special Constable, and knew there was a caution
      at the beginning of the statement, she had not signed this. Her signature
      there must be a forgery. She agreed that she had signed the statement at the
      bottom of each page and at the end.
I took her through the statement which she was said to have given to WPS
Appleton. Much of it she agreed she had said. But in every case where
the statement records that she was confused, did not have a clear
recollection and was like a “zombie”, she said that was untrue and that
WPS Appleton had made it up, though she accepted that she had used the
phrase that ‘she was acting on auto-pilot’.

Miss Martin insisted to me that she had a clear recollection of the events
on 15 April 1989. She told me that she had never read the statement she
gave to WPS Appleton. When I pointed out that this appeared to be
inconsistent with her statement of 22 February 1995 to Miss Adlington, she
accepted that she must have read it on that occasion but had no recollection
of it. She told me that she was very distressed and upset by the events of
the day of the disaster and had made a claim against the South Yorkshire
Police in respect of her post traumatic stress, but had been pressurised to
drop the claim.

Mrs Martin, Debra’s mother, also gave evidence to me. She too said that
WPS Appleton had been to the house three or four times previously. She
was not present during the interview on 17 March 1990 - but had been in
the next room with her husband. They could hear raised voices but not
what was said. She said there came a time when her daughter came and
spoke to them and said, “I can’t take any more, she is bullying me all the
time, she is calling me a liar”. Both she and her husband told Debra not to
sign anything, but in spite of this she went back into the lounge and signed
the statement. She told me that Debra had been deeply disturbed by
Hillsborough and still was. She agreed with me that her daughter was very
emotional.

In my judgement Debra Martin cannot be regarded as a reliable witness.
Her first statement (8 May 1989) is very confused and in conflict with all
the other evidence relating to events at Hillsborough. In it she said that at
about 2.50 p.m. she was on duty at the Penistone Road end (that is, the
other end of the ground from Leppings Lane where the Liverpool fans were
arriving). She said that there was a great deal of trouble at that end with
drunken Nottingham Forest fans so that mounted police were forced against
the wall. A large blue gate (which she told me was somewhere near the
entrance from Penistone Road by the gymnasium) was opened and the large
majority of the crowd pushed their way into the ground. She was carried
along by the crowd and pushed to the floor.

She found herself inside the ground at the bottom of the Spion Kop, with
the gates closed behind her. She managed to get out into the road again,
where she found herself surrounded by drunken fans screaming abuse. She
then made her way to the Leppings Lane end (she told me she had gone
round the North side of the ground and along Vere Road). Ambulances and
police cars were rushing to that end of the ground (the first ambulance
arrived at that end at 15.13). There was, she said, a vast crowd of about
4,000 fans trying to get into the ground. Next thing she got into the
ground, apparently through a blue gate and found herself on the pitch, she
could not remember how.

Miss Martin is the only witness who speaks of a crowd of disorderly
Nottingham Forest fans surging through a blue gate at the Penistone Road
end. Her mother told me that when Debra had given her an account of
what had happened, she understood that this had happened at the Liverpool
end. I found Miss Martin to be highly emotional; she was obviously deeply
upset by her experiences that day. She told me in her interview that she
had felt Kevin Williams’ pulse and felt a faint one. I can find no trace of
her ever having said that before.

In fact her two statements of 8 May 1989 and 17 March 1990 are not
contradictory. But the second one explains why the first may not be
reliable. I am satisfied that her statement that Kevin Williams was alive
and said ‘Mom’ to her in the gymnasium cannot be relied upon. It is
contrary to the evidence of PC Bruder and also contrary to the medical
evidence, both of Dr Slater and the pathologist Dr Iain West (who advised
Mrs Williams and said that it was unlikely that with the injuries to his
throat Kevin could have said ‘Mom’).

I am also confident that Miss Martin signed the caution at the beginning of
the second statement.

By contrast I found WPS Appleton a most impressive witness. She told me
that she had been asked by the Coroner to see Miss Martin because he
found her account of Kevin Williams dying in her arms difficult to
reconcile with the other evidence and he wished to make sure that she was
correct about it. She telephoned and made an appointment. She had only
been once to the house - she remembered this as she had difficulty finding
it. She said other officers may have been previously with a view to tracing
the movements of deceased supporters from photographic material; but she
had not done so. (In fact this is correct - there are two statements by Debra
Martin, dated 12 July and 5 September 1989, taken by police officers other
than WPS Appleton, dealing with identification of victims).

So far from being anxious to discredit Miss Martin, she would have liked to
be able to confirm what she said in relation to Kevin, because she realised
that it might be of some comfort to Mrs Williams. The interview was
perfectly amicable though like many people involved with Hillsborough
Miss Martin was upset, particularly when talking about Kevin. WPS
Appleton said she explained the problem about the inconsistency with other
evidence in relation to Kevin. She had not appreciated that the earlier
account of the entry of a crowd at Penistone Road was inconsistent with all
the other evidence, and she did not ask about it. She did not call Miss
Martin a liar and did not bully or browbeat her. Miss Martin dictated the
       fresh statement and she, WPS Appleton, took it down. Miss Martin signed
       the caution at the head of the statement and initialled two corrections in it.

50.    WPS Appleton told me that she was shocked when she heard for the first
       time the allegations made by Miss Martin in the ‘Cook Report’ television
       programme in 1994. I accept the evidence of WPS Appleton and prefer her
       account to that of Miss Martin, or that of Mrs Martin to the extent that she
       supports her daughter.

51.    I deal further with the case of Kevin Williams in Appendix 9 .


Paul Taylor

52.   The third witness who I was told had been pressurised into changing his
      evidence is Paul Taylor. Mr Taylor, a Liverpool supporter, was near the
      centre of the crush in pen 3 of the Leppings Lane terrace. Although badly
      affected by the crush himself he helped or tried to help a number of other
      people who were caught in the pen.

53.   The allegation is that there was an attempt to prevent Mr Taylor from adding
      to his original statement relevant matters concerning the death of Victoria
      Hicks.

54.   I have interviewed Mr Taylor. He made three statements in writing. The
       first is undated, which he told me was made on 4 May 1989 because he had
       been asked by the survivors’ group to record his recollections. The second
       was to West Midlands Police dated 8 May 1989, and the third is dated 23
       September 1997. He also gave oral evidence at the Inquest.

55.   In his first statement (4 May 1989) he described dealing with a girl in pen 3.
      He said

               “I then spotted a girl with her legs trapped and lying over
              backwards so I pulled her out and carried her to one side. I put her
              down and went to give her the kiss o f life and then smelt the odour
              coming from her mouth. I realised then she was dead but I still did
              it out o f instinct. I then pulled her arm out o f her cardigan and
              pulled it over her face and left her, and went to help anyone else I
              could”.

56.   His next statement, of 8 May 1989, is substantially the same, but also
       includes a description of the girl and her clothing. It appears that Mr and
       Mrs Hicks were told of this description and thought it was their daughter
       Victoria. As a result, Mr Taylor told me that he had a telephone call from
       Mr and Mrs Hicks four to six weeks after the disaster, when he described
      how he had found their daughter and what he had done. In his statement of
       23 September 1997 he said
          “I told Mr and Mrs Hicks that when I lay the young boy next to
         Victoria a young police officer wearing gloves came along. He felt
        fo r a pulse in both Victoria and the boy. He told me to leave both
         bodies as they were dead . .. M r and Mrs Hicks were keen that I
         added this information to my earlier statement. I therefore received
         a visit at home from DC McCombie, the West Midlands Police
         Officer assigned to the Hicks ’ case. I explained what I wanted to
         add to my earlier statement. He told me that unless I knew the name
         and number o f the police officer that I would be committing perjury
         if I made another statement. He told me I could go to ja il fo r
         committing perjury. At the time my wife had just had a baby. I was
        frightened by what DC McCombie was saying to me and agreed that
         I would not make another statement. I did not want to put my family
         at risk. I did not refer to any o f this when I gave evidence at the
         Inquest. ”

In fact when he gave evidence at the Inquest he did refer to the incident; but
he did not mention that the person who said Victoria was dead was a
policeman or was wearing gloves. He said (transcript, day 32, p74E):

        A.      “I saw she had bits o f rust in her mouth when I slightly
         opened her mouth and I realised then it was from the pole o ff the
         barrier when it had been thrown over. I had seen all the stuff
         earlier and it must have gone on her and it was around her eyes and
        speckled on her face, and I ju st took a few bits o ff her lips and then
        just tried to blow into her mouth, and then someone said, ‘Leave
        her, she’s dead’. ”

        Q.      “You thought she was dead. She looked dead to you, did she
        not, or did she?”.

        A.     “Her lips were rolled back and her eyes were really wide
        open”.

In cross examination, Mr Fraser who was acting for the Hicks family,
brought out that the girl Mr Taylor was referring to was Victoria Hicks.
But no further question was asked as to who the ‘someone’ was, or how they
knew she was dead. This is hardly surprising. In a letter, dated 13
November 1990, a copy of which was sent to the Coroner, Mr Hicks
records the meeting between himself, his wife and Mr Taylor, and what Mr
Taylor had told him. So far as is material this is as follows:

        ‘He went on to describe how Victoria was pinned by her legs and
        was bent over backwards on the top o f the pile o f bodies and how
        she was removed in a semi-conscious state. He went on to say how
        she was laid on her back on the terraces; he/others removed her
        blue cardigan when he had been told she was beyond help. He
        claimed he did not know how to do mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, he
        was put o ff by the smell o f vomit from her mouth and rust from the
        barrier on her face and the fact “she was only a young school kid”.
        He described how he sat and cuddled her fo r some minutes before
        she was passed on to the pitch - this six minutes could have been
        vital to Victoria’s survival had she received proper attention at that
        time. ’

It is noticeable that in this account there is no reference to a policeman. The
account is also inconsistent with Mr Taylor’s first written statement and
recollections where he says that he thought Victoria was dead, not semi­
conscious, and there is no reference to cuddling her.

In his evidence to me, (transcript page 7, lines 10-26), Mr Taylor said that
Detective Sergeant McCombie

          “asked me if I could describe the police officer, and I said, like, I
        knew he was a young police officer and not an old man. He said,
          “well, did you recognise his badge number or anything like that?” I
        said, “well, I can’t recollect because everything was hectic at the
        time ”. It was just a case o f trying to get on with what you were
        trying to do. He said then, “have you ever heard o f the word
         ‘p erjury ’”. I said, “Well, I think so. I don’t realty understand what
        it means”. He explained if you say something and put it down in the
        statements and then it’s found not to be true you can actually go to
        prison fo r committing perjury. He said, “I ’d have a think about
        this ” and then he went, and I spoke to my wife after he went because
        he said on the lines that you ’re a young family. Our Michael was
        only about 12 weeks old at the time, and he was emphasising about
        perjury and you could actually go to prison. ”

Mr Taylor did not mention that the police officer was wearing gloves when
he took the pulse until he was specifically asked this. I am not so much
concerned with whether Mr Taylor’s recollection about the policeman
wearing gloves is correct, but with whether he was actually threatened in the
way he describes.

I interviewed Detective Sergeant McCombie on 2 December 1997 and he
sent me a further written statement, dated 17 December 1997, elaborating
certain matters. He told me that he had been contacted by the Liverpool
Social Services. Mr Taylor had been in touch with the Hicks family and it
was established that one of the people he had dealt with was Victoria Hicks.
Mr Taylor had told them that while he was giving Victoria Hicks the kiss of
life a policeman said, “Leave her alone, she’s gone”, without feeling her
pulse. This had caused upset to Mr and Mrs Hicks.

DS McCombie went to see Paul Taylor on 31 May 1989. He said that Mr
Taylor was confused, upset and emotional, and said he’d been suffering
from the stress syndrome. He went through Mr Taylor’s original statement
with him and what he had apparently told Mr and Mrs Hicks. He said that
Mr Taylor retracted what he had said to the Hicks family about the
policeman. DS McCombie said that he would try and check his involvement
through the photographic evidence. To this end he filed an ‘Action’ dated 1
June 1989, asking if there was any identification of Mr Taylor in the crowd,
for his involvement to be assessed and whether his continuity to Victoria
Hicks could be established. The ‘Action’ recorded the above account of
what Mr Taylor was supposed to have told Mr and Mrs Hicks, that he had
retracted it and was suffering from the stress syndrome.

West Midlands Police pursued the matter. They found two photographs
which showed Mr Taylor in pen 3, but these did not show him in any
involvement with Victoria Hicks. When I spoke to him DS McCombie
could not recall whether he had visited Mr Taylor again or spoken to him on
the telephone to tell him the result of the further enquiries.

Mr McCombie told me that at no time did he threaten Mr Taylor with any
question of perjury. He did not bully or intimidate him. He was very well
aware of the trauma Mr Taylor had been through. He was anxious that
things should not be said which might upset the Hicks family unless they
were correct. But it did not matter to him whether a South Yorkshire
policeman behaved as Mr Taylor had told Mr Hicks.

After more than eight years it is impossible to be sure precisely what
happened. On balance of probability I would conclude as follows. Mr
Taylor was undoubtedly very upset and emotionally disturbed following
Hillsborough. This is confirmed in his original recollections of the
treatment he received. DS McCombie was anxious that things which might
upset Mr and Mrs Hicks should not be put forward unless it was reasonably
certain that they were correct. To this end I have no doubt that he went
through Mr Taylor’s original statements, and pointed out that there was no
reference to a policeman saying Victoria was dead without taking her pulse,
and pressed him as to whether he was sure of this. He also said that he
would have a check made to see if any photographic evidence could link him
with Victoria. I am satisfied that Mr Taylor said he was not sure, and DS
McCombie took this as a retraction. I am certainly not satisfied that DS
McCombie in any way bullied or intimidated Mr Taylor or threatened him
with a charge of perjury if he insisted on adding to his statement anything
about the matter.

I think the most likely explanation of Mr Taylor’s belief that there was a
reference to perjury is that made by DS McCombie in his statement to me of
17 December 1997. This is that when the police took from Mr Taylor his
statement of 8 May 1989, they may have explained the formal caution at the
top of the statement to him in terms of a prosecution for perjury if the
witness making the statement wilfully says in it which he believes to be false
or does not believe to be true. Alternatively, in going through this statement
with DS McCombie, Mr Taylor may have asked what the caution meant,
and DS McCombie explained it to him in that way.

It should be noted that Mr Taylor’s account of his conversation with the
policeman in pen 3 has varied over the years. In his original very full
recollections and statement, there is no mention of it. His account, as
recorded by Mr Hicks in his letter of 13 November 1990, also makes no
mention of a policeman. The next account, at least as recorded near the
time by DS McCombie, is that the policeman said, “She’s gone”, without
taking Victoria’s pulse. This account however appears to be hearsay on
hearsay. At the inquest he said, ‘Someone said’, “Leave her, she’s dead”
with no mention of a policeman or of a pulse being taken.

In his statement of 23 September 1997 Mr Taylor said the policeman took
Victoria’s pulse. It is not clear whether he means that the policeman was
wearing gloves at that time. In his evidence to me he did not initially
mention him wearing gloves when he took the pulse, but in answer to a
direct question at the end of his interview said that he was.

It is quite plain that despite the situation which he himself was in Mr Taylor
did his best to help other spectators who were trapped and in some cases
dying in pen 3. I intend no criticism of him - very much the reverse. But
in the light of the inconsistent statements he has made over the years I
cannot regard his evidence as reliable. I can see no reason why I should not
accept DS McCombie’s account, supported as it is by the contemporary
documents. No complaint has, so far as I am aware, ever been officially
made about DS McCombie’s conduct to the Police Complaints Authority and
the first time it appears to have been raised is very recently in 1997. In my
view the evidence is wholly insufficient to justify any action being taken
against this officer.

Neither WPS Appleton nor DS McCombie had any reason or motive to try
to bring pressure to bear on Miss Martin or Mr Taylor. The suggestion that
they did so as part of a biased and incomplete investigation and ‘fo r the
purpose o f keeping to a minimum the scrutiny o f South Yorkshire Police’s
reaction to the disaster’ (see para 4 above) is clearly untenable.

Miss Martin’s evidence about the last moments of Kevin Williams has
nothing to do with South Yorkshire Police. West Midlands Police gathered
and presented to Lord Taylor and the Coroner extensive evidence critical of
South Yorkshire Police. Even if DS McCombie had done what is alleged,
which he did not, it is difficult to see how omitting to mention questionable
conduct (taking a pulse with gloves on) by one police officer in the terrible
circumstances of the epicentre of the disaster could amount to an attempt by
its investigators to minimise the faults in the South Yorkshire Police reaction
to it. Nor is there any indication here of an incomplete investigation. On
the contrary, when the point about the policeman saying Victoria Hicks was
dead was raised DS McCombie very properly looked into it.
Collection of evidence from South Yorkshire Police Officers


73.   In his written submissions to me Professor Scraton stated that there was a
      ‘range of claims that witnesses were subjected to pressure in giving their
      statements’. When he came to make oral submissions to me I asked him to
      tell me what these claims were. In addition to the three cases which I have
      dealt with in the first part of this chapter he invited me to consider the
      evidence of Mr David Frost, whom he brought to see me.


David Frost

74.   Mr Frost was a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police on duty at
      Hillsborough. He was in Serial 21, which was at the Penistone Road End.
      He assisted in arresting a drunken fan and taking him to the charge room.
      He returned to the Penistone Road End. At 2.55 his serial was called inside
      the ground and sent to the Leppings Lane Terraces where he assisted with
      the rescue operation. Like other officers Mr Frost was asked to write out
      his recollections. He did so in his own handwriting and this appears to have
      been typed up into the form of a statement dated 9 May 1989. It was
      submitted to the South Yorkshire Police solicitors, as a result of which a
      number of deletions and some alterations were made. (Appendix 6 is the
      amended version, showing the alterations).

75.   I can see nothing to take exception to in these amendments save possibly in
      three instances. The reference in the third page to the radio being garbled
      and frantic might be considered both factual and material, though other
      officers had also spoken of the difficulties with the radio. On the fifth page
      the word ‘bottleneck’ possibly amplified the sentence that follows. A
      reference on this page to the late arrival of certain officers to organise the
      rescue might be regarded as factual, though the language is not appropriate.
      But none of the deletions or alterations in my view alter the substance of the
      statement.

76.   Mr Frost was asked to sign the amended statement. He told me he refused
      to do so. He said that other officers also refused to sign their amended
      statements, though he was unable to name any. He said he would let me
      know their names, but he has not done so.      He also told me that others
      were ‘asked/impelled to sign things that they didn’t want to that had been
      changed’. I asked him if he had witnessed any one being impelled to sign.
      He said that he personally had not, but he knew officers who had. Again I
      have not been supplied with their names. He accepted that his original
      statement was not in a suitable form to be a witness statement. He said that
       he himself was not put under any pressure to sign, he was left alone. He
       told me:

                ‘This was an attempt by senior management to sanitise and protect
               themselves; and any honour that the South Yorkshire Police, which I
               thought at the time was considerable, disappeared fo r me.

               That is why I left the force. I was medically pensioned off. I
               couldn’t wear a uniform after this sort o f thing took place’
               (transcript page 14, lines 13-19).

77.    He suggested to me that the reason why officers were asked to submit
       statements on plain paper as opposed to writing up their notebooks or
       making statements on Criminal Justice Act forms was so that they could be
       doctored.

78.    On the strength of this evidence and that which I have dealt with in part 1 of
       this Chapter, Professor Scraton submitted to me that officers’ statements had
       been taken in a manner which was

               “highly irregular and leaves itself open to accusations o f widespread
              and institutional malpractice; it does smack o f ‘getting our stories
              right before they go to the investigation force’ and pressure, no
              pressure, but people are expected to make changes in their statements
              to their recollections”.


Collection o f police evidence

79.    I have investigated the facts surrounding the obtaining of statements from
       South Yorkshire Police officers. At a meeting of senior officers including
       the Chief Constable at South Yorkshire Police HQ on the 17 April 1989 it
       was decided that the officers principally involved should set down their
       recollections of events in writing. On the 25 April Assistant Chief
       Constable Mervyn Jones, who was in charge of the Inquiry on behalf of
       West Midlands Police and the Taylor Inquiry was told that the South
       Yorkshire Police were obtaining ‘self-serving’ (ie self-written) statements by
       police officers down to Inspector level, and also from all officers at
       Leppings Lane End of the ground.

80.    At a meeting on the morning of 26 April 1989 Chief Superintendent Wain
        told a group of South Yorkshire Police officers who were concerned with the
        inquiry that it was necessary to obtain self-written statements from the
        relevant officers. These would be on plain paper and not taken under
        Criminal Justice Act rules. It was said that “our job is merely to collate
        what evidence South Yorkshire Police officers can provide to their Chief
        Constable in order that we can present a suitable case, on behalf o f the
       force, to subsequent inquiries”. An aide memoire produced by Chief
       Superintendent Wain setting out the matters to be dealt with appears to have
       been distributed. These included the time of coming on duty, to whom the
       officer was responsible, and where they were deployed and what they said
       and did. It appears to call for a factual account.

81.   At 2pm that day there was a conference between senior South Yorkshire
      Police, the solicitors acting for the South Yorkshire Police, Messrs
      Hammond Suddards, and leading and junior counsel. A note of the meeting
      made by the solicitors records that in the course of it Mr Woodward QC
      advised that the operation undertaken by South Yorkshire Police should be
      regarded as an evidence gathering operation for the information of the legal
      advisers. He said that any statements taken for this purpose would be
      privileged, and that writs were expected. He suggested that some officers
      might “want to put all their thoughts and expressions of that day down on
      paper, as a sort of catharsis”. The process was a confidential one and the
      legal advisers would choose what they wanted to leave in or leave out.

82.   In a letter dated 7 May 1989 ACC Jones told the Chief Constable of South
       Yorkshire that he had been asked by Counsel for Lord Taylor’s inquiry to
       request statements from a selected number of officers of their recollections
       of the day. This was in addition to the statements of senior officers which
       had already been sought. In a telephone conversation referred to in an
       attendance note dated the 9 May this request was discussed between Mr
       Metcalf, a partner of Hammond Suddards and Chief Superintendent Denton
       of the South Yorkshire Police. Statements from some 120 officers were
       being sought by the West Midlands Police; of these about 100 had already
       written their accounts. It was agreed that many of these might be suitable to
       be handed over as they were, but some might include comment and
       speculation and might have to be redone. The solicitors were to consider
       them. Mr Denton sent a number of statements under cover of a letter of the
       same date. He said “no doubt you will advise me on the propriety of
       supplying these documents to the West Midlands Police.”

83.   Over the next 5 weeks in excess of 400 statements written by South
      Yorkshire officers were submitted to the solicitors. Of these, 253 attracted
      no comment at all. In 60 cases the comment was confined to pointing out
      some minor error or ambiguity.

84.    As the work of supplying material to the West Midlands inquiry continued,
       South Yorkshire Police themselves suggested alterations to some officers’
       statements, adopting the same basis for amendments as the solicitors had
       recommended to statements that had been sent to them previously.


Police statements amended pursuant to recommendations by solicitors

85.   At that time no official guidance appears to have been given by the Law
      Society or the Bar Council as to the preparation of witness statements to be
disclosed to other parties. Guidance has subsequently been given by the Bar
Council in 1997. In his submission to me Mr Metcalf summarised what he
considered were the appropriate principles to be applied. I accept these,
though I have made some alteration to para. 4 which I have underlined:

       (1)    The statement must accurately reflect a witness’s evidence, but
               exclude inadmissible hearsay, comment and argument.

       (2)    It should be succinct, exclude irrelevant material and
               unnecessary elaboration, and should not serve as a
               commentary on documents.

       (3)    It should contain all witness’s evidence in chief; it should not
               be edited so that it no longer fairly reflects the answers which
               the witness would be expected to give in response to viva voce
               examination in chief.

       (4)    Great care should be exercised in the exclusion o f material that
              is unhelpful to the parties case. No material should be
              excluded which might render a statement anything other than
              the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, e.g. by
              leaving in fact A while excluding fact B in such a way as to
              render untrue or misleading anything which remains in the
              statement. The overriding duty is to assist the Court or
              Tribunal in the administration o f justice.

       (5)    The exclusion o f unfavourable material, other than in such
              manner as to amount to a failure to comply with guideline 4, is
              a matter o f judgement.

       (6)    It is permitted and appropriate to draw a witness ’ attention
               that what he proposes to say appears in conflict with other
               evidence, or may be found by a court difficult to accept, but if
               the witness maintains the evidence, then the guidelines 1-5
               above apply.

I have examined approximately 100 amended statements where on the face
of the comments by the solicitors something of substance might have been
referred to. In 74 instances the amendment is of no consequence. Of these,
there are some cases in which the solicitor’s recommendation was not
adopted and the suggested amendments were not made. In others, adverse
comment on fans’ behaviour, intemperate language, personal feelings or
hearsay have been removed or the statement has been made clearer or
ambiguities or inconsistencies put right.

In the remaining 26 cases comment and opinion are excluded. These are
generally criticisms of the police operation and in the main fall under three
heads: complaints about lack of radios, lack of information on the radio and
difficulty of communication by radio due to interference; apparent shortage
of police on foot at Leppings Lane; and lack of organisation by senior
officers in the rescue operation. Not infrequently the factual matters
underlying the criticism are apparent from the rest of the statement. In a
factual statement these comments and opinions would not normally occur
and the solicitors cannot be criticised for recommending their removal.

Of the 26 amended statements which I mentioned in the last paragraph there
is a total of ten on which I should make specific comment, and I do that in
Appendix 7. In five of these cases - Creaser, Crawford, Eustis, Powell and
Huckstepp - factual matters were excluded which arguably should not have
been. (The amendments which they appear to have suggested to PC
Huckstepp’s statement were not in fact made, apparently due to administrative
error - see Appendix 7).

In four others - Brookes, Ramsden, Walpole and White - although what is
excluded is comment, factual matters are implicit in the comment and it might
have been better to elucidate these rather than simply exclude the comment. I
also comment in Appendix 7 on the alterations to a statement by PC Groome
which, other than the statement by PC Frost, has more changes made to it than
any other I have examined.

The solicitors were under severe time constraints in giving their advice since
the statements were urgently required for Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. In no case
does what is excluded render the rest of the statement misleading. In those
cases where factual matter has been excluded I accept that the solicitors had to
exercise judgement as to whether material unhelpful to the police case should
be excluded. I have indicated in Appendix 7 that at least in some cases it
would have been better if it had not been. But I would categorise this at worst
as an error of judgement. I certainly do not think the solicitors were guilty of
anything that could be regarded as unprofessional conduct.

A number of officers had expressed concern over the alterations to Mr
Denton and those officers under him who were responsible for obtaining
amended statements.. With the approval of the solicitors an explanation was
circulated on about 23 May 1989. I exhibit a copy at Appendix 8, p i.
The recipients are identified in the document and I have no doubt that the
explanation was passed on to those who had expressed concern.

It appears that in some cases, because of the short timescale before the Lord
Taylor’s Inquiry got underway (it started on 15 May 1989), some
statements were sent to the inquiry team and circulated by them to
representatives of the parties before they had been vetted by the solicitors.
As a result one police officer was cross-examined at the Inquiry (day 16) on
the basis of a criticism contained in his original statement but later excluded.
This was a matter of concern to ACC Jones, because it was contrary to an
arrangement which he had made with the Chief Constable of South
       Yorkshire. The matter was taken up with the Treasury Solicitor, who
       replied on the 7 June. A copy of this reply is in Appendix 8, p2.

93.    This letter shows that Counsel to the Inquiry and the Treasury Solicitor were
       well aware that self-written statements were being vetted by Hammond
       Suddards. Mr Justice Collins, who was Leading Counsel to the Inquiry,
       and Mr Whitehurst, Assistant Treasury Solicitor and part of the Inquiry
       Team have both confirmed to me that that was the case. So also has Chief
       Superintendent Foster who was in charge of the investigation by the West
       Midlands Police.


Privilege

94.    I do not think statements which came into existence prior to 26 April 1989
       were subject to legal professional privilege. There is no evidence that they
       were obtained so that the legal advisers to the Chief Constable could advise,
       as opposed to the officers being asked to record their recollections while
       matters were fresh in their minds. Those that came into existence following
       the conference with Counsel may well have been privileged, though there
       may have been difficult questions relating to the dominant purpose for which
       the statement was obtained.

95.    In the event I do not think the point is of any consequence since the question
       of legal professional privilege only relates to the non-production of
       documents in litigation. Nor do I think there was anything improper about
       asking officers to record their recollections in their own words on ordinary
       paper, rather than in their notebooks. The occasion was wholly exceptional
       and a notebook is not a convenient form in which to write what, in many
       cases, was likely to be a very long statement.


Timescale

96.    While it might have been preferable for statements to be taken in the usual
       Criminal Justice Act form, I doubt whether this was practicable having
       regard to the time constraints. Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was working to a very
       tight timescale in order to allow the Home Secretary to have a report by the
       beginning of the next football season in August.

97.    It would probably have been difficult for South Yorkshire Police to take
       these statements from their colleagues in the time available. It is quite clear
       to me that the West Midlands Police could not possibly have taken such
       statements in time for them to be available for consideration by the Inquiry
       team. The Inquiry team, including Lord Taylor, were clearly well aware
       that original self-written statements were being vetted by the solicitors and in
       some cases altered. I have no doubt that they either knew or suspected that
       criticisms of the police operation or conduct of senior police officers were
       being excluded on the basis that such criticisms were comment or opinion.

98.    These alterations were made on the advice of the solicitors, though in many
       cases they simply advised that the passage in question be reviewed. This
       process of submitting statements to solicitors before they were sent to the
       Inquiry did not materially differ from that adopted by the Club and the
       Ambulance Service. In their cases the respective solicitors took the
       statements and forwarded them to the Inquiry team.


Statements which were amended without reference to the solicitors

99.    There were also a large number of statements which South Yorkshire Police
       obtained from their officers which they did not send to their solicitors for
       comment. The reason for this seems to have been that they were not
       available until the latter part of May 1989. The force examined these
       statements but suggested no alteration to most of them.

100.   I have examined 51 of these statements where some alteration was made. In
       many of these the alteration is quite trivial and of no consequence whatever.
       In others, comments have been excluded, for the most part of the same kind
       as those I have referred to in paragraph 87, that is to say criticism of the
       shortage of radios and information, and of the lack of organisation of the
       rescue. In my opinion these comments were properly excluded and I have
       not found any instance in which the factual content of the statement has been
       altered so as to render it misleading.


Cover-up?

101. Having regard to Mr Duckenfield’s disgraceful lie about Gate C being
     forced open by fans and the fact that some shocking stories about the
     behaviour of fans, said to have emanated from some police officers, were
     reported in the press (see Lord Taylor’s Interim Report, para 257), I have
     considered this matter critically because of the allegation of a cover-up. I
     have no doubt that in the days following Hillsborough the South Yorkshire
     police perceived themselves to be on the defensive. This was also the
     perception of their legal advisers. There was an understandable desire not to
     give anything away.

102. For the most part the suggestions for amendments by the solicitors are not
      open to criticism. In a few cases however I think it would have been
      preferable if the deletion had not been made. The amendments which South
      Yorkshire Police suggested themselves, without reference to the solicitors,
      are in my view unexceptionable. What was happening was well known to
      Lord Taylor’s the Inquiry team, though not the detail of the amendments,
       except in those cases where the unamended version was forwarded due to
       pressure of time.

103.   I have made enquiries of a number of the officers whose statements I refer to
       in Appendix 7 to see if they were subjected to improper pressure as Mr
       Frost suggested. One, PC Groome, told me that he had been told that unless
       the alterations were made his evidence would not be forwarded to the
       Inquiry, and so, reluctantly, he agreed. He might perhaps have sent his
       unamended version in to the Inquiry of his own accord if he had really
       wanted to, but in any event the alterations to his statement - though
       extensive - are in my view unexceptionable (see Appendix 7). Otherwise
       any reluctance the officers may have had seems to have been allayed by the
       explanation to which I referred earlier (see Appendix 8).       I have not come
       across any statement that is not signed by the officer, and that includes Mr
       Frost’s.

104.   In fact I think the whole effort may have been counter productive. Had
       more attention been paid to the comments and opinions of the junior ranks,
       the Force might have avoided the stinging rebuke which they received from
       Lord Taylor. At para 285 of his Interim Report he said:

                ‘It is a matter o f regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions,
               the South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in
               any respect at fault in what occurred. Mr Duckenfield, under
              pressure o f cross-examination, apologised fo r blaming the Liverpool
              fans fo r causing the deaths. But, that apart, the police case was to
               blame the fans fo r being late and drunk, and to blame the Club fo r
              failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal crush was
               not caused by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a
               being defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause fo r anxiety
               as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would have been more
               seemly and encouraging fo r the future if responsibility had been
              faced. ’

105.   I am quite satisfied that Lord Taylor’s Inquiry Team were in no way
       inhibited or impeded by the exclusion of material from the original
       statements. They were well aware of the criticisms that were being raised
       by junior officers. All the questions on which comments were made and
       excluded were matters which Lord Taylor investigated and made findings -
       on the basis of the facts - which were adverse to the police. This applies to
       all the cases I have commented on in Appendix 7. Mr Justice Collins has
       confirmed to me that this was so.

106.   I have not found anything in the material excluded in this way that might
       have influenced the jury at the Inquests to bring in a different verdict. The
       legal representatives of the families at the Inquest were well aware of Lord
       Taylor’s conclusions on the points at issue. Equally I am quite satisfied that
       the exclusion of these comments could not possibly have affected the
       Director of Public Prosecutions. As I have already stated, Counsel advising
       the Director proceeded on the basis that the evidence before them supported
       Lord Taylor’s findings.

107.   In my opinion the allegation made by Professor Scraton of irregularity and
       malpractice (paragraph 78 above) is not substantiated.
CHAPTER 5


Other matters of concern to the victims’ families


1.    As an important part of my scrutiny I visited Liverpool in early October to
      meet the families of victims of the disaster and listen to the matters which
      concerned them. I held an open session to which I invited all the families of
      those who died, and I was pleased that many were able to attend. I then held
      sixteen private meetings with families who had asked for them. I had two
      other meetings with family members later, at the scrutiny office in London.

2.    Many of the relatives of victims whom I saw during these meetings raised
      questions to do with the video and medical evidence about the disaster, which
      I have discussed in Chapters 2 and 3 of this report. But both in my
      discussions with them and in writing victims’ families have made other
      allegations as well. To summarise them briefly, they are

              there were inconsistencies between the way in which the police
              summarised the facts about each individual death at the ‘mini­
              inquests’ and evidence about what actually happened to that person;

              the Coroner was biased;

              Liverpool supporters were treated unfavourably and in a hostile
              manner when they gave evidence at the inquest;

              South Yorkshire Police have failed to give families documents to
              which they are entitled;

              victims were confirmed as being dead on the basis of cursory
              examination;

              the West Midlands Police investigation team was biased in favour of
              South Yorkshire Police;

              South Yorkshire Police have never apologised for the disaster.

3.     I consider these points in this Chapter.


Inconsistencies in the evidence about individual deaths

4.    One of the most common complaints which families had was that they had
      not been able to find out precisely when and where their relations died, in
      some cases because the evidence was very sparse and in others because it
was said that the evidence was conflicting, or did not support the summary
given about their relative at the mini-inquest. I fully understand the families’
anxiety to know all the facts as far as possible. But it is only right to point
out that the West Midlands Police were faced with a massive task in
collecting the evidence, seeking to identify individual deceased from
photographic evidence, and reconciling, in so far as it was possible, the
inevitable conflicts of evidence.

Inspector Layton of the West Midlands Police described how they had set
about this task on the first day of the mini-inquest (18th April 1990,
transcript pages 37-47). He said

         “Specifically with regard to the deceased, we have attempted to
        identify each person’s position at the ground, where possible, before
        and after their deaths. The search fo r such information has been
        exhaustive, but the degree o f success in achieving an accurate picture
       fo r each individual does vary greatly. In some cases the information
        obtained has been very limited and in some instances it has not been
       possible to confirm with any degree o f certainty some o f the
        identifications made. ”

Mr Layton then described the photographic source material. There were 71
hours of video, from police, club and BBC. There were about 600 colour
still photographs taken by the police for normal intelligence gathering
purposes and a further 1800 photographs from Press, freelance agencies and
the public. Much of the photographic material is timed (i.e. the time at
which it was taken, down to the minute or the second, appears on the print).

West Midlands Police investigators showed this material to over 300 South
Yorkshire Police Officers, 10 officers from other forces, 21 members of the
South Yorkshire Fire Service, 19 members of SYMAS, and 169 spectators
and other civilian witnesses who said that they had had some involvement
with people who had died.

Initially, the police had been reluctant to involve the families in the
identification process, because of the distressing nature of the photographic
material. However, following consultation with the Social Services and the
families themselves the policy was changed. Eighty families wished to see
the evidence and take part in the identification, and were able to do so.

Altogether West Midlands Police interviewed over 600 people, with each
interview lasting a minimum of 2 hours.

The possible misidentification of pictures and other evidence about those
who died was a problem. Inspector Layton told the Inquest:

       “I should point out that on a small number o f occasions it has
       subsequently transpired that both police and civilian witnesses have
       made mistaken identifications. Although I would again stress they
       were made at the time with the genuine belief that they were correct. ”

West Midlands Police created a file, known as a ‘body file’, for each of the
people who died. These files contain the following material:

       i)      a single-page summary report, prepared by the West Midlands
       Police, setting out the name of the person, where he or she died, and
       other formal details;

       ii)    an analysis or summary of the witnesses, tracing the
       movements of the deceased from the time they left home on the day
       of the match right up to the autopsy, also containing details of visual
       evidence and the blood ethanol analysis;

       iii)   statements of witnesses, referred to in the analysis. In many
       cases these statements dealt with other matters and contain only a
       short passage about the person who is the subject of the file;

       iv)    visual evidence (photographs and video stills) taken from the
       sources I have mentioned, together with plans identifying so far as
       possible where the deceased was last seen alive, and where he or she
       was found apparently dead, together with supporting photographs;
       and

       v)    A continuity chart, showing what happened to the individual
       hour by hour during the day.

A police officer presented a summary of the evidence, based on this
material, at the mini-inquest on each of the victims. The summaries would
often include excerpts from the witnesses statements. The summaries were
prepared in advance and sent to the solicitors for the families so that they
could be checked for errors and corrected if need be, though the supporting
material was not then made available.

The Coroner made it clear that if from time to time it became apparent that
corrections had to be made, they would be made at a later stage. This
happened in some instances.

Before the main Inquest began the Coroner told the lawyers for the families
that he would consider questions they had about the facts which had come
out at the mini-inquests sympathetically, so that the Inquest dealt properly
with inaccuracies or omissions in the evidence about what had happened to
individuals. He invited the solicitors for the Hillsborough Steering Group,
who represented the families, to submit the questions they wished to raise
(transcript of business meeting, 30 October 1990, p. 13).
15.    There followed considerable correspondence between the solicitors and the
       Coroner, lasting from November 1990 until the main inquest began in
       March 1991. Some of the questions the families’ lawyers had about the
       precise facts of particular deaths were dealt with in correspondence or not
       persisted in. In other cases the Coroner agreed to call witnesses requested
       by the families to deal further with the questions where and when their
       relatives had died. Paul Taylor - whom I mentioned in the last Chapter - is
       an example of such a witness. He gave evidence about Victoria Hicks.

16.   In other cases it would seem the Coroner considered that the problem could
      be taken no further. It seems to me that he did his best to resolve the
      queries that were being put to him.

17.   The Divisional Court upheld the Coroner’s decision to conduct the mini­
      inquests in the way he did. Equally in my opinion, even if there were
      inconsistencies in the evidence and discrepancies between the summary and
      the supporting evidence, that cannot affect the Coroner’s decision about the
      3.15 cut-off time or the verdicts of accidental deaths.

18.    I did my best to point this out to those families who raised these points when
       I met them. But I appreciated that this was a matter of great concern to
       them and said I would do my best to resolve the inconsistencies or
       discrepancies which they pointed out to me (although I very much doubt
       whether this was within my terms of reference).

19.   Some of the relatives I spoke to did tell me the nature of the inconsistency or
      discrepancy which concerned them, for example in the cases of Kevin
      Williams and Philip Hammond. Other people told me that they could not
      specify the problem at that stage, either because they had not received copies
      of the body file from the police or had not had it long enough to deal with
      the points. I urged those families who had not yet sought copies of the body
      files to do so without delay.

20.    I am afraid that I have not been able to resolve relatives’ concerns about
       conflicts of evidence in every case. It seems to me that that is inevitable
       given the nature of the problem. What is clear, however, is that no
       further inquiry involving examination of the witnesses could be of any help.
       No one is likely now to have a recollection beyond what was written in their
       statements at the time and if they did, it would be likely to be suspect after
       eight and a half years.

21.   However I deal as best I can with individual cases in Appendix 9.


Bias and conflict of interest on the part of the Coroner

22.   The Divisional Court was specifically asked to consider whether the Coroner
      was biased or had a conflict of interest. It found that he did not and I have
       seen no reason to disagree with that assessment. A criticism that the
       Coroner visited the ground with the jury is not correct.


Hostile treatment of Liverpool supporters at the Inquests.

23.    The allegation has been made to me during my scrutiny - but without any
       particular examples being cited - that Liverpool supporters who gave
       evidence at the Inquest were given a difficult time. I have read most of the
       supporters’ evidence.

24.    I can find only two possible examples of cross-examination which might fall
       into this category. In one case Counsel tended to ask repetitive questions
       and was stopped by the Coroner. The second case is of a witness who said
       that he and two friends had been drinking and pushed their way from the
       back of pen 3 (in his statement he used the word ‘forced’) to the front and
       through the gate onto the pitch, ignoring appeals not to push and regardless
       of the plight of others. In these circumstances it is hardly surprising that the
       cross-examination was less than sympathetic.

25.    In view of the criticisms that have been made of the Coroner on this score I
       should record that on 30 April 1991 Miss Steele, the solicitor acting for the
       Hillsborough Steering Committee wrote to him thanking him on behalf of
       the Committee and their clients for his kindness. She said “the care and
       sensitivity and in particular the arrangements made for the families at the
       individual Inquests was very much appreciated both by them and us”. She
       also said that the families’ lawyers concerned appreciated his unfailing
       courtesy, consideration and ready response to problems that they raised.


Police failure to let families have documents

26.   One of the complaints which families have made particularly strongly to me
      is that they have been unable to obtain copies of relevant documents from
      the South Yorkshire Police. It may help if I set out the background to this
      complaint.

27.   South Yorkshire Police have an extensive archive of material about the
      Hillsborough disaster. There is a substantial storeroom full of investigation
      files, statements, photographs, videotapes and computer records. They have
      given me and my team unrestricted access to their archive for work on this
      scrutiny. It contains two types of material. First, there are th e ‘body files’, of
      which there is one for each individual who died in the disaster.

28.   I have described the content of these files in paragraph 12 of this Chapter. The
       police keep these on behalf of the (current) Coroner for South Yorkshire, and
       access to them is at his discretion. There is a right of access to some of the
material in them under Rule 57 of the Coroners Rules 1984, which so far as
relevant reads

        ‘A coroner shall, on application and on payment o f the prescribed fee
       (if any), supply to any person who, in the opinion o f the coroner, is a
       properly interested person a copy o f any report o f a post-mortem
       examination... or special examination, or o f any notes o f evidence, or
       o f any documentput in evidence at an inquest ...

       A coroner may, on application and without charge, permit any...
       properly interested person to inspect such report, notes o f evidence, or
       document’.

The approach which the South Yorkshire Police have told me they adopt, with
the consent of the Coroner, to requests from relatives for material from the
body files is to send copies of all of it to them, uncut and without charge, so
long as it is not material which they have sent to the relative before.

The rest of the material in the archive is not covered by the Coroners Rules
and access to it is at the discretion of the police. It includes all the statements
taken both during the investigation by West Midlands Police and by South
Yorkshire Police themselves (including, in the case of amended ‘recollections’
and statements by South Yorkshire police officers, both the original and final
versions) and other material such as videotapes, photographs, and the West
Midlands Police report of their investigation to the Director of Public
Prosecutions. Some of the statements and photographs, and stills from the
videotapes, are included in the body files.

South Yorkshire Police told me that they send relatives copies (free of charge)
of material falling into this second group which they say they would like to
see. There are however some exceptions to this. The most important ones are
that they do not send out copies of statements which are not contained in, or
referred to, in the body files unless the person who made the statement agrees
that it should be released (or has since died) and that they will only send
photographs or video stills showing a dead body to someone who is a relation
of that person. This means that they will sometimes trim the print which they
send to relatives of a photograph which contains a picture of more than one
dead body. I think this is a reasonable step for them to take, since sending out
a picture uncut would mean that a picture of other bodies shown on it would
go to somebody who was not a relative of those people.

Some of the families I met said that they could not be sure that the police had
supplied them with all the information from the body files. Others assumed
that they had not done so. I was anxious from the outset of my scrutiny that
families who wished to do so should be able to see the material in these files,
and from what I have seen of the way the South Yorkshire Police have dealt
with families’ requests I would surprised if these criticisms were true.
33.   Nevertheless I invited those families who said they had not received all the
      material in their relative’s file, or that they might not have had it all, to let me
      know what they had so that I could check and see what was missing. Two
      families did so. I checked the relevant files and I am satisfied that nothing of
      significance was omitted.

34.   Quite apart from any of this, witness statements by people who gave evidence
      at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry were made available at that time to the legal
      representatives of the parties, including the families. Transcripts of the
      evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the main Inquest are in the public
      domain and have been available to the families at all material times.


Confirmation of Death

35.   Some of the families whom I met said that they did not think that their
      relatives were necessarily dead when they were examined at the ground by
      doctors who confirmed to the police that they were so. They said that the
      doctors’ examination was cursory and that mistakes might have been made.

36.   This very serious criticism was in particular made of a Dr Bull, who
      examined 20 people and stated that they were dead between approximately
      3.50 p.m. and 4.20 p.m. (Dr Bull’s statement gives a time of 4.15, but this
      seems to be wrong because the timing of his last examination was 4.20
      according to the police officer who had been placed in charge of the body
      concerned). Relatives have told me that proper examinations could not
      have been conducted in this time.

37.   No expert medical evidence has been tendered to me to support this
      criticism. Nevertheless I thought it right to interview Dr Bull. He told me
      that the times in his statement were an approximation based upon what the
      police told him. He did not look at his watch.

38.   He and a Dr Redgrave divided a certain group of casualties between them.
      These were all people whom the police, or ambulance staff, or other doctors
      had thought were dead and who had been placed in rows in a particular part
      of the Hillsborough gymnasium, which was being used as a casualty clearing
      station and temporary mortuary. Dr Bull said he looked for a pulse in the
      neck of each person and listened for heart and breath sounds. He had not
      brought a stethoscope with him, but he shared Dr Redgrave’s. This was
      possible because they were working in close proximity to each other.

39.   He also examined each person’s pupils for reaction to light. He did not have
      a torch, which he would normally use but in each case he closed the
      person’s eyelids and then opened them and looked for a reaction. The
      gymnasium had bright overhead lighting and he considered this was as good
      as looking with a torch. He felt under no pressure of time. The police had
      asked him to check and make sure of death. He said he had no doubt that he
      had done so correctly. In some cases when using the stethoscope to listen to
      heart sounds he could hear footsteps reverberating through the body, so he
      had to make sure, after these ceased, that there was no heart sound.

40.   Dr Bull did not complete any paperwork as he would have done in a normal
      case of certification of death, but told the police officer who was allocated
      responsibility for each body that the person was dead. At that stage the
      identity of most of the bodies was unknown. His recollection was that he
      looked at one line of bodies, that Dr Redgrave examined the adjacent line,
      and that having done so he checked Dr Redgrave’s cases and vice-versa. He
      did not leave the ground until 5.45 p.m.

41.   Dr Bull was at the match as a spectator and had gone onto the pitch to help
      when he saw that things were going wrong. He had administered first aid to
      a number of people before being asked by the police to go into the
      gymnasium. He had no connections with the police or with Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club as some relatives have claimed to me.

42.   I have discussed what he told me with a senior Accident and Emergency
      consultant. I did not do this because I was in any doubt about what Dr Bull
      had said but because of the very grave nature of what was being alleged
      about him and the other doctors who unexpectedly had to carry out this
      difficult and demanding task on the day. The consultant confirmed to me
      that the procedures Dr Bull adopted were proper and reliable and I see no
      reason whatever to doubt that this was so.


West Midlands Police biased in favour of the South Yorkshire Police

43.   Chapter 4 deals with allegations that the West Midlands Police tried to
      distort evidence or bully witnesses in favour of the South Yorkshire Police.
      Even if there were signs, which in my view there are not, that individual
      officers exerted undue pressure in those cases, it does not support the
      contention that the West Midlands Police as a whole favoured the South
      Yorkshire Police.

44.   The other suggestions that were made to me on this score were wholly
      unsubstantiated. I see no reason to differ from Lord Taylor’s conclusion as
      to the impartiality of the West Midlands investigation which I cited in
      Chapter 4.


No apology by the police

45.   One frequent complaint made to me by victims’ families was that the police
      had never apologised for the part they played in the disaster. I have
      discussed this with Mr Wells, who took office as Chief Constable in mid-
      1990. He drew my attention to a press release by his predecessor, Mr Peter
Wright, issued on 4 August 1989, the publication day of Lord Taylor’s
interim report. Mr Wright said

       7 accept the findings and the conclusions o f the Inquiry in so fa r as
       they relate to South Yorkshire Police. The fact that we are held to
       have contributed to the terrible tragedy o f Hillsborough is a matter o f
       profound sadness to all members o f the Force, and both personally
       and on their behalf I once again extend my heartfelt regret to those
       who have lost loved ones or suffered injury'.

Mr Wells said that he often uses the occasion of public speeches to express
his and the Force’s regret. He gave me some examples (and there are many
others).

In a press release on 28 March 1991, the day of the Inquest verdict, he said:

         “I f there seems to be any sense o f relief in South Yorkshire Police
        today it should not be mistaken fo r celebration. I have the
       profoundest sense o f sorrow fo r the 95 deaths that occurred, any
        sense o f relief that we do feel is diminished by the desolation o f the
       families who lost loved ones. We have come to the end o f another
       phase o f the long, slow process o f understanding and healing. ”

In a television interview on the same day there was the following exchange:

       Trevor Hicks: “I was gladdened when I heard his announcement
       earlier where fo r the first time publicly I have heard the Chief
       Constable publicly apologising and expressing regret to the families
           »




The interviewer asked Mr Wells if it was true that he had said on behalf of
the Force that they were sorry. Mr Wells said:

       “I would not have said it if it wasn’t true ... as I say, as a parent
       with all the feelings that I can muster, to Mr Hicks and everybody
       else who has lost loved ones here, we are, not just the Chief
       Constable but all o f the officers involved are terribly sorry. It is an
       inexpressible grief to have to bear and I know words don't count fo r
       much but they are sincerely meant. ”

In the Yorkshire Post for 29 March 1991 Mr Wells is recorded as saying:

       “I can’t bring back their children. I wish to God I could. I can only
       say sorry so much, but by God, we are sorry. "

In a letter to the Yorkshire Post dated 25 January 1992 he wrote:
        ‘The truth is that Lord Justice Taylor described the failure o f the
       police to order the closure o f the tunnel leading to the terracing as a
        “blunder o f the first magnitude”. South Yorkshire Police has
       consistently and unequivocally accepted the truth o f this finding. I
       repeat it now. How can anyone fairly describe this acceptance o f
       responsibility as evasion?

       Not only the police were to blame. You will recall that Lord Justice
       Taylor concluded that there were many factors that contributed to the
       disaster - the layout o f the crush barriers, the dangerous congestion
       arising at the turnstiles, inadequate signing - were some . . . . I repeat
       that blame apportioned by Lord Justice Taylor has been accepted by
       South Yorkshire Police. '

Following the broadcast of the Granada Television film ‘Hillsborough’ Mr
Wells issued a press release whose last paragraph reads:

        “I am on public record as saying sorry to the bereaved families fo r
       the police’s part in the tragedy and I repeat that every time I have the
       opportunity. We were found wanting and have faced up to our
       responsibility fo r our role, but we were not the only ones who played
       a part in it and it is time fo r others, including the fans, to do the
       same and fo r the families to try to start building bridges. ”

At my meeting with him Mr Wells made it plain that since Lord Taylor’s
Interim Report he had acknowledged on behalf of the force that there had
been four main errors:

i)     failing to delay the kick-off in the light of the large crowds at
        Leppings Lane;

ii).   not noticing or taking full account of the fact that the central pens
       were full by 2.50 p.m;

iii)   not foreseeing where the supporters would go once Gate C was
       opened and not blocking off the tunnel - this was the critical mistake;
       and

iv)    not distinguishing distress from disorder and consequently not
       reacting sufficiently quickly or effectively to the situation.

But Mr Wells also pointed out that others had been criticised by Lord Taylor
(see Chapter 1, paras 47 and 48) and that the police did not bear the sole
responsibility for the disaster although he accepted that they took the largest
share. This is in accordance with Lord Taylor’s findings and is reflected in
the apportionment of liability reached in the settlement of civil proceedings.
I do not think it is reasonable to assert that the South Yorkshire Police have
never apologised or accepted responsibility for their share of the blame.
CHAPTER 6


Miscellaneous


Television programmes

1.     Not unnaturally the Hillsborough disaster has attracted a lot of media coverage over
      the years. Three television programmes I think are particularly significant, and I
      think it right to offer brief comments on these.

2.    The first is a ‘First Tuesday ’ programme, ‘Disaster at Hillsborough’, broadcast by
      Yorkshire Television in February 1990. It is in my view a fair and balanced
      account, using much original material, including scenes taken from police camera 5
      after 15.02 (being part of the clip shown to the jury as C539). The commentary
      closely corresponds with Lord Taylor’s findings.

3.    The second is an episode of the ‘Cook Report' (Yorkshire Television) shown in June
      1994. This concentrated on the case of Kevin Williams. A number of statements
      made in the course of the programme are in my opinion not substantiated, for
      reasons I set out when discussing the Kevin Williams case earlier. For example -

                Roger Cook ‘Evidence previously disregarded or altered with duress and
                witnesses previously ignored demonstrate that Kevin and others could be
                alive today”.

                Sir Malcolm Thornton MP “The truth seems to have been suppressed -
                policemen and women on the spot were ‘leaned on' by their colleagues to
                change their evidence.”

                Roger Cook “I f evidence that (Kevin) was alive at five to four had been
                allowed to stand, events after 3.15 would have had to be investigated” (by
                the Inquest).


4.   The third is the Granada Television programme ‘Hillsborough' shown on 5
      December 1996. This is a highly emotive and powerful drama based on
      Hillsborough and the Inquest. It portrays most graphically the appalling grief of the
      bereaved and their disillusion with the Inquest. It is not always easy for the viewer
      of this programme to tell what is reconstruction and what is original video footage
      taken on the day.

5.   I do not have much doubt that this programme played a substantial part in the
      decision to set up my scrutiny. It is not for me to comment on the accuracy of the
      impressions which it gives as a whole. But in so far as it suggests that police
       videotapes were suppressed or destroyed, it is not accurate. The programme also
       relies on Mr Houldsworth’s assertions, made for the first time at about this time,
       that he could see from police cameras 5 and 3 as relayed in the Club Control Room
       that pens 3 and 4 were already full before Gate C was opened. For reasons I have
       set out at length, I do not accept this evidence.


Ten unresolved questions?

6.     At the time of the ‘Hillsborough’ television programme in 1996 the programme
       makers, Granada Television, wrote to Mr David Maclean MP, then a Minister at the
       Home Office, with a list of what they said were ten unresolved questions about the
       disaster. Most of these questions were in my view clearly answered by Lord Taylor’s
       Inquiry. Nevertheless I have looked at them and set out the answers in Appendix 10.


The state of the ground

7.    At a late stage of my scrutiny I was invited by the South Yorkshire Police to consider
      the evidence of Mr Noel Bume, BSc(Eng), ACGI, FICE, FI.StructE., FCIOB, FFB,
      ACIACG, FBAE. Mr Bume is a structural engineer who was instructed in July 1989
      to report on and advise the South Yorkshire Police Authority on the safety and
      structural aspects of the Hillsborough ground, in particular with a view to the
      anticipated civil proceedings. He produced a report, dated August 1990, and gave oral
      evidence in the contribution proceedings heard before the Hon Mr Justice Jowitt
      which began on 2 October 1990. His evidence was therefore not available at the time
      of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and he was not called to give evidence at the Inquest.


Mr Burne ’s evidence

8.    In his Report Mr Bume dealt with the following matters:

              (a)      Turnstiles - poor labelling and inadequate number

              (b)      Lack of proper direction signs in the concourse

              (c)      Lack of control system for monitoring numbers in each pen

              (d)      Overall capacity of Leppings Lane Terraces overestimated

              (e)      Incorrect slope of the tunnel

              (f)   Exits from the pens not signed and inadequate for emergency
              evacuation

              (g)    Crush barriers - poorly placed, too low, of inadequate strength and
              insufficient in number
9.     In Mr Bume’s view there were many breaches of the advice and recommendations
        contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide) to such an extent
       that his overall opinion was:

               “As a whole, the West Terrace was unsafe by reason o f neglect to conform to
                the primary recommendations and obligations o f the Green Guide, among
               others. ”

10.    On 5 October 1990 Mr Bume gave evidence before the Hon Mr Justice Jowitt in the
       contribution proceedings. Before his evidence was completed or tested in cross-
       examination, the proceedings were settled. It is reasonable to assume that Mr Bume’s
       opinion was a material factor in persuading the Club and Eastwood and Partners to
       make a substantial contribution to what was then estimated to be the overall cost of
       the claims.

11.    For the most part the matters that Mr Bume criticised were fully considered by
       Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, and Lord Taylor made a number of findings consistent with
       Mr Bume’s criticisms, some of which I have referred to in Chapter 1 (paragraphs 47
       and 48). But there are two matters which Mr Bume pointed to which the police
       suggest were either not considered or not fully considered at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.


Height o f the crush barriers

12.    The first relates to the height of the crush barriers. The recommended height for crush
       barriers in the Green Guide is between 1.02m and 1.12m with a preferred height of
       1.1m. This is measured above the nosing of that part of the step immediately behind
       the barrier. According to Mr Bume, adopting this method of measurement, the .
       effective height of crush barrier 124A (the one which collapsed in pen 3) was between
       .865 - .915m, and more importantly the height of the barrier immediately behind,
       namely 136, was only .745 - .775m; barrier 136A (which was diagonally between
       barrier 124A and the entrance to the tunnel) was .765 - .785m.

13.    Mr Bume identified three disadvantages resulting from too low a crush barrier. First,
       if the barrier is at the level of the upper leg and below the groin it is not anatomically
       in the best position and the person behind it cannot use his arms to push away from
       the barrier. This is not particularly relevant in the circumstances of extreme
       overcrowding. Secondly, the upper part of the body of a person behind the crush
       barrier is not restrained by it, so that the load is transferred from those behind to those
       in front, thereby imposing an excessive load on the next barrier. Finally, there will be
       a downward component in the forces exercised on the barrier in addition to a
       horizontal one, which tends to make it more vulnerable to collapse under conditions of
       extreme pressure.

14.    There is little doubt that the failure of barrier 124A contributed to the substantially
       larger number of deaths in pen 3 and in particular in the area between barrier 124A
       and the perimeter fence. These points could therefore be of some significance.
15.   Dr Nicholson, who was a Chartered Engineer and Deputy Director of the Research
      and Laboratory Services Division of the Health and Safety Executive, made a written
      report to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. He also gave evidence at the inquest. He did not deal
      with these specific matters; but in his oral evidence at the inquest he considered that
      one of the important causes of the collapse of barrier 124A was that there was a gap in
      the barrier behind, between barriers 136 and 136A, with the result that there was
      nothing to break the density of the crowd bearing on barrier 124A. and it may well be
      that this is a more important factor in causing the failure of barrier 124A than those
      suggested by Mr Bume relating to the height of the barriers.


Capacity o f the Leppings Lane terrace

16.   The second matter which Mr Bume pointed to relates to the overall capacity of the
      Leppings Lane terrace. The overall capacity for the terrace had been calculated by
      Eastwood and Partners, the consulting engineers to Sheffield Wednesday Football
      Club, and accepted by the City Council at 10,100. This was divided between 2,900 to
      the North West Terrace and 7,200 for the remainder, calculated at the rate of 54
       spectators per 10 sq meters. The size of the area in question was not based on a
       survey of the ground by Eastwood and Partners, but on a drawing produced by the
      Club. In December 1989 (after Lord Taylor’s interim report) the area was measured
      and this revealed that the size of the North West Terrace as shown on the Club’s
      drawing was too great. Adopting the correct measurement, at the rate of 54 spectators
      per 10 sq meters the capacity of the North West Terrace was only 2,242. There was
      therefore an excess of 658 or 22.6% allowed in this area.

17.    In paragraphs 137 to 142 of his Interim Report, Lord Taylor dealt with the correct
       calculation of the capacity for pens 3 and 4. These had been calculated by Eastwood
       and Partners at 1,200 for pen 3 and 1,000 for pen 4. These figures would have been
       too high even if the terraces complied with the Green Guide recommendations. If
       they had complied with the Green Guide the figures should have been 1,015 and
       1,036 respectively. But they did not and Lord Taylor calculated that the capacities of
       pens 3 and 4 should have been 822 and 871 respectively, a total of 507 less than the
       2,200 allocated.

18.    It is not clear whether the other pens on the Leppings Lane terraces, numbers 1 , 2 , 6
       and 7 complied as to layout, position and size of crush barriers, means of access and
       gangways with the Green Guide. It seems unlikely that they did. But even assuming
       that they did, and that it was appropriate to calculate the capacity of these pens on the
       basis of 54 spectators per 10 sq meters, it is apparent that the capacity overall was
       overestimated by 1,165, ie 658 in the North West Terraces and 507 in pens 3 and 4.
       The result would be that an excessive number of tickets were sold over the safe
       capacity.

19.   The individual pens were not segregated and did not have separate turnstiles, and
       spectators naturally tended to congregate in the central pens 3 and 4 because these
       were the ones behind the goal. The overstatement of the capacity of the Leppings
      Lane terraces is clearly therefore a matter of some importance. Lord Taylor was
      aware of part of the problem, but it does not seem that he was aware of the
      overstatement of the size of the North West Terrace and it is not clear whether an
      adjustment for non-compliance with the Green Guide should have been made in
      relation to the pens other than 3 and 4.

20.   These matters do not give grounds for re-opening the Judicial Inquiry or any other
      proceedings. Indeed it is not suggested by the police that they do. Lord Taylor
      might, if he had known of them, have criticised Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
      their consultant engineers, and those responsible for licensing the ground in more
      stringent terms than he did, but I do not consider that there would have been any
      question of his changing his central conclusion, borne out as it is by the overwhelming
      mass of the evidence, that the primary cause of the disaster was a failure of police
      control. However, if the responsibility of the other parties was somewhat greater than
      had earlier been appreciated, that might have a bearing on any reconsideration of
      criminal proceedings against police officers.



Further complaints about the Inquest

21.   In further very late submissions dated 11 December 1997, Junior Counsel for the
      Family Support Group raised two further complaints about the Inquest. The first
      concerns the Coroner’s summing-up. Counsel said that in relation to the state of the
      central pens at 14.52 he directed the jury to reach ‘a factual conclusion which was
      in direct conflict with the conclusions reached by Lord Taylor’ and by so doing he
      distorted the evidence.

22.   This has nothing to do with any fresh evidence and strictly speaking therefore does
      not call for comment from me. But lest it be given credence it is I think only fair to
      the Coroner that I say something. Counsel cites three passages. When his
      summing-up is read as a whole, it seems to me that the Coroner dealt fully and
      fairly with all the evidence.

23.   He did not direct the jury to make particular findings of fact and he did not usurp he
      jury’s function. Had he done so, I have no doubt that it would have been
      challenged in the Divisional Court. Complaint was made there of his directions to
      the jury on law, but not of his summary of the facts.

24.   Secondly, Junior Counsel for the Family Support Group criticised the Coroner’s
      ruling about the use of transcripts in cross examination. This again has nothing to
      do with fresh evidence. It is a point which if there was any substance in it, could
      and should have been raised in the Divisional Court.

25.   Under cover of a letter dated 17 December 1997 the Solicitor for the Family
      Support Group sent me “an analysis of the major variances between the findings of
      Lord Justice Taylor and the summing-up of Dr Popper”. The analysis does not
      contain any fresh evidence. Moreover it appears to confuse the function of Lord
      Taylor in weighing conflicting evidence and making his findings according to his
      view of its reliability, and the function of the Coroner who has to sum up the
      evidence so that the jury can reach their verdict. The two things are quite
      different.

26.   The fact that there is evidence both consistent and inconsistent with Lord Taylor’s
      findings is a consequence of having an Inquest which covers much the same ground
      as the Inquests. I comment on this below.

27.   It is perhaps some indication of the substance of these points that they were raised
      for the first time on 11 and 17 December 1997.


An Inquest following a Judicial Inquiry

28.   I do not agree with the criticisms of the Coroner and his conduct of the Inquests
      advanced by the families (most of them had already been rejected by the Divisional
      Court) and I have found no fresh evidence to justify reopening them. But I have
      come to the very firm conclusion that it is unsatisfactory to have an Inquest into the
      question of how the deceased came to their deaths where there has been a major
      disaster and an inquiry chaired by a High Court Judge, which will inevitably have
      covered the same ground and indeed, as in this case, ranged much wider.

29.   I have read the Report of the Home Office Working Group on Disasters and
      Inquests (published in March 1997) and concur with their recommendation that in
      such cases the role of the Coroner should be limited by securing the adjournment of
      the Inquest when a public inquiry is established and limiting the circumstances in
      which the inquest can be resumed. I also agree with the Working Group’s
      reasoning for making this recommendation. I would like to make the following
      points specifically in the case of Hillsborough:

             a)     At the Taylor Inquiry 179 witnesses gave evidence over a period of
             31 days. Of these over 50 were Liverpool supporters. Their evidence
             occupied about four days in total. Their evidence was graphic, clear and
             substantially to the same effect. By contrast at the Inquest over 200
             witnesses gave evidence over a period of 72 days. Of these over 100 were
             Liverpool supporters and included only a few of those who gave evidence
             before Lord Taylor. I estimate that their evidence in total took in excess of
             15 days. Again their evidence of the critical events was often graphic and
             substantially to the same effect. But it took much longer because it was not
             concentrated on the vital points and much of the questioning was repetitive.

             Dr Popper told me that he considered it necessary to call so many supporters
             so that their side of the case should be fully put. While I understand this
             desire, it must be open to question whether in considering the question ‘how’
             a deceased came to his death, it is necessary to call so many witnesses whose
             evidence is essentially the same.
       b)      Although the issues at the Inquest are likely to be of far more limited
       scope than at a judicial inquiry, and in particular questions of civil liability
       and individual criminal liability are not matters for the Inquest, in practice it
       is very difficult for the Coroner to draw the line, especially if, as in this
       case, there are a considerable number of parties legally represented, all of
       whom have interests to pursue or protect.

       c)     In practice it is the decision of the DPP that it important in
       determining whether or not there should be a prosecution for manslaughter,
       though the DPP can reconsider a decision not to bring a charge if further
       evidence not previously considered emerges at an Inquest and the jury reach
       a verdict of unlawful killing.

      d)      It is most unlikely that a Coroner will have experience comparable to
      that of a High Court Judge in controlling an Inquiry of this magnitude. It is
      an extremely onerous task.

      e)      A tribunal of Inquiry is an inquisitorial body, usually charged with
      the responsibility of finding out what happened and why and making
      recommendations to avoid similar disasters in future. The tribunal will
      make detailed findings of fact and very probably express an opinion as to
      where responsibility or criticism lies. It seems pointless to go over part of
      the same ground again, especially having regard to the limited scope of the
      Inquest and available verdicts. Although as I have already said, the
      perception is misconceived, there is no doubt that a number of the families
      have perceived the verdict of accidental death as in some way reversing or
      negating the findings of Lord Taylor.

      f)      Quite apart from other considerations, a major inquest of this sort
      involves very considerable expense both in time and money. Witnesses have
      to attend; local taxpayers have to bear the expense of the Inquest, interested
      parties the expense of legal representation for which legal aid is not
      available.

      g)      There is distress and anxiety caused by the delay. In this case it was
      over two years before the verdict at the Inquest. Not infrequently in this
      type of case, there is a challenge in the Divisional Court which increases the
      delay and adds to the uncertainty. If the challenge is mounted by legal
      advisers who did not appear at the Inquiry or Inquest, points may be taken
      which could not have been taken by those who had appeared before, possibly
      giving rise to false hopes of the applicants. It is not only the bereaved who
      suffer from this long drawn out process. Those whose conduct has been
      called in question should not have the anxiety hanging over their heads
      indefinitely.

In the case of Hillsborough the Coroner was confronted with a most formidable
task. The Divisional Court rejected the criticisms made of him and complimented
him on his summing up. The undue prolixity of the proceedings flowed in part
from the difficulties in controlling such an Inquiry with many parties represented
and in part from the Coroner’s understandable desire that the Liverpool supporters
side should be fully presented to the jury. It is not the sort of case which a Coroner
should be asked to undertake where there has already been a full judicial inquiry.
But as the law now stands he has no option.
CHAPTER 7


Summary


1.   In this chapter I summarise the findings which I have made.

2.   Before doing so I must make it clear that anyone who is familiar with the
     terrible events of 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough is bound to have great
     sympathy with the relatives of those who died and the spectators who were
     injured. I have now spent many weeks studying the evidence of what
     happened and considering the representations and submissions made by the
     families and their legal representatives. I find it difficult to imagine anything
     more horrific than that experienced by those who endured it and those who
     lost their children, relatives and friends.

3.   That 96 people, the majority of them young, should set out in high hopes and
     spirits on a fine Spring day, and yet within a space of less than half-an-hour
     suffer crushing injuries from which they died, is nothing less than appalling. I
     have the most profound sympathy with all the families and friends of those
     who suffered in this way, many of whom I have met. I also understand the
     dismay that they have that no individual has personally been held to account,
     either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent of
     losing their job.

4.   I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
      especially since they had had their hopes raised that something more could be
      done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to
     look dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the
     light of the evidence which had previously been considered.

5.   Having done so, for the reasons I have set out, I have come to the clear
     conclusion that there is no basis upon which there should be a further Judicial
     Inquiry or a reopening of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. There is no basis for a
     renewed application to the Divisional Court or for the Attorney General to
     exercise his powers under the Coroners Act 1988. I do not consider that there
     is any material which should be put before the Director of Public Prosecutions
     or the Police Complaints Authority which might cause them to reconsider the
     decisions they have already taken. Nor do I consider that there is any
     justification for setting up any further inquiry into the performance of the
     emergency and hospital services. I have carefully considered the
      circumstances in which alterations were made to some of the self-written
      statements of South Yorkshire Police officers, but I do not consider that there
     is any occasion for any further investigation.

6.   None of the evidence I was asked to consider added anything significant to the
     evidence which was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or to the Inquests.
Video evidence

7.     Chapter 2 of this report deals with video evidence of the disaster. My
       conclusions about that are that there is no new video evidence of it or video
       evidence which was not available to Lord Taylor, the Coroner, or the other
       authorities who examined the disaster at the time.

8.    Two video tapes which were stolen on the day of the disaster remain missing.
       They were tapes of pictures from CCTV cameras operated by Sheffield
       Wednesday Football Club. They were not police tapes and would not have
       shown anything significant. Their theft is unsolved. The suggestion that
      the police tried to blame their failure to spot overcrowding on the terraces onto
       faulty CCTV equipment is wrong. They did not blame the CCTV equipment.
       The police controllers had a good view over the terraces from their control box
       and did not pretend otherwise.

9.    The allegation that police hid videotape evidence of the terraces is unfounded,
       and the allegation that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of
      this ‘missing’ police footage is equally unfounded.      Police officers did not
       give false evidence about the state of the police CCTV system at the ground,
       and I do not accept the evidence of Roger Houldsworth, video technician at
       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that he realised from looking at police
       CCTV pictures of pens 3 and 4 at about the time Gate C was opened at 14.52
      that these pens were dangerously overcrowded.


The aftermath o f the disaster

10.   I deal in Chapter 3 of the report with suggestions that the inquest into the
       deaths of those who died in the disaster was seriously flawed, and that there
       should now be a public inquiry into what was done, or not done, to help them
       and others who were crushed.

11.   I do not consider that the Inquest was flawed. Most of the criticisms relate to
       the so-called ‘3.15 cut-off point’. I do not agree with these criticisms. The
       Coroner considered the questions of who the deceased were and when and
       where they died at the mini-inquests, and this involved consideration of
       matters long after 3.15. It was only in relation to the question of how, i.e. by
       what means, the deceased came to their deaths that the Coroner imposed a cut­
       off point of 3.15 p.m. He had good reasons for deciding to limit the inquiry in
       this way and the cut-off did not limit inquiry into that question.

12.   Questions of whether the response of the emergency services was adequate
      were not relevant to the task the Coroner had to perform. It was suggested to
      me that the fact that Dr Walker, Mr Houldsworth, and others were not called
      as witnesses at the inquest amounted to fraudulent concealment of their
      evidence. That suggestion is false and I regard it as wholly irresponsible.
13.     Lord Taylor inquired into the rescue operation and his findings are published
        in his report. He made criticisms of the slow response of the police and
        recommendations for the future. I cannot see that any useful purpose would
        be served by having any further inquiry into the rescue operation. In my
        opinion there is no evidence of want of care by the emergency or medical
        services. Any wide-ranging inquiry into this aspect of the disaster would
        place huge burdens upon them, but to no purpose.


Interference with witnesses

14.    Chapter 4 of this report deals with suggestions that the evidence of witnesses
       to the disaster was tampered with, so that the truth did not emerge either at
       Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or the Inquests. These allegations are of two types -
       that the West Midlands Police put pressure on Derek Bruder, Debra Martin,
       and Paul Taylor which affected the evidence they wished to give, and that the
       way in which the South Yorkshire Police went about collecting evidence from
       their own officers who were at Hillsborough and witnessed the disaster was
       unacceptable. I have interviewed Mr Bruder, Miss Martin, and Mr Taylor and
       have come to the conclusion in each case that there was no improper attempt
       to affect their evidence.


M r B ruder

15.     So far as Mr Bruder is concerned, I am quite satisfied that the West Midlands
        Police, in seeking to confirm details of his statement relating to Kevin
        Williams, did not subject him to improper pressure. He told me himself that
        they did not. His statements were accurately summarised at the inquest on
        Kevin Williams and there was no attempt to discredit him.


M iss M artin

16.     I did not find Miss Martin a reliable witness. Her statement about events at
        Hillsborough, where she was on duty as a Special Constable, was seriously at
        variance with the account of everybody else who was there. She remains
        plainly - and understandably - deeply upset by the disaster, and her memories
        of the day and of subsequent events relating to it are vague and confused. I
        think that she gave her account of Kevin Williams sitting up in her arms and
        saying ‘Mom’ in good faith. But it cannot be relied upon. It contradicts Mr
        Bruder’s evidence and is also contrary to the pathological findings.

17.     I interviewed the West Midlands police officer who Miss Martin claims
        bullied her. I found this officer to be an impressive witness. I cannot see
        that she had any reason to discredit Miss Martin, and she told me that she did
       not bully or browbeat her.   I accept her account and prefer it to Miss
       Martin’s.


Mr Taylor

18.    As far as Paul Taylor is concerned, I do not accept his evidence that he was
       bullied or intimidated by a West Midlands officer. His account of what he
       saw at Hillsborough has changed in various ways over the years, and he does
       not appear to have raised any complaint about the conduct of this officer until
       1997. I prefer the evidence of the officer, which is supported to some extent
       by the contemporary documents. In any event he had no reason to put
       pressure on Mr Taylor.


South Yorkshire Police statements

19.    I have looked with great care at the way in which the South Yorkshire Police
       obtained written evidence from their officers who witnessed the disaster to put
       before the West Midlands Police investigators and Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.
       Soon after the disaster officers were asked to write out in their own words their
       recollections of the day and of the part which they themselves had played.
       Many of these statements were submitted to Hammond Suddards, solicitors to
       the force, to advise whether they were in a suitable form for submission to
       Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.

20.    The solicitors made no comment on the great majority of these statements, and
       in others their advice was confined to clearing up ambiguities and removing
       hearsay, comment or inappropriate language. In a very few cases, which I
       have referred to in Appendix 7, what has been excluded is either factual or
       comment in which factual matters are implicit. In these cases I think it would
       have been preferable for the factual matters not to have been excluded, or the
       comment elucidated.

21.    It was well known to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry Team that the statements were
       being vetted in this way. The process did not materially differ from the way
       in which statements were taken from witnesses who were employed by
       Sheffield Wednesday FC or the Ambulance Service.

22.    Towards the end of May 1989 the South Yorkshire Police team responsible for
       collating the evidence of officers in the Force began to suggest amendments to
       statements without referring them to the solicitors. The suggestions they
       made were on the same basis as those made by the solicitors. I have looked
       at all the statements that were altered in this way. In most cases the alteration
       is trivial. Where comment or opinion is excluded the amendments cannot in
       my opinion be criticised. In no case is the statement rendered misleading.
23.     I am quite satisfied that Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was not in any way inhibited or
        impeded by what happened. Lord Taylor was well aware of the criticisms
        made by some junior officers. His Inquiry examined these issues and he
        made findings about them which were adverse to the police.

24.     I am also satisfied that the exclusion of these comments did not affect the
        outcome of the Inquests, or the decision by the Director of Public Prosecutions
        not to bring criminal charges as a result of the disaster. I do not consider that
        there is any question of misconduct either by the solicitor who gave the police
        advice upon the statements or by the police officers who suggested alterations
        to the statements without referring the statement to the solicitors.


Other issues

Inconsistent evidence

25.     It is clear that there is inconsistent evidence about precisely what happened to
         some of the people who died at Hillsborough. Such conflicts of evidence are
        inevitable given the scale of the disaster. The Coroner did his best to resolve
        these questions at the Inquest, and I have tried to get to the bottom of some of
        those which remain and which the families of those who died have asked me
        to look into. I have not been completely successful in this. What is clear
        however is that no further inquiry involving examination of the witnesses
        could help after this lapse of time.


The Inquests

26.     The Divisional Court found that the Coroner was not biased and had no
        conflict of interest. I see no reason to disagree with that. I can find no
        evidence to support the suggestion that Liverpool supporters who gave
        evidence at the Inquest were given a difficult time in the witness box.

27.     I do not agree with the criticisms which have been made of the Coroner and
        the way in which he ran the Inquests. But I endorse the recommendation of
        the Home Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests that the role of the
         Coroner should be limited in circumstances such as these. I have reached the
         firm conclusion that is not satisfactory to have an inquest into the deaths
         caused by a major disaster when an Inquiry chaired by a High Court Judge has
         already covered the same ground.


The p o lice

28.     Some of the families of those who died have told me that they have been
        unable to obtain copies of documents to which they were entitled from the
        South Yorkshire Police archive on the disaster. Two families supplied me
       with material to enable me to check on this. In neither case did I think the
       complaint was justified.

29.    The investigation of the disaster by the West Midlands Police was not biased
       in favour of the South Yorkshire force.

30.    The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has on many occasions apologised for
       the disaster on behalf of his force.


Examination by doctors confirming death

31.    Criticism that doctors who examined bodies at the ground did so in a cursory
       or inadequate manner is wholly unsubstantiated.


The state o f the ground

32.    There are two questions to do with the state of the Hillsborough football
       ground which seem to me to have aspects which were not considered by Lord
       Taylor’s otherwise very full Inquiry. These questions are to do with the
       height of the crush barriers on the Leppings Lane terrace where the disaster
       happened and the overall capacity of that terrace. I do not consider that they
       give grounds for reopening the Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings.
APPENDIX 1


People who helped me in my scrutiny



1.   This Appendix lists the people who have assisted me in my scrutiny. They fall
      into three categories;

      a) those who made written or oral submissions to me;

      b) those who gave evidence to me, orally or in writing; and

      c) those whom I consulted, mainly about what happened at previous
      proceedings.


Submissions

2.   The relatives of victims who put submissions to me in connection with my
      scrutiny were:

      Mr & Mrs Aspinall (parents of James Aspinall)
      Mr Roger Ball (father of Kester Ball)
      Ms Louise Brookes (sister of Andrew Brookes)
      Mrs Christine Burke (widow o f Henry Burke)
      Mrs Corrigan (mother o f Keith McGrath)
      Mr & Mrs Church (parents of Gary Church)
      Mrs Fox & Ms Lynne Fox (mother and sister o f Thomas Fox)
      The Glover family (family of Ian Glover)
      Mr & Mrs Hammond (parents of Philip Hammond)
      Mr & Mrs HanMn (parents o f Eric Hankin)
      Mrs K Harrison (widow o f Gary Harrison)
      Mr & Mrs Hicks (parents of Sarah and Victoria Hicks)
      Mr Howard (father o f Thomas Howard and grandfather o f Thomas Anthony
                 Howard)
      Mr & Mrs Lewis (parents o f Carl Lewis)
      Mr & Mrs Jones (parents of Gary Jones)
      Mr & Mrs Jones (parents of Richard Jones)
      Mr & Mrs Joynes (parents of Nicholas Joynes)
      Ms Deborah Matthews (sister o f Brian Christopher Matthews)
      Mrs Joan McBrien (mother of John McBrien)
      Mr & Mrs G McDonnell (parents o f Peter McDonnell)
      Mrs Irene McGlone (widow o f Alan McGlone)
      Mr & Mrs Pemberton (parents o f Roy Pemberton)
      The Roberts family (family of Graham Roberts)
      The Robinson family (family of Steven Robinson)
      Mr Harold Rowe (brother-in-law o f Alan McGlone)
      The Sefton family (family of Andrew Sefton)
      Mrs Sinclair and Jane Sinclair (sister and niece of Michael Kelly)
      Mr & Mrs Spearritt (parents o f Adam Spearritt)
      Mr & Mrs Steele (parents of Philip Steele)
      Mrs Sandra Stringer (mother of Paul Carlile)
      Mrs Thompson (mother o f Stuart Thompson)
      The Traynor family (family of Christopher and Kevin Traynor)
      Mr & Mrs Whelan (parents o f Ian David Whelan)
      Mrs Anne Williams (mother of Kevin Daniel Williams)

3.    All these people both wrote to me and saw me in private session, apart from
      those whose names I have put in italics, who did not seek private meetings
      with me. I also had oral and written submissions from the following:

      Alun Jones QC, Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group
      Mr Julian Knowles, Junior Counsel
      Ms Ann Adlington, Solicitor to the Family Support Group
      Professor Phil Scraton, Hillsborough Project, Edge Hill University College
      Ms Sheila Coleman


Evidence

4.    The witnesses who gave me oral evidence (in most cases in addition to written
      statements) were:

      Police Sergeant Julie Appleton, West Midlands Police
      Police Sergeant Trevor Bichard, South Yorkshire Police
      Mr Derek Bruder
      Dr Matthew Bull
      Mr Donald Denton, former Superintendent, South Yorkshire Police
      Mr Tony Edwards, former South Yorkshire ambulanceman
      Mr David Frost, former South Yorkshire police officer
      Mr Roger Houldsworth
      Ms Debra Martin, former Special Constable, South Yorkshire Police
      Mrs J Martin
      Police Sergeant Graham McCombie, West Midlands Police
      Mr McRobbie, former South Yorkshire police officer
      Mr Paul Taylor
      Dr Edward Walker

5.    Witnesses whose written statements I consulted at the request of the families
      or the police, but whom I have not seen, were:

      Mr Ian McDermott
      Mr Andrew Worsley
      Mr Steven Williams
      Mr John Flack
       Mr Peter Howes
       Dr James Bums
       Dr Iain West
       Mr Noel Bume


Assistance

6.    People whom I consulted to assist me on various aspects of my scrutiny
      included:

      The Hon Mr Justice Collins
      Mr Christopher Dorries, presently Coroner for South Yorkshire
      Detective Chief Superintendent Foster, West Midlands Police
      Mr Douglas Fraser
      Mr Benet Hytner QC
      Mr Tim King QC
      Mr Peter Metcalfe, Hammond Suddard Solicitors
      Sir David Parry-Evans, St John Ambulance Brigade
      Dr Stefan Popper, former Coroner for South Yorkshire
      Dr David Slater
      Her Honour Judge Elizabeth Steele
      Mr James Wardrope
      Mr Peter Wells, St John Ambulance Brigade
      Mr Richard Wells
      Mr Peter Whitehurst
      Dr David Williams


Correspondence

7.    At the beginning of my scrutiny, in July 1997,1 wrote to all the families
      whose relatives had died asking for any information they wanted to give me. I
      also wrote to the FA, Liverpool, Nottingham Forest, and Sheffield Wednesday
      Football Clubs and to the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Attorney
      General, the Crown Prosecution Service, and the Police Complaints Authority.

8.    I have had a number of letters from members of the public expressing views
       about the disaster.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 1:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hillsborough Ground.

                                                                                                                                                                                  N           W tS \   '
                                                                                                                                                                                  X'           "     ' \




                                                                                                                                   Gymnasium


                                                                                                                                                                                                           v    '       ' i
                                                                                                                                                                                                            '       \
                                                                                                                                            i i 1---- 1
                                                                                     Lighting                                               I--- 'y t i. _ 50                                                           ''
                                                                                     Tower                                            First Aid                 Rn™?                                 g £ ng% \ \        \
                                       Sweet Shop
                                                                                                                                      Room                      Room                                        *V\ \    N '          ' \
                                                                                                                                                                                                            'OS N' : N'   '\       \\
                                                        ''Access                                                           NORTH STAND
                                        .G ate A         .Gate                           116


                                                     Porta­
                       o S T S»"-«                   cabins

                  /7 k         9' 16,!
                                                   Porta-
                                T urnstilel^i^V 03^

                                                   \'Access
                                                    Gate
                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                               <411
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ''
                                                                   Ju n nel__
                                        [.Gate C                                                                                                                                                                                                 \          \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \ N~       N
                                                                                                                                                                               1311



                                                                                                                                                                               !2ll
                                                                                        112
                                                                                                                                         Players
                                                                                                                                         Tunnel
                                                              "CCTV      “H

                                                                                                                                                                                               Lighting
                                                                                                                                                                                               Tower

                                                                                          Police
                                                                                          Control                   CCTVO.             CCTV 3
                                                                                                                           SO UTH STAND
                                                                                               i— i   r ---- m_ m rm *1                          1    ■
                                                                                                                                                                       30-32          34-36
                                                                                                                      C =ri v                u       i
                                                                                                                            }     'Directors Entrance J                                                                       embartwn®01
                                                                                                                Official   £ ~ ] g j p S " " " CarJ ParK
SCALE                                                                                                                          L ig h tr^                                                                                               ‘ ’• ’ •V'
0                                                                                   - .***«■••* •   ,                         Tower
I       - ~T~ i                                                                 •S*«*%         * \ ....
                  I --------- -T 50metres
          50      WO         tSOfeet
52
48
APPENDIX 3 - ROGER HQULDSWORTH


PART 1 - Statem ent 16 May 1989


STATEMENT


I,     ROGER HOULDSWORTH of                (address deleted)        WILL STATE:-

I am 42 years old and up to the week commencing 10th April I was employed as Technical
Director by M.W. (Technology) Limited of Sheffield. I had been employed in that capacity for
some 2 years until I resigned my position. I hold an H.N.C. qualification as an Electronics
Engineer. Prior to working with M.W. (Technology) Limited I had previously worked for
more than 10 years abroad, in the electronics field.

When I returned from working abroad, in 1986,1 was approached by the then Company
Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Dick Chester, who asked me to assist in
relation to certain problems the Club were having with their closed circuit television systems
(CCTV). I understand the CCTV system then installed had been put in place by Philips Alarms
in about 1984 but that Company had subsequently gone out of business.

I did look at the system at Mr Chester’s request and as then designed and installed it was not
working properly.

Shortly afterwards I joined M.W. (Technology) Limited and whilst their employee I completed
by examination of the existing system and re-designed it to improve the system and also the
computer system related to it. I also re-designed the CCTV system which had been installed by
the Club for Police use - this being a separate system from that operated by the Club for its own
purposes.

The Club System

This consisted of a number of static TV cameras situated at strategic points around the ground.
As a result of my examining the system I arranged for some additional cameras to be installed
to enhance it, particularly when the Spion Kop part of the ground was re-opened in 1986.

Being a static system the cameras are in a fixed position and focus on a particular fixed area.
They were in fact positioned at strategic points to view the turnstile entrances, and there was
also a camera covering the players’ entrance. Within the CCTV room, situated in the south
stand near the players’ entrance, there is a bank of 20 monitors plus a monitor for the computer
system. This computer system records the number of spectators who come through the
turnstiles for each separate area of the ground. Of the 20 monitors within the control room, 19
display the scene as depicted in the Club’s static system. The remaining monitor is connected
to the Police CCTV system.

Each of the monitors connected to the Club system is in turn connected to a VCR so that we
have the facility to tape the film shown on those monitors, on a video tape. Of the 19 static
cameras however I was not in commission at the time because a wall had been constructed after
the camera had been installed, which obstructed that camera’s view of the relevant turnstiles.
The turnstiles in question were those numbered 9 - 1 6 which will be referred to later in this
Statement.

The Police System

This consisted of 5 fully functional remote controlled cameras - ie those cameras could pan tilt
through 360°, and zoom on a 16/160 lens. They are controlled from a Police control box which
is fixed in position at the south west comer of the ground, adjacent to the western end of the
south stand. The cameras for the Police system are positioned as follows:-

       1 on the upper south west comer of the west stand;

       2 are positioned on the top of the south stand, 1 at about its centre point and the other to
       the eastern end of the stand at the top;

       1 at the top (rear) of the roof of the Spion Kop;

       1 at the south west comer of the ground, mounted on high near the score board and
       close to the Police control box.

Within the Police control box there are 7 TV monitors. 5 of them are dedicated, 1 to each of
the CCTV cameras. The other 2 are connected to special time lapse Video Recorders, and you
can switch from camera to camera by means of a passive switch within the control room so that
the Officer in Charge can record the scene being displayed on any 1 of the 5 cameras. The
remaining 2 monitors are used so that the Officer can check which of the 5 cameras are being
recorded at any given time. PC Trevor Bishop (sic) (Bichard) was the Officer who worked the
CCTV system for the Police but it was not usual for him to be alone in the control room - there
might perhaps be 3 or 4 other Officers in there with him at any given time for their own
reasons - eg to watch a section of the crowd from an elevated position.

Within the Police control box there is also a telephone land line which is part of Sheffield
Wednesday FC’s internal telephone system, and the Police have their own separate telephone
land lines installed also.

The events of Saturday. 15th April. 1989

Although I had previously resigned my position as Technical Director of M.W. (Technology)
Limited I was asked by Graham Mackrell to attend at the ground on that day in case my
assistance was required. We knew that the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool FC and
Nottingham Forest FC was a sell-out all ticket match and I arrived at the ground fairly early on
the Saturday morning to check that everything was in order. I was in fact asked to rectify a
fault on one of the Police CCTV cameras, the one at the south west comer near the score
board. I checked it, found it was not functioning properly and I made the necessary
adjustments to the iris controls within the camera and thereafter checked that it was working
OK. Late in the morning I then went to the CCTV control room where PC Harold Guest was
also in attendance, as usual. In addition there was present Doug Lock, the Security Officer for
Sheffield Wednesday FC and Geoff Plane of M.W. (Technology) . PC Guest, as a matter of
routine, would have ensured early in the morning that cassette tapes were inserted in the 19
                                                 2
VCRs - 1 of course would not be recording a picture because the camera was out of action but
PC Guest would nevertheless routinely load all 19. The authorised crowd capacity figures for
each section of the ground was part of the data stored in the computer, and the display monitor
for the computer would show how many spectators came through each of the turnstiles in
operation as the day went on. The system was so designed that when the turnstiles for a
particular area had admitted 90% capacity to that area, the total for that section would flash on
the TV screen and if, for example, one part of the ground was being filled up quickly and there
was capacity in another part (subject to segregation of supporters) that would enable the Police
to be aware that they should direct remaining supporters to a different set of turnstiles. Each of
the turnstiles was also fitted with an infra-red ray sensor, so that if spectators tried to climb
over the turnstiles but within the turnstile enclosure, that would also be recorded on the screen,
under a separate heading. I produce [Exhibit 1] a copy of the print-out from the computer
monitor for the game in question. Numbers climbing over the turnstiles within the enclosure
would be shown on the column headed “Check Total”. The first heading “Gate” is the
turnstile number through which the fans entered, the “Gate Total” shows the number who
entered through each of those turnstiles and there will be sub-totals for each section.

I was present in the CCTV control room from about 11.30 am that morning when the turnstiles
were opened and spectators were entering the ground. The Spion Kop and the south stand had
been designated for Nottingham Forest supporters, and the north stand and west stand
(including Leppings Lane) were reserved for Liverpool supporters. The authorised capacity for
the various sections of the ground was as follows:-

               Spion Kop                    21,000
               South Stand covered           5,524
               South Stand uncovered         3,310
               West Stand                    4,465
               Leppings Lane                10,100
               North Stand                   9,702

By about 2.45 pm the Kop and the south stand areas were full of Nottingham Forest supporters
but the north stand and the west stand areas were only about 2/3 full at that time and it was
noticeable from the static camera covering the Leppings Lane turnstiles that there was a build­
up of fans outside the turnstiles in that area. I produce [Exhibit 2] a plan of the ground
showing the Leppings Lane entrance to the west and the turnstiles (7 in number) which admit
spectators to the terraced area of the west stand are designated A/G. It will be seen that to the
south of those turnstiles runs a concrete path which leads around eventually to the south stand.
That path is bounded on the one side (the south) by the river Don and on the north side by a
high brick wall. Situated in that wall just immediately beyond the turnstiles - ie to the east of
them - was an exit gate designated Gate C which is a double gate of the concertina metal type
which was kept closed. One of the static cameras of the CCTV system was situated on a post
just east of that gate, the camera being positioned so as to show the area of the turnstiles A/G.

It was through the monitor showing the scene depicted by that camera that it was possible to see
the build-up of supporters outside the turnstiles. The Police had erected some barriers across
the pathway a short distance east of Gate C so that spectators could not walk along that pathway
to get across to the south stand. The build-up of Liverpool supporters outside the Leppings
Lane entrance was such that some had been forced beyond the entrance to the turnstiles outside
Gate C and some of those supporters were visible within the field of vision of the static camera.
The position was such that I recall commenting, at perhaps 2.50 pm, “For God’s sake why
don’t they delay the kick-off’ and I made that comment in the presence of Doug Lock and PC
Guest. We were all, as I recall, in general agreement that it would be sensible to postpone the
kick-off to enable people to get into the ground, although I do not recall that anyone in the
CCTV control room attempted to contact the Police by radio or telephone to suggest that. The
Police of course were monitoring the situation themselves from their own CCTV system, and in
particular using the camera on the south west corner of the west stand roof. We could of
course see that that camera was trained on the Leppings Lane turnstiles because we were able to
monitor the Police pictures on one of the monitors within our control room, although we did
not have the facility to record that picture.

There came a time when Gate C appeared to be opened, and a number of spectators rushed
through into the “reservoir” area between the turnstiles and the rear of the west stand. An
examination of the video recording appears to indicate that this occurred when the Police
opened the gate in an effort to eject one of the spectators that way, and a number of the fans
pressed through from the outside. It would appear that several hundred got through before the
gates were again closed.

Subsequently the static camera picked up the fact that a number of fans climbed up over the
structure housing the turnstiles, and jumped down into the reservoir area inside. That is, it
seems, further indication of the pressures building up outside the turnstiles although a steady
flow of spectators was coming through those turnstiles at all times, in the normal way.

I recall that after the first influx of several hundred spectators through Gate C, Doug Lock left
the CCTV room to go outside presumably to report the matter to the Club Secretary, Graham
Mackrell, and/or to check the position for himself on the ground.

Some time later, I am unsure of the exact time, I heard over the Police radio (we had one in the
CCTV room) a Senior Police Officer make a request that a gate be opened at the Leppings Lane
entrance. Police control asked which gate he wished opened and he repeated his request 2 or 3
times. On about the fourth occasion he said “Someone is going to die here. Open the gate”
and Police control replied “If someone is going to die open the gate, open the gate”.

As appears from the video tape recording the scene the gate was then opened apparently by a
uniformed PC, and a huge number of fans flooded into the area.

At that point in time I realised, from the numbers already displayed on the monitor as having
entered from the Leppings Lane turnstiles, that a dangerous situation was being created. I left
the room and went down the players’ tunnel to the pitch and just as I did so the Referee stopped
the match as I recall. I looked over to the west stand area and I saw fans climbing over the
fence and my first thought at that time was that it was a pitch invasion, and the match had been
stopped for that reason. The perimeter fencing at that point is high and not easy to climb over.
I sat down in the stand area behind the dug-out, and watched the situation for a little time -
perhaps 2 or 3 minutes before I realised what really was occurring. One of the Sheffield
Wednesday ground staff came down the tunnel holding 2 stretchers and I grabbed one from him
and ran across with it to help ferry the injured people to the gymnasium area where the first-aid
room was situated. It was in fact only after I had ferried 3 or 4 injured people in that way that
I then realised that there were many people who had died as a result, and the gym was in fact
designated as a temporary mortuary.
After helping on the pitch as much as possible at about 4.15/4.30 pm I went back to the CCTV
room where Geoff Plane and PC Guest were present, and I had a cup of coffee and a cigarette.
Subsequently I took print-outs of the attendance from the computer monitor, and ejected the
tapes from the VCRs leaving them in the machine in the ejected position so that I could later
know exactly which tape related to which monitor/area.

I normally take 3 print-outs from the computer for the attendance figures, 2 of which go to the
Secretary, Graham Mackrell, and the third will normally to the Ticket Office staff. However
on this occasion, since it was an FA Cup semi-final, all ticket, I did at first give the third print­
out to PC Guest at his request, since he said his superior officers might want it. Later however
Graham Mackrell said that he wanted to keep all 3 in his secure possession and I therefore
retrieved it from PC Guest.

At about 6.15/6.30 pm Graham Mackrell asked me to ensure the video room was properly
secured. Geoff Plane and PC Guest had left the ground at that time. I went to the CCTV
room, locked the cupboard doors where the VCRs were and then locked the room and activated
the alarm system for the room. I kept the key in my possession overnight. On locking the
cupboard doors where the VCRs were I do not recall specifically checking that all the tapes
were still in the machine but I do recall that as I finally left the ground at about 7.30 pm that
night, with my fiancee who works as a receptionist at the Club, I asked the Security Guard at
the players’ entrance to ensure that no-one entered the CCTV room overnight. He promised to
do so.

I returned to the ground at 9 am on the Sunday morning and checked the room where it was
still locked and the alarm operative. However when I opened up the room and checked the
VCRs I found that 2 tapes were missing. One of those was the tape relating to the camera
which looks over Gates 9 -16, and the other was from the VCR which had not been activated
at the time. I have no idea who removed the tapes - 1 mentioned it to the Security Officer,
Doug Lock, and he was surprised and had no knowledge of it.

I have read this Statement and it is correct to the best of my knowledge and belief.

Signed:       R HOULDSWORTH
Dated:        16.5.89
Witnessed:    R O’CALLAGHAN
Dated:        16.5.89




                                                  5
APPENDIX 3

Part-2 - Roger Houldsworth. interview with ‘First Tuesday ’ (broadcast February 1990)

ROLL 62
Interviewee - ROGER HOULDSWORTH (RH)


A police officer was present with Mr Houldsworth and the interviewer.


EH:    From approximately quarter twelve, twelve o’clock when we set the videos going and it
       was quite normal inflow of people right the way up to approximately about two fifteen
       although I didn’t really look at the time. Then we could see through looking, especially
       on this monitor which comes down from the police system, I’ve linked the video imputs
       down to here so that the policeman, Harold Guest and Wednesday’s own security man
       can see what the police are actually looking at. We put it on to camera one which is the
       West stand camera which overlooks the Leppings Lane end and you could see that the
       crowd was building up. This kept continuing up to about approximately two thirty, two
       thirty five where we could see that from that camera and also from the camera that is
       part of the Wednesdays own system, it overlooks turnstiles A to G and gate C, that it
       was a very, sort of abnormal build up. Really my brief, I am down here purely as a
       consultant in case anything goes wrong on the day. So apart from that I cannot say
       anything to the police or advise in any way, shape or form. So it was just a case that we
       watched it happening. At approximately twenty to three, somewhere round about that
       region, we did notice that gate C was open and an influx of people came through the
       gate. Eventually the police got that under control by putting a police horse across gate
       C to allow them to close it again.

INT: Can I just interrupt you at that point and ask you, you say it was an abnormal build up,
     can you tell me what made you think it was abnormal. What you saw on the monitors?

RH:    Well what we saw on the monitors was the mass of humanity that was outside the gates
       and looking from the monitors themselves and from the imputs that were going through
       on the computer system that there was no relationship between the two. There was,
       there seemed to be less people as though they’d got only a small crowd outside coming
       through the turnstiles. So that led us to believe, or led me to believe, that the crowd
       outside were forcing so much pressure against the entrances to the turnstiles, instead of
       being like an orderly queue you don’t look for the type of problem that obviously did
       occur, but you could see that there was a problem. Now what the cause of that problem
       was I honestly didn’t know but I had my own thoughts that too many people had come
       too late as opposed to last seasons gate, which I was also in attendance in the same
       position here, it was a more steady flow from an earlier hour.

INT: Did you talk with the policeman who was in here with you and what was the
     conversation that you had with him. Was he aware of the problem?
EH:    The policeman was aware of the problem but again I don’t think really either myself, the
       policeman or Mr Lock sort of took any cognisense (sic) of what was happening outside.
       You could hear the police radios and they were breaking down. For what reason that
       was I do not know. Because it seemed to be as if there was an awful amount of static on
       the police radio.

INT: OK so let me ask you then Roger. Not talking about the very early part of the day but
     from when the crowds really started to build up. If you can tell us what you saw on
     your screen when you saw the crowds building.

EH:    Well what I saw on the screens from both the camera on A to G and from the police
       monitor that the others. A large build up of people outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles
       which sent (sic) very abnormal, we came to the realisation that a lot of people had
       arrived late and they were all trying to get into the ground obviously before the kick off
       at three o’clock. The crowd outside bore no sort of relationship to the people who were
       actually going through the turnstiles as I say which led me to believe that there was a
       build up which would not allow the normal flow through. At about twenty to three,
       somewhere in that region, gate C was opened, at the time we didn’t know why it was
       opened, just that it was opened. A large amount of people came in to the ground from
       gate C which relieved the pressure a little bit on the people outside. Eventually the
       police got control of that situation by putting a police horse across the gate and they
       managed to close it. It continued the same as it had before up to about I would say ten
       to, five to three when we heard that gate C was asked to be opened by the police, the
       command was given for gate C to be opened. It was opened and the flow of people
       came through. It came through first fairly steadily. It built up to a surge, died of for a
       short while and then it built up again and it built up then and it was at the point then that
       I left the room to go down to the entrance, to the players entrance, just to see exactly
       what was happening in the central pens.

INT: Why did you do that?

EH:    Because again from the police system we could see that there was a ... and from the
       computer system we could see how many that were supposedly to be allowed in that end
       of the ground and we knew that we were getting somewhere near the limits that
       obviously the computer system then was virtually useless. Because I could not count the
       people on the computer system coming through gate C.

INT: So effectively this whole system had been bypassed by the opening of the gate.

EH:   By the opening of the gate the system had been bypassed. As far as accounting is
      concerned and keeping account of crowd control from that point of view.

INT: At what stage. I mean can you sort of describe what you saw on that monitor when gate
     C opened, by sort of referring to the monitor, like I was sat, I looked at the monitor ...?

EH: I looked at the monitor and as I say we heard the command at gate C, open the gate and
     the gate was to be open. Gate C was opened. When it was open a huge surge went
     through and that eventually tailed off to a steady flow for a minute or so. After that the
     surge surged again and a whole load of people came through. I mean we could see from

                                                 7
      the monitors that they were coming down right from the top end of Leppings Lane and
      they were bypassing the turnstiles and coming straight through gate C and I could see
      from the way that they were heading from, cos’ I know the bearing, of the relationship
      of the cameras to the layout of the ground, that the majority of people were heading
      towards the central pens.

IN T: What did you say to the policeman who was with you?

RH:   I didn’t really in all honesty say anything because he was trying to get through himself
      to the police control box as the police radios were not working properly and the land,
      we have a landline here which is through Wednesdays internal telephone system and that
      was blocked as well.

INT: So effectively you were isolated?

EH:   At that point in time yes.

INT: Can I ask you finally what you saw when you went outside and looked at the pens for
     yourself.

POLICE OFFICER:              Hang on is this in your statement?

RH:   No this is not in my statement.

POLICE OFFICER:              He can only talk about what is in his statement
APPENDIX 3

Part 3   -   Comments bv Roger Holdsworth on the evidence about the video cameras


25 November 1996


‘I went to the club at about 8.00am because I’d been asked by Graham Mackrell to give the
cameras a final check. We’d had a problem with the camera on the scoreboard.

I switched on all the cameras at the police control box, and checked the irises were working
properly, monitors and VCRs were OK. It would have taken about three quarters of an hour.’

The ‘faulty’ camera

‘There had been a flaring problems with the camera on the scoreboard - an electrical fault when
the scoreboard came into use. It wasn’t a problem with the quality of the picture. I had been
there all day the day before to sort it out. On the day of the disaster itself I phase-locked the
camera, which cured the problem, and to save any more potential problems, I disconnected the
earth to the camera which suppressed the electrical supply. By the time I had finished the
check, everything was working OK.

Graham Mackrell came and talked to me when I was up the ladder and I said it was all working
properly.

Mick Ryan also came in when I was checking them. I would have shown Ryan and Goddard
that they were working when I had finished.’

Evidence given by police re cameras:

 PC Mick Ryan (in charge o f phones and public address system in control box) says camera 5
faulty

Mick Ryan says in his evidence to Taylor p 52E re camera 5 ‘there was an apparent fault on the
camera to the West stand.. the one that is mounted on the electronic scoreboard’.

He also specifically describes this camera at 53E to say ‘It is principally directed towards the
West stand terraces’.

He goes on on p53A to say ‘the picture was very distorted’. He says that he contacted Roger
Holdsworth himself about it, and Holdsworth ‘was there working on it for some considerable
time’.

He then says ‘The picture was never satisfactory as far as I recall... It was not as clear as you
would hope the picture to be... It was the quality of the picture which was the problem’.

RH: The quality o f the picture was never a problem - and fixed the flaring problem by
disconnecting the earth that morning.
                                                 9
Sgt Mick Goddard (in charge or radios in the control box)

1) Couldn’t see pens 3 and 4 fu ll

Goddard says in his evidence to Taylor p95B that it wasn’t possible to tell that the pens were
full from the control box.

He says that at no stage before he saw people climbing over the pens did he notice any
overcrowding in pens 3 and 4.

‘3 and 4 were getting full, were full. From my vantage point, they were not overcrowded’.

RH: 7 was able to see what the police could see on their monitors, and he specifically
members checking to see the state o f pens 3 and 4 when the order was given to open the gates.
I could see very clearly that the pens were fu ll to the point o f overcrowding’.

2) ‘Blind spot’ made it difficult to see crushing

Goddard also talks on p96 about a ‘blind spot’, down at the front by the fencing, obstructing
the first two rows of the terracing.

“Even though your view is obstructed, basically you see figures, although... you would not be
able to pick them out individually’.

RH: ‘This evidence does not make any sense to me, based on my knowledge o f the control box. ’

PC Bichard (in charge o f cameras and videos)

1) Camera 5 faulty

In his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry (June 12th), P43 Trevor Bichard claims, like Mick Ryan,
that there was a problem with the scoreboard camera which overlooked the terraces. He says
that ‘for a number of weeks we had been having difficulty with the camera, and they had been
looking into having the camera replaced or improvements made., when the system had been
switched on, the picture would go white - you would lose what you could actually see., we
seem to think it may be a problem with the electrical supply to the camera. On that particular
day, it was not up to the mark, but it was a lot better than it had been. We were getting
pictures, that is the best way of describing it’.

At the Inquest, P80, Bichard admits that camera 5 was trained on the Leppings Lane end, but
says that the camera ‘had been faulty and in fact you saw some of the problems that occurred.
You were getting what is called flare. It is reflection of light on coloured objects and you lose
the picture. The camera was not being used as much as it normally would be because of the
substandard picture.’
Inquest P89B Bichard says that from 2.05 onwards there was only one camera trained on
Leppings Lane, which solicitor Mr Manning summarises as being ‘a small screen and not a
very easy picture to distinguish and differentiate’.

At the Inquest, P93A, Bichard again describes the camera as ‘inadequate’.

RH: ‘Bichard gives an accurate description o f what the problem had been, but I disagree that
 ‘it was not up to the mark’. As fa r as I was concerned, the camera was working perfectly after
I had fixed it that morning. ’

2) No close ups available with camera 5

At the Inquest P92D Bichard says that it is not possible to get what he would call a ‘close up’
view of the centre pens from any of the cameras. He is defining ‘close up’ as no more than 6
or 7 heads and shoulders on the picture.

Inquest p96D/E/F, Bichard agrees with the comment that it is not possible to zoom in so that
one can clearly identify a given individual if one wishes to do so. He also denies that you can
zoom in and see clearly facial features with the camera.

RH: ‘With camera 5, you wouldn’t get 6 heads at the fa r end o f the ground, but you would get
them in the central pens.

 It is possible to pick out facial features with the camera. [This is borne out by the evidence o f
 the families and lawyers who went to the ground]. It would be more difficult to pick out facial
features while events are happening, but this is not the specific question that Bichard was
 asked. ’

3) Camera 5 was not only fault, it gave a distorted view o f the terraces

Bichard describes the close up that is available of the pens from this particular camera (5). He
says to Taylor P43E.

‘A close up is available to move into those centre two pens. However, because of the position
and the angle, it does give you a false impression about the crowd that is in there. It is quite
low down and it is set at 90 degrees to the pens rather than looking face on... The picture it
creates is a bit of an illusion about the crowd that is in there. You may be looking at somebody
who is stood in the far corner of pen 3, and it may give you the impression that in fact he is
stood at the far comer of pen 4. It is because of the angle of the camera.... The physical
position it is in is difficult to assess that the pens would be getting overcrowded’.

RH: ‘This explanation does not make any sense at all. You cannot get optical effects with
 crowd density. Even looking at an angle you’ve got reference points. You’ve got a perceptive
 depth which would give you an indication o f density. I had focused each o f the lenses along the
focal plane, so they were virtually in focus all o f the time. A CCTV camera doesn’t auto-focus,
 would also disagree that it was difficult to assess that the pens were getting overcrowded from
 that camera’.

4) Colour camera (camera 2) does not provide a very close picture o f the terraces
Taylor P44D Bichard says of the colour camera that ‘although it does provide a better angled
view of the terraces it does not provide as close a picture as the one mounted on LL itself. ’

Taylor P63D, Bichard says that the zoom facility of the colour camera was not good enough to
see whether or not people were being crushed against the perimeter fencing in pens 3 and 4.

Bichard admits that it enables you to see the fence, but not to get a close up of the people at the
fence.

‘We must define what you mean by a ‘close up’. It is closer than it is closer that in its extreme,
yes, but it is not a close up of an individual. You would probably only get 30 or 40 heads and
shoulders at best on this picture’.

At the Inquest, P77B Bichard says of the colour camera ‘If you were to take pictures of people
below the camera in the uncovered seating area, you would get identification because they are
so close to the camera, but once you get to the end of the South Stand area, Leppings Lane, the
magnification available on that zoom was insufficient to create identification’.

(He admits, however, at 77F that it gave you a ‘reasonable view’ of pens 3 and 4).

RH: ‘The colour camera had the same magnification as the camera on the scoreboard. The
magnification was reasonable (1:10). After all, it was designed fo r identification purposes.
This evidence is contradictory and not altogether truthful. It depends where on Leppings Lane
you are talking about. The shots o f the very fa r side would obviously not be quite as detailed.
But the camera was designed to give a view o f the Leppings Lane end. You could certainly
identify individuals with it, and distinguish their clothing. A shot would give you 6 or 7 heads
and shoulders, depending on the crowd density’.

5) Camera 1 provides large and general picture when zoom is on

P47E, Bichard describes the camera that could look down Leppings Lane (camera 1) ‘when you
are using your zoom facility the picture you are getting at the extreme is a rather large and
general one’.

RH: ‘That the camera had been replaced 6 months earlier, and was so good that he could pick
out a car number plate at the end o f Leppings Lane.

6) Why there is no video evidence from camera 2 before 3.00

At the Inquest 79C Bichard says ‘when the colour camera came into use, the tape had expired’.
Bichard also says that the colour camera was also trained on the Spion Kop, along with camera
3, and camera 2 was not retrained onto the terraces till after 3.00.

7) Why no video recording o f the terraces before 3.00

Taylor P51D, Bichard admits that there was a video going of the situation on the West terrace
from about 2.30, [yet no pictures from this camera were ever made available to the Inquiry or
the Inquest].
At the inquest, p80D, Bichard can offer no explanation of why there is no video material
available of from camera 5 before 3.02. He admits that it would have been recording before
then.

Taylor P69D Bichard claims that of the 2 VHS recordings that were made, one expired just
after 3.00 [this does not explain why there was no evidence available from this tape before
3.00]. He says (Taylor p69H) that it finished at 6 minutes past 3.

‘The other tape, somewhere between 2.30 and 3.00, the actual function of the tape, the mode of
operation, altered inadvertently. The assumption is that when the radio repair man came into
the control box, Mr Duckenfield actually came and stood to my right hand side, behind the
controls, and I would then move to the left hand comer and I have caught the video with my
knee - the actual operating button.

RH: ‘The buttons in the front o f the machines are tiny. They don’t stick out. It is highly
unlikely that he could have knocked it with his knee. More importantly, it is actually impossible
to flick a switch and go into time lapse mode if, as Bichard claims at 69G, the machine is
already recording’.

8) ‘Pictures shown to jury at inquest greatly enhanced’

At the inquest P73F, Bichard says that the video pictures shown to the jury of Leppings Lane
end of the ground were ‘greatly enhanced’. ‘What you must consider is that the screen we are
looking at is only 12 inches...(the tapes shown to the jury) gave a false impression about the
accuracy of the picture you were seeing’. He agrees with the coroner that the image seen by
the jury is ‘infinitely clearer’.

RH: ‘The screens in the control room were 14 inches, not 12. They are 5ft in front o f the
camera operator. The size o f the screen is in relation to the position o f the person watching it
in the control room. You get the same information as you would do if you showed the picture
on a larger screen, as they do in the court. It is irrelevant if the image is blown up. It is
simply not true that you get more information on the screen if the picture is enlarged’.

A t the inquest p74D Bichard says that the pictures the court have seen (which he initially claims
that he did not recognise as his own) was running on a time lapse system, and was not running
at the same speed as they would have seen it on the camera.

[From p80A, we know that the pictures shown to the court were actually taken from camera 5,
the allegedly faulty camera, and showed the Leppings Lane terraces].

RH: ‘You only get the time and date imprinted on the recording if things are recorded at
normal speed. ’

9) Camera 3 not trained on Leppings Lane end

P77G Bichard says that Camera 3, the one with maximum zoom facilities, wasn’t trained onto
the Leppings Lane end because there had been an incident at the Kop end. He agrees on p78A
that the camera remained on that location - then goes onto contradict himself at 78D by saying
that it was retrained onto the Leppings Lane end, but it was not recorded.
At 78B, Bichard says that this particular camera would not have been good enough to enable
identification of individuals at the front of Leppings Lane terraces ‘it would give you an overall
picture only’.

RH: ‘This camera was extremely powerful - and had magnification facilities o f 1:500. It would
have been able to give a very clear picture o f the Leppings Lane terraces’.

10) Why pictures from camera 3 did not become part o f the recording

At 78D, Bichard says that the reason the pictures from Camera 3 when it was retrained on the
Leppings Lane end did not become part of the recording was as follows.

 ‘The system operated whereby at 2.30 I should have replaced both tapes. Because of what was
happening on Leppings Lane end I didn’t replace those tapes, and eventually I think it ran out
just after 3.00. The camera was used, but it was not taping’.

RH: ‘It is very unusual fo r them to have needed to replace both tapes at 2.30. It would suggest
that they had been recording everything in real time since 11.30am.
                THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

                        CONDUCTED BY

                  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH


                           HELD AT

                          Room 1106
                    50 Queen Anne's Gate
                       London SW1H 9AT


                              ON

                  Tuesday, 14th October 1997




           MR C F BONE (Secretary to the Scrutiny)




Also present:
          Ms Ann Adlington (Solicitor for Hillsborough
          F a m i l y Support Group.

          Mr Roger Houldsworth




           Transcribed front the shorthand notes of
             Harry Counsell & Co, 61 Carey Street,
          London, WC2A 2JG. Telephone: 0171 242 9346




                                 1
     1
                                                                     2.00 pm
     2   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Good afternoon. •- In what capacity
     3        are you here, Ms Adlington?     Are you here as Mr
 4            Houldsworth1s solicitor?
     5   MS ADLINGTON:     I am solicitor for the Group, but
 6            Mr Houldsworth requested that I attend with him.
 7       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     You are acting as his solicitor
 8            for the day?
 9       MS ADLINGTON:     Yes, but not in an official capacity, I must
10            say.
11       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I hope that he will not need
12            any legal advice.  I do not think that it is likely that
13            any of the questions that I will ask him will put him at
14            risk or anything of that sort.
15                   Anyhow, it is very nice to see you.     I wanted to
16            have a word with you about one or two matters
17            afterwards, if we may.
18       MS ADLINGTON:    I have seen the checklist of outstanding
19            documents.
20       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    That is really more of an aide-
21            memoire than anything else.
22                   Mr Houldsworth, it is very good of you to come and
23            see me.    I have read the various statements that you
24            have made.    It might help if you have a copy in front of
25            you.    I do not want to go through them all word for
26            word, because I have read them and I see what you say.
27            What I am going to do is to simply ask you questions
28            about various things that arise on them.
29                   Could you look at your statement, which starts at
30            page 72?   That is the original statement that you made
31            and it is dated on the last page 16th May 1989.      I
32            imagine that this was made to the West Midlands Police.
33       MR HOULDSWORTH:    No.
34       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    To who was it made?
35       MR HOULDSWORTH:  It was made to Sheffield Wednesday's own
36            solicitors.
37       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    Can I just clarify one or two
38           matters?    If you look at page 12, which is the last
39           page, you are dealing with the two tapes that were


                                         2
 1         stolen or which disappeared.     You say that one of those
 2         was the tape relating to the camera which looks over
 3         gates 9 and 16.      I think that that must be turnstiles 9
 4         to 16.
 5    MR HOULDSWORTH:    That is correct.
 6    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      The other was from the VCR which
 7         had not been activated at the time.
 8    MR HOULDSWORTH:    That is also correct.
 9    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      If you turn on in the bundle,
10         you will find a statement which is made to the West
11         Midlands Police, dated 28th April.
12    MR HOULDSWORTH:   Yes.
13    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      On page 3 of that, again you say
14         (halfway down the page),      "The tapes concerned are (1)    a
15         blank tape from a camera      that was not operating;   (2) the
16         tape concerning turnstiles 9 to 12."      I just want to
17         check that that was correct, because there appeared to
18         me to be a slight inconsistency with what      you say on
19         page 3 (page 74) of the first statement.       You had been
2 0        dealing with the     Club system and at the top of page 3
21         you say, "Of the     19 static cameras, however, one was not
2 2        in commission at     the time because a wall had been
23         constructed after the camera had been installed, which
24         obstructed that camera's     view of the relevant
2 5        turnstiles. The turnstiles in question were those
2 6        numbered 9 to 16, which were referred to later in this
27         statement".
28                Those two statements cannot be correct, can they?
29    MR HOULDSWORTH:    How the system was operating from those
30         turnstiles 9 to 16, there were two cameras      in that area.
31         They overlapped.     You have the drawing of   the ground, do
32         you?
33    LORD JUSTICE   STUART-SMITH: Yes.
34    MR HOULDSWORTH (Indicating on the drawing) :     You are looking
35         at this end of the ground.
36    LORD JUSTICE   STUART-SMITH: You arepointing to     the west
37         end of the ground?
38    MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes.
3 9   LORD JUSTICE   STUART-SMITH: TheLeppings     Laneentrance?


                                        3
 1   MR HOULDSWORTH:   Yes.   These were the turnstiles that --
 2   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Here are 9 to 16'.
 3   MR HOULDSWORTH:   That is correct.    There were two
 4        cameras that were looking at that area and they did an
 5        overlap because of the angles of the camera. Then a wall
 6        was put across here, so it could not see that part ---
 7   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     There is really then no
 8        inconsistency?
 9   MR HOULDSWORTH:   No, there is no inconsistency as such.
10   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Thank you.   Could you turn on
11        to the next page, page 4 of the first statement?         You
12        are dealing here with the police system.       "Within the
13        police control box, there are seven TV monitors, five of
14        them are dedicated, one to each of the CCTV cameras.
15        The other two are connected to special time-lapse video
16        recorders and you can switch from camera to camera by
17        means of a passive switch within the control room, so
18        the officers in charge can record the scene being
19        displayed on any one of the five cameras".      That I
20        follow.
21             "The remaining two monitors are used so that the
22        officer can check which of the five cameras are being
23        recorded at any given time".     I am not quite sure to
24        what you are referring when you say "the remaining two
25        monitors".
26   MR HOULDSWORTH:   Perhaps, I could show you.
27   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Are the two remaining monitors
28        the same as the two to which you are referring a little
29        earlier: "The other two are connected to special time-
30        lapse video recorders"?
31   MR HOULDSWORTH:   That is correct.
32   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Then it is purely a grammatical
33        misunderstanding.   I thought that you were talking,
34        possibly, about two further monitors.
35   MR HOULDSWORTH:   No.
36   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I think that we have a picture.
37        I am looking at photograph 48 of the photographs.         As I
38        understand it, these are linked to the number of camera
39        that is referred to.


                                      4
 1    MR   HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
 2    LORD JUSTICE   STUART-SMITH:    And then that on'e is one of the
 3          monitor ones, is it?
 4    MR   HOULDSWORTH: Yes, these eyes,    obviously, are dedicated        to
 5          cameras 1 to 5.    This monitor at the end and       this one
 6          here, obviously, were put there, becausethere is         no
 7          space left in there, and are attached to      the VCRs
 8          (video-cassette recorders).     These switches here,     they
 9          operate whichever one of these five pictures will show
10          which one is being taped on these two monitors.         These
11          are the passive switches.
12    LORD JUSTICE   STUART-SMITH:    If yousee   something on    camera
13          1 which you want to record ----
14    MR HOULDSWORTH:    You just press one of these.
15    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      You press one of these and
16          you will have the same here as you will get on camera 1,
17          but it is being recorded.
18    MR HOULDSWORTH:   Yes.
19    LORD JUSTICE   STUART-SMITH:    Do both   of these haveexactly
2 0         the same facility?
21    MR   HOULDSWORTH: Exactly the same facility.      You could be
2 2         recording something from camera 1 on that one and
2 3         something from camera    3 on that one,   so you would get
24          duplicate pictures of whichever camera you were
2 5         recording from.
26    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:Also I understand that           there
2 7         is a system whereby one of these will flick from one
28          screen to another.
29    MR HOULDSWORTH:   Correct.     By pressing one of these buttons
30          here on the end - it is what is called an auto        sequencer
31          - from those auto sequencers the switcher itself will
3 2         take every one of the five inputs and sequence it around
3 3         at a preset interval.
34    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      Canyou, for example, just
3 5         sequence cameras 1, 2 and 3 and not 4 and 5?
3 6   MR HOULDSWORTH:   No.
3 7   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      So it would be all five of
3 8         them?
3 9   MR HOULDSWORTH:   Yes.


                                        5
 1   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I think that I have seen th4t
 2        happen on some of the videos.       Can you'determine how
 3        long any particular camera will be recorded under that
 4        means?
 5   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes, you can setit on those switches.
 6        You can set a preset     timing.
 7   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Can you help me about another
 8        matter?     If you go back to page 2 of that statement, you
 9        are dealing here with the Club CCTV room.        About five
10        lines up from the bottom, you say, "Within the CCTV room
11        situated in the south stand and the players' entrance,
12        there is a bank of 20 monitors, plus a monitor for the
13        computer system. This computer system records the number
14        of spectators that come through the turnstiles for each
15        separate area of the     ground. Of the 20 monitors within
16        the control room, 19     display the scenes as depicted    in
17        the Club static system".     That I understand.     That is
18        what we talked about earlier.      "The remaining monitors
19        are connected to the police CCTV system".
20             Am I right in thinking that     what you can see on
21        that monitor (the one connected to the police CCTV
22        system) is what would be being recorded on these two
23        monitors about which we have just spoken?
24   MR HOULDSWORTH:    No, sir.   I could pick any of them
25        up irrespective of whether they are being recorded or
26        not.
27   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Were you doing that?
28   MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
29   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     The next thing is that I want
30        to understand that we are talking about the same numbers
31        of cameras.     I have been provided with these numbers by
32        Mr Hicks.     They are not actually in sequence, but number
33        1 was the one on the west stand,     which by and large was
34        looking towards the Leppings Lane and the turnstiles at
35        that end.     Number 2 is situated on top of the south
36        stand, which has views all around the ground.        That is
37        the colour one.
38   MR HOULDSWORTH:     Yes, that is the colour one.
39   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Then there is another one here


                                       6
  1        which is above the tunnel, which is number 3.       That is
 2         black and white.     That is used primarily, as I
 3         understand it, for the Spion Kop end.
 4    MR HOULDSWORTH:    That is what the police primarily did use
 5         it for, but all the cameras, in fact, had the facility
 6         of a 320 degree sweep, so they could use it wherever
 7         they desired.
 8    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    If they wanted to go around
 9         the ground, and particularly if they wanted to go to
10         this end (that is the west end), they would presumably
11         use camera 2 in preference to camera 3.
12    MR HOULDSWORTH:    I would have thought so, but, again, I had
13         no control over exactly what they were looking a t .
14    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    Camera 4 is the one that is
15         overlooking Penistone Road and that can go either north
16         or south to see the whole range of Penistone Road.
17    MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes.
18    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    Finally, there is number 5, which
19         is the one nearest to the police control box, which is
20         mounted at the south-east corner of the west stand by
21         the scoreboard.
22    MR HOULDSWORTH:    It is on the score board.
23    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    That is camera 5.
24    MR HOULDSWORTH:    These are Mr Hicks's numberings.
25    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    But they are also, I think,
26          yours, are they not?
27    MR HOULDSWORTH:    They are related to what I have come
28         into now.    When I first developed the system, the
29         numberings were not exactly the same.     There is one part
30         of the submissions where he refers to camera 1 as being
31         camera 5.    That is wrong, it is camera 1 that they are
32         looking at: the one at the top of the west stand.
33    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    That is what I thought.
34    MR HOULDSWORTH:    That is correct.   That is incorrect and
35         I pointed that out to Ann last night.
36    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    I am grateful to you for
37         clearing that up.    That is to what I thought you were
38         referring.
39              Can we just go on a little bit more?     On page 7 of


                                       7
     1        the first statement you say, "By 2.45 the Kop and the
 2            south stand areas were full of Nottingham Forest
 3            Supporters, but    the north stand and the west stand areas
 4            were only about    two thirds full at that time and it was
 5            noticeable from    the staticcamera covering the Leppings
 6            Lane turnstilesthat there       was a build up of fans
 7            outside the turnstiles in that area."       Are you referring
 8            there to the Club camera?
 9       MR HOULDSWORTH:    Correct.
10       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I think that that is made clear
11            in the next paragraph.     "It was through the monitor
12            showing the scene depicted by that camera that it was
13            possible to see the build up of supporters outside the
14            turnstiles".
15       MR HOULDSWORTH:    That is correct, yes.
16       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Then on the next page you, first
17            of all, talk about the delay in the kick off.         Then
18            about half way down the page, you say,      "The police, of
19            course, were monitoring the situation themselves from
20            their own CCTV system and, in particular, using the
21            camera on the south west corner of the west stand.           We
22            could, of course, see that that camera was trained on
23            the Leppings Lane turnstiles, because we were able to
24            monitor the police pictures on one of the monitors
25            within our control room".       That is camera 1?
26       MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes, that is camera 1.
27       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     At the bottom of page 9 you
28            are referring to the request to open the gates.        This is
29            the request by the police,      "Open the gates".   The police
30            control replied,   "Yes, someone is going to die, open the
31            gate, open the gate.     And, as appears from the video­
32            tape recording, the gate was then opened, apparently by
33            a uniformed PC, and a huge number of fans flooded into
34            the area".     You are referring there both to the
35            C l u b ---
36       MR HOULDSWORTH:    No, I am referring there to the static
37            camera and the static camera only.       I believe that that
38            is shown quite clearly in the compilation tape, the way
39            that that camera was situated - looking at turnstiles A


                                          8
 I        to G - is that it overlooked gate C and, again, because
 2        of the angle of the lens, it gave you a-good view within
 3        the collecting area behind the turnstiles, the
 4        turnstiles themselves and gate C and part of the outside
 5        walkway.
 6   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:        You can see both from the Club
 7        tape and from the police tape, camera 1, people coming
 8        in through gate C.
 9   MR HOULDSWORTH:     Yes.     Here I was primarily referring to the
10        static camera.        At that point when the gate was opened,
11        I did switch the video monitor from the police system to
12        have a look at what was happening inside the ground,
13       because the central pens were very, very full.         It was
14        through experience and knowing the ground and what
15       usually did occur on this type of scenario - not when
16       the gate was opened, obviously, because that was the
17        first time that that ever happened - but when the two
18       central pens, which were the main attraction point for
19        fans, were full, normally what would happen was that
20       they had a removable barrier that went across the
21       tunnel, where they used to put stewards or possibly one
22       or two policemen.         It was when gate C was opened and
23       observing, primarily, from cameras 3 and 5 that those
24       central pens were full. Then, because I had no video
25        tape to record those, I had no facility to record those,
26       primarily what I am referring to here is the static
27        camera.     When that gate was opened and from the way that
28        the crowd flooded in - from the angle of the camera I
29        knew where they were going, towards the tunnel - we
30       began to get a bit alarmed, because we could see from
31        the top angle of the Leppings Lane camera that no
32       barrier had been put across.
33   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       Are you saying then that at
34        this time at 2.52 you switched the monitor in the
35        control room to pick up what was being shown on the
36        police cameras 3 and 5?
37   MR HOULDSWORTH:     Yes, we were looking at those all the time.
38   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:        You have not said that before,
39        have you?


                                         9
 1   MR HOULDSWORTH:    No.    I have not said it in a statement,
 2        but this statement, as I say, was given 'to Sheffield
 3        Wednesday's solicitor.      I never gave a statement or was
 4        asked to by the police concerning that part of the
 5        event.    It was only through my observations.      It was
 6        what alarmed both myself and Harold Guest, the policeman
 7        who was in the control room.      That is what alerted us to
 8        the situation.      Obviously, we did not think that people
 9        were going to die, but it was going to be a very large
10        influx of people that were going to go down that tunnel
11        to pens which you could obviously see from the monitors
12        were overcrowded.
13   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     When you talk about the
14        monitors, what are you talking about?
15   MR HOULDSWORTH:   The police monitor.
16   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Let us just go on a little.
17        "At that point in time I realised from the numbers
18        already displayed on the monitor as having entered from
19        Leppings Lane turnstiles that a dangerous situation was
20        being created".     What you are talking about there, as I
21        understand it, is the facility that you have for
22        checking the numbers that are coming into the ground.
23   MR HOULDSWORTH:   Yes.
24   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     That seems to be the reason
25        that you thought that there was a danger.
26   MR HOULDSWORTH:   No, it was taking the collective view of
27        everything that was happening.     If I had looked just
28        purely at the computer system, the computer system
29        counted each individual turnstile to give you a figure
30        of how many people had come through each individual
31        turnstile, and then at the bottom of that page, if you
32        like, on the VDU (video-display unit), it gave you a
33        collective figure for people that had come into that
34        area.    But that area was the whole of this.
35   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I understand that.
36   MR HOULDSWORTH:    It did not designate how many people are
37        going to pens three, four, one or two.
38   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     But you knew, as I understand
39        it, from your experience, that they tended to go into


                                      10
 1        the central p e n s .
 2   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Correct. That is what was alarming, because,
 3        looking at the computer, if my memory serves me
 4        correctly, there were still at least another 4,000
 5        spaces in the collective area of Leppings Lane.       If
 6        people had moved around to the wing areas of the
 7        terraces, instead of going down the tunnel ---
 8   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    That I follow, but what I am
 9        a little troubled about at the moment is that that does
10        not seem to be what you are saying in this statement.
11        It may be that there is no inconsistency, but you appear
12        to be saying, as I see it, on page 10, "It appears from
13        the video tape recording of the scene, the gate was then
14        opened, apparently by a uniformed PC, and a huge number
15        of fans flooded into the area".    You say that that is
16        what you were seeing on the Club static video.
17   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Correct.
18   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    "At that point in time I realised
19        from the numbers already displayed on the monitor as
20        having entered from Leppings Lane turnstiles that a
21        dangerous situation was being created."       Those appear to
22        be the two things that in your mind created the danger,
23        what you had seen on the Club video and the numbers that
24        you knew had come into the ground.
25   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes, knowing the numbers that
26        had come into the ground, but also, from looking at the
27        police monitors at pens three and four, which they were
28        primarily concentrating on, knowing that the numbers
29        that had come in had accumulated in the central two
30        pens.   It was an overview of the whole situation.      With
31        all due respect, sir, I was led by Sheffield Wednesday's
32        solicitor in making this statement, not by a policeman
33        or somebody who was totally impartial.    It was an
34        overall situation and the cognisance that I took into
35        effect knowing the layout of the ground, being able to
36        see how many people had gone into the central pens and
37        knowing that from the numbers displayed on the VDU that
38        the majority of those people were in the central pens,
39        and that the wing areas were free.    When the gate was


                                     11
 1        opened, not by putting a barrier across, those people
 2        were going to aim directly for that tunnel.
 3   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    Yes, I follow that.
 4             Then you say, "I left the room and went down the
 5        players' tunnel to the pitch and, just as I did so, the
 6        referee stopped the match, as I recall.    I looked over
 7        the west stand area and I saw fans climbing over the
 8        fence and my first thought was that there was a pitch
 9        invasion and the match had been stopped for that
10        reason".     Is that correct?
11   MR HOULDSWORTH:   It is correct, but this does not take any
12        cognisance of time.    It was not when the gate was opened
13        that I immediately ran out.
14   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    I follow that.
15   MR HOULDSWORTH:   We both waited to see what was happening
16        and where things were going to go. We realised that the
17        barrier had not been put across.    Harold tried to get
18        through to the police control, both by land line and by
19        his police radio. The land line was engaged, the police
20        radios were falling over, they were not working
21        properly, and Sheffield Wednesday's own radio system was
22        blocked up as well, because I tried to get through to
23        the police, who had a receiver in their police control
24        box, to tell them to get the barrier up, to try to get
25        them to do something. Then that is when Harold and I
26        decided that I would go down the tunnel to see what was
27        occurring in the area itself.
28   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Is the position then that you
29        had not appreciated from what you had seen and on the
30        screens that there was overcrowding?
31   MR HOULDSWORTH:    I had appreciated that there was
32        overcrowding.    That is what concerned us both.
33   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    Why did you not go out at that
34        stage?
35   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Looking back - and it is now a long time
36        ago - Harold was trying to get through and I waited to
37        see who was getting through.    He could not leave his
38        position and that is when it was decided that I would go
39        down.   I said, "I will go down and see what is


                                     12
 1        happening, see if we can get something to make a barrier
 2        to block that off".     By the time that I"got down there,
 3        things had already started to occur.       I will freely
 4        admit that at first I thought that it was pitch
 5        invasion.     The referee was just in the process of
 6        stopping the game.     I just sat down at the bottom of the
 7        tunnel and just looked over to see what was happening.
 8        Then two minutes after that, and certainly no longer,
 9        one of the lads ran back and the ground staff got us a
10        couple of stretchers.     He said,   "They are hurt" and we
11        ran over.
12   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I do not want to get on to that
13        for a moment.     Mr Guest saw everything that you saw in
14        the control room, did he?
15   MR HOULDSWORTH:     Yes.
16   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Can you tell me - I do not know
17        whether you can remember - when you saw the gate open,
18        was it before or after that that you switched over to
19        look at what cameras 5 and 3 were doing?
20   MR HOULDSWORTH:    We were flicking between them all the time.
21        The way in which the system worked and how it was
22        devised to work, with the police officer down there, was
23        that he was the liaison between the Club control and the
24        police.     Although the Club control room was purely
25        independent and was not meant there as a function for
26        crowd safety, it was primarily devised for anti-fraud.
27        The policeman was put in there as a sort of liaison.
28        That was all.     How it used to work was that the police
29        had no VDU input, no computer input in their control
30        room, so, in an ordinary game, we would say when the Kop
31        was getting full, because, as it came up to two thirds
32        full, it gave an indication on the computer.      What used
33        to happen was that Harold used to inform the police
34        control box and ask them to turn the camera down
35        Penistone Road one way or the other, so that we could
36        see the build up of the crowd, see if there was still a
37        lot coming down who would need entry or to see if it was
38        relatively free.      Say, we had about two and a half
39        thousand spaces, looking through the Penistone Road


                                      13
 1        camera, it was obvious that there were quite a number of
 2        people coming down still requiring entry into the Spion
 3        Kop area, we would then advise that they start closing
 4        turnstiles and the police and stewards, who were
 5        primarily outside (primarily the police) would start
 6        moving people around to other areas of the ground which
 7        still had plenty of capacity to take them.
 8   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     That I follow.    When you are
 9        coming up to the maximum number on your "numbers
10        monitors", if I can refer to them as that, you then want
11        to see how many people are coming in at Penistone Road,
12        if you are dealing with the Kop end.       That is right, is
13        it not?
14   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes.
15   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Similarly, you would want to see
16        what the position was at the Leppings Lane end if they
17        were coming up there.
18   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes, if you were concerned about the other
19        side.
20   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    What I do not quite follow at
21        the moment is why you need to look inside the ground.
22   MR HOULDSWORTH:     To look inside the ground gives you
23        the indication, as I say, because you take the
24        accumulative effect of the area. The computer does not
25        recognise if they go into one section or the other.        It
26        just counts the people coming through the turnstiles
27        which had access to the whole of the Leppings Lane
28        terraces.     At a football game, the primary objective of
29        most fans is to try to get behind the goal, so we knew
30        that the central pens were the ones that always got full
31        first.     On matches before, when those pens have been
32        full, we have looked in, and the police themselves have
33        done it, we did not advise them to barrier the tunnel
34        off, the police usually did it themselves.       They
35        barriered the tunnel off and started moving people to
36        the wings.
37   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I do not want you to run on too
38        much.     Would this be right?   If one were to have a
39        record of what camera 3 was doing in the ten minutes


                                      14
 1        before 3 o'clock, say, it would be focusing on the
 2        Leppings Lane terraces, would it?
 3   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Whether it was focusing there all the
 4        time or not, I do not know.      It was just that, when we
 5        looked at it, they had swung the camera away and had
 6        swung it around to Leppings Lane and one of the shots
 7        was at a fairly wide angle - I would say about half zoom
 8        - which showed the central pens quite full.     Number 5
 9        camera was parked in an area that you could see the
10        central pens at a fairly wide angle.      It was taking the
11        two. They were not concentrating on one camera,
12        because, as I say, I had no control over the camera, it
13        was a case of switching between the cameras.
14   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So far as camera 5 was concerned,
15        the views that you saw from camera 5, where was that
16        concentrated on?
17   MR HOULDSWORTH: That was concentrated along the Leppings
18        Lane area, at right angles to it.
19   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    Do you mean the terraces?
20   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes, the terraces.
21   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    What was it showing?
22   MR HOULDSWORTH:    It was showing the build up of the crowd.
23        You could see that the central pens were full, but there
24        were spaces both this side of the pens and the far side.
25   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:  I see.
26             Can we go to the record of the interview which you
27        had with Yorkshire TV, "First Tuesday"?
28   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Can I just have a short break?
29                      (Break from 2.37 to 2.41 pm)
30   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    If we could pick up the
31        interview with the television company at page 3, where
32        you say, "I've linked the video inputs down to here so
33        that the policeman, Harold Guest and Wednesday's own
34        security man can see what the police are actually
35        looking at.    We put it on to camera one which is the
36        west stand camera which overlooks the Leppings Lane
37        end."   That you confirm is camera 1 and not camera 5.
38   MR HOULDSWORTH:    That is correct.
39   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    You are dealing here with the


                                     15
 1        period, I think, just before the trouble starts.          You
 2        could see that the crowd was building up.       "This kept
 3        continuing up to approximately two thirty, two thirty
 4        five, where we could see that from that camera and also
 5        from the camera that is part of the Wednesday's own
 6        system, it overlooks turnstiles A to G and gate C, that
 7        it was a very, sort of abnormal build up."
 8             You are talking there about the Sheffield Wednesday
 9        camera which looks over gates A to G and also camera 1.
10                 Then you go on at the bottom to say,   "So it was
11        just a case that we watched it happening.       At
12        approximately twenty to three, somewhere around about
13        that region, we did notice that gate C was open and an
14        influx of people came through the gate". Again, you are
15        talking about police camera 1 and your own camera at
16        that stage.    Is that right?
17   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Primarily, I am talking about Wednesday's
18        own camera.
19   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     "Eventually the police got that
20        under control by putting a police horse across
21        gate C ..."    Then you are asked,   "Can I just interrupt
22        you at that point and ask you, you say it was an
23        abnormal build up, can you tell me what made you think
24        it was abnormal. What you saw on the monitors?"       Then
25        you reply, "Well what we saw on the monitors was the
26        mass of humanity that was outside the gates and looking
27        from the monitors themselves and from the inputs that
28        were going through on the computer system that there was
29        no relationship between the two".     The monitors there,
30        as I understand it, are the police camera 1 and the Club
31        camera, but then you are referring to the inputs, the
32        numbers, and that is the numbers monitor.       Is that
33        right?
34   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Correct.
35   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     "There was, there seemed to
36        be less people as though they'd got only a small crowd
37        outside coming through the turnstiles.     So that led us
38        to believe, or led me to believe, that the crowds
39        outside were forcing so much pressure against the


                                     16
     1         entrances to the turnstiles, instead of being like an
     2         orderly queue.     You don't look for the type of problem
     3         that obviously did occur, but you could see that there
     4         was a problem".    Again, I think this must be a reference
     5         to what you are seeing outside the turnstiles or around
     6         the turnstiles.
     7    MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct.
     8    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     "Now what the cause of that
     9         problem was I honestly didn't know but I had my own
    10         thoughts that too many people had come too late as



C
    11         opposed to last season's game, which I was also in
               attendance in the same position here, it was a more
               steady flow from an earlier hour".      Is that correct?
          MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
€         LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     That is what you thought.      Then
    16         you are asked, "Did you talk with the policeman who was

    17         in here with you and what was the conversation that you

    18         had with him?     Was he aware of the problem?"   You said,

    19         "The policeman was aware of the problem, but again I

    20         don't think really either myself, the policeman or Mr

    21         Lock sort of took any cognisance of what was happening

    22         outside.   You could hear the police radios and they were

    23         breaking down.     For what reason that was I do not know.

    24         Because it seemed to be as if there was an awful amount
               of static on the police radio".       So there was a problem
#    5
    26         with the radio, was there not?
          MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct.
•    7
    28    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Then you are asked,   "OK.    So let
    29         me ask you then, Roger.     Not talking about the very
    30         early part of the day but from when the crowds really
    31         started to build up.     If you can tell us what you saw on
    32         your screen when you saw the crowds building.          Then you

    33         say, "Well what I saw on the screens from both the
     34         camera on A to G and from the police monitor that the
     35         others.   A large build up of people outside the Leppings

     36         Lane turnstiles which sent very abnormal ..."         Again,
     37         you are looking at those two cameras, the police camera
     38         1 and the Club one, is that right?
     39    MR HOULDSWORTH:     That is right, yes.


                                            17
          lord    JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     »We came to the realisation that
                  a lot of people had arrived late and they were all
                  trying to get into the ground obviously before the kick
                 off at three o'clock.      The crowd outside bore no sort of
                 relationship to the people who were actually going
     6
                 through the turnstiles as I saw which led me to believe
     7
                 that there was a build up which would not allow the
     8           normal flow through"
     9
                      Then you say, "At about twenty to three, somewhere
 10
                 in that region, gate C was opened, at the time we didn't
 11
                 know why it was opened, just that it was opened. A large
 12              amount of people came into the ground."        This is the
 13              first occasion when gate C was opened, when it was to
 14              eject a fan, I think.
 15      MR HOULDSWORTH:     Correct.
 16      LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       A little further down,     "At about
 17              ten to, five to three when we heard that gate C was
 18              asked to be opened by the police, the command was given
 19              for gate C to be opened.        It was opened and the flow of
20            people came through.        It came through fairly steadily.
21               It built up to a surge, died off for a short while and
22            then it built up again and it built up then and it was
23            at that point then that I left the room to go down to
24            the entrance, to the players' entrance, just to see
25            exactly what was happening in the central pens".
26                 You appear throughout that passage to be referring
27            to what you are seeing both on the Club camera
28            controlling Leppings Lane end and also camera 1.
29       MR HOULDSWORTH:    Camera 1 and also flicking through the other
30            cameras.
31       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       You do not make any mention of
32            that.
33       MR HOULDSWORTH:    I do not.
34       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       Why was that?
35       MR HOULDSWORTH:    Because all the time this interview, again,
36           was led. Certain questions were put to me which I was
37           not allowed to answer.
38       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You are not being stopped
39            answering here, are you?


                                            18
      1
           MR HOULDSWORTH:    This is a transcript of it, sir.
      2
                I was not on the "First Tuesday" progrartime, because they
      3
                did not use any of this, but I had DCI Tope (I think his
      4
                name was) from the West Midlands Police with me all the
      5
                way through the interview.     When they asked me certain
     6
                questions, there were certain questions that he would
     7          not let me answer.
     8
           LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    I follow that, because I think
     9
                that there is an interruption at the end.     Just so that
 10
                I understand what you are saying, this is an accurate
 11
                transcription, as far as you are aware, of what you
 12             said.
 13       MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes, but there are certain things that were
 14            asked me - I cannot remember specific questions, but you
 15            asked me if this is accurate as to what was asked and
 16            what I said, and there were certain things that were
 17            asked me that I was not allowed to answer.
 18       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I follow that.   I do not want to
 19            get on to that at the moment.      This has been put before
20             me, as I understand it, as an accurate record of what
21             you said at this interview.     You confirm, as I
22             understand it, that that is so.
23        MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes.   I have no doubt that I did say this.
24             What I am saying is that this seems to follow on in a
25             complete order, but there were certain interjections
26             within the interview where I was not allowed to answer.
27        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    Where do we find that?
28        MR HOULDSWORTH:    It is not in here.   They have probably
29             edited those parts out and then come down to a complete
30             interview and then did not use it at all.     I really
31            cannot say.    All I am saying is that all the way through
32
              this interview, certain questions were asked - I cannot
33            remember now the questions; I remember doing this, but I
34            cannot remember what was asked me in total - and there
35            were certain interjections that were made by the
36            policeman to say, "No, you can't answer that".       Then it
37            followed on from there.     Whether this is a full
38
              transcript - it obviously has not got the interruptions
39            in it, so I cannot honestly say that it is a full


                                          19
 1        transcript, because certain questions were asked me that
 2        I just presume the police thought were contentious and
 3        would not allow me to answer in my own way, and it went
 4        on from there.   Then, eventually, as you say, it got to
 5        the end where he stopped the interview altogether.
 6   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     At the moment I am dealing with
 7        what appears to be a fairly unrestrained account given
 8        by you of the few minutes or half an hour or so before
 9        you went out on to the pitch.
10   MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
11   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Were you stopped saying anything
12        important in relation to that period?
13   MR HOULDSWORTH:  I cannot remember specifics now, sir, it is
14        an awful long time ago.     All I can remember is that
15        certain questions were asked that I was not allowed to
16        answer.   He just said,   "You can't ask him that" and then
17        they moved on to something else.
18   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     We have a record of a question
19        of that sort towards the end to which we will come in a
20        moment.   At the moment I am finding difficulty in
21        understanding why, when you appear to be giving a
22        coherent account of what you did and at what you were
23        looking, there is no reference whatever to you looking
24        at these other screens.
25   MR HOULDSWORTH: No, sir.   I answered the questions that --
26   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Can you account for it?
27   MR HOULDSWORTH: Not really, no.
28   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Did you think what you had seen
29        on these other screens was important?
30   MR HOULDSWORTH:   At that particular point in time, no.       It
31        did not occur to me that it was important then.      It does
32        now, yes.
33   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Why does it occur to you to be
34        important now?
35   MR HOULDSWORTH:  I think it is now, especially with the
36        evidence that was given by the police, Bichard and Ryan,
37        at the inquest that the cameras were faulty and then not
38        only the cameras being faulty, but, since I have been
39        able to prove that the cameras were not faulty, we have


                                      20
 1       had that the videos were switched off, the videos were
 2        lost, then the monitors were not working, then it was
 3       BBC interference on the monitors that was causing the
 4       problem that they could not use camera 5.         Yes, I do
 5       think that it is important now. Because of things that
 6       have come to light which I knew absolutely nothing about
 7       until the beginning of last year, I do feel that it is
 8        important now.    When I gave this interview, I was asked
 9        if I would do a TV interview as they were doing a
10       documentary on the "First Tuesday".         I was not looking
11       to lay blame or anything on anybody, I was just giving
12       what I thought was a general interview. As I say,
13       through the interview there are certain questions - as I
14        say, I cannot remember specifics - but there were
15       questions that were asked me to which the police were
16        saying, "You can't answer that".
17   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      I think that we can see that
18        on the last page of this interview, page 11, halfway
19        down the page, "Can I ask you finally what you saw when
20        you went outside and looked at the pens for yourself"
21        and then "MAN", who is obviously the policeman,        "Hang on
22        is this in your statement?        (A)   No, this is not in my
23        statement.   (Policeman)     He can only talk about what is
24        in his statement".
25             Is this a reference to some statement that you had
26        given to the television company?
27   MR HOULDSWORTH: N o .
28   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: What was it?
29   MR HOULDSWORTH: I do not know what statement it wa s .        He
30        just said that.    I presume that that is what was said.
31        I cannot remember.    As I say, it was a long time ago.
32        All I know is that the interview was stopped at a
33        certain point.    He had not lost his temper, but it was
34        as if he had lost his patience, and he said, "That's it,
35        he can't say any more".      He referred to a statement, he
36        asked if this was in my statement.         The only statement
37        that I made at any time was to Sheffield Wednesday's own
38        solicitor.   I never made a statement to the South
39        Yorkshire or the West Midlands police concerning the


                                       21
     1         actual disaster itself or what occurred in any detail to
     2         anyone, other than Sheffield Wednesday's solicitor.
     3         What statement he is referring to there, I really cannot
     4         say.
     5    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Just help me about this,
     6        Mr Houldsworth. Have you discussed your evidence at all
     7        with anyone in the last few days?
 8       MR HOULDSWORTH:     No, not at all.
 9       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      Not in the last fortnight or so?
10       MR HOULDSWORTH: N o .
11       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     But you have looked at the
12            transcript of what transpired between me and counsel on
13            3 0th September.
14       MR HOULDSWORTH:     No, I have not.
15       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I thought that you said that
16            you had.
17       MR HOULDSWORTH:     I am sorry, I do not understand.
18       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Because you corrected something.
19            You said that it was not correct that you were referring
20            t o --
21       MR HOULDSWORTH:    No, you asked me how the cameras were
22            numbered and if it was camera 1 or camera 5, as Trevor
23            Hicks was referring to, the one on the top of the west
24            stand, and I said,    "No, that is camera 1. Camera 5 is on
25            the score board".
26       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    That is all that you have been
27            asked, is it?
28       MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes, that is all that I have been asked.
29       MS ADLINGTON:     I did mean to start off the meeting with
30            that point, to make that concession.      I discussed that
31            with Mr Bone outside.
32       MR BONE:   She did, sir.
33       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    When you got outside, as I
34            think you said in your earlier statement, you did not
35            realise what was going on for a moment and you thought
36            it was a pitch invasion.      Is that right?
37       MR BONE:   That is correct, yes.
38       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    Why did you think that?
39       MR HOULDSWORTH:    People coming over the pitch, over the


                                          22
 1        turnstiles, the police mulling up at that end, I just
 2        did not think at all that people were dying, that there
 3        was such a crush that people were literally getting
 4        hurt.   It is just not something that ---       I mean, I
 5        have been to hundreds and hundreds of football matches,
 6        I have never ever seen anything like that before in my
 7        life.
 8   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     So when you saw all these people
 9        coming in through gate C, you saw that on the screens,
10        and you realised that they were likely to go to pens
11        three and four, which you already appreciated were full,
12        you did not think that that was going to be a dangerous
13        situation.
14   MR HOULDSWORTH:    I thought that it would be uncomfortable
15        but not to the extent that it was.        I certainly did not
16        think, even with people coming over on to the ground at
17        that initial time, that people were getting seriously
18        injured.     I just thought, unfortunately, with all due
19        respect, Ann, Liverpool did have a reputation, same as
20        virtually all teams.    Quite a few teams in the UK had a
21        reputation for, let us say, bad behaviour and Liverpool
22        was one of those teams.       It was in the height of the
23        hooligan period in football and it was just something
24        that you thought was happening: yes, it is a pitch
25        invasion.     With the police going in there, I was in the
26        same mind then as I suppose all the policemen that went
27        on the ground.     I think that we all thought exactly the
28        same.   All our thoughts were not trained on crowd safety
29        at that time.    Although I was a consultant down at
30        Sheffield Wednesday, I was only an electronics engineer
31        and nothing else.     I used to help out, but you just
32        never ever really thought about crowd safety.
33   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:        Can I just ask you something
34        else?   You are fairly familiar with the police control
35        box.
36   MR HOULDSWORTH:     Quite, yes.
37   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:        I have some pictures of it.
38        It seems to me that the police have a very good view
39        from that control box through the windows.


                                         23
     1    MR HOULDSWORTH:    I would say so, yes.
     2
          LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      If they wanted to see what the
     3
               position was in pens three and four, they can see it out
     4         of the windows, can they not?
     5    MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
     6    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    In what way do the CCTV cameras
     7         assist them?
     8    MR HOULDSWORTH:    CCTV cameras were primarily put in again
     9         for crowd trouble, crowd control, not for safety.         The
 10            CCTV system was designed purely for the identification
 11            of culprits, so that they could see if any trouble was
 12            occurring and, if it occurred, they could zoom in on to
 13           that person and, if necessary, persons, and pull them
 14           out of the crowd.
15       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    Is it right that, if the police
16            watching through the windows of the control box thought
17            that they saw trouble, they could zoom in the camera on
18            them?
19       MR HOULDSWORTH:    How the police worked in the Wednesday
20            control room was that Ryan and Goddard were sat at the
21            front.   When you opened the door, there was a desk on
22            your left-hand side where the windows were.        Ryan and
23            Goddard were sat there doing the radio control.        There
24            was a walkway and on the right-hand side was the desk
25            and a built-up step with the controller for the CCTV sat
26            behind that desk.    His primary job was to look at the
27            monitors which were placed ---
28       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    This is Mr Bichard?
29       MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes, or whoever the controller was.
30       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    It was Mr Bichard on this day.
31       MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes, he was on that day.      The monitors
32            were placed above the desk that overlooked the windows.
33       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    So that the police in the front
34            row would not really be looking at the monitors at all.
35       MR HOULDSWORTH:    No, the people in the front row could not
36            see the monitors, because, if they were sat there, they
37            were directly above them.        Unless, they leant back, they
38           would not be able to see them.        As you can see, this is
39            the desk part here, and that police box used to get


                                          24
             quite full.
       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      Mr Murray, as I-understand it,
            was also in the front row, perhaps you do not know that
       MR HOULDSWORTH: I do not know.
       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      At any rate, anybody sitting in
            the front row is dependent upon looking out of the
            window to see what was going on?
       MR HOULDSWORTH:     Yes, unless they actually leant quite far
            back or stepped back.      It was not a very big control box
 1C
            at all.     More than about four people in there meant that
 11         they were sort of crawling all over each other.
 12
       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I think that you have confirmed
 13
            what seems to me to be apparent from looking at these
 14         pictures that you would be able to see, primarily, by
 15         looking out of the window, what the state of those west
 16         terraces were.
 17   MR HOULDSWORTH:  I would say so, yes.      That is the best view
 18        that they had of the ground.
 19   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Much better than anything that
 20        you get from a camera?
 21   MR HOULDSWORTH:     Yes.   For an overall perspective, yes.
22    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      So far as camera 5 is concerned,
23         that is, so far as the terraces are concerned, at any
24         rate, further down, it is looking slightly from behind,
25         is it not?
26    MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes.    The terraces are there, you are
27         looking at about a 30 degree angle on to it.
28    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     You would not see anybody's
29         face who was looking towards the pitch.
30    MR HOULDSWORTH:    No, you would get a profile view.
31    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I can see that, if you are
32
           looking into a very sparsely-populated pen and there are
33        only a few people around that, you might get a good
34        profile or something of that sort ---
35      HOULDSWORTH:    If they are looking out towards
36        the pitch, y es.
37
        D JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      If you have a pretty packed
38        pen, certainly anything like the situation that
39
          pertained from about quarter-to-three on the day in


                                       25
                   qu   cion in pens three and four, you would not be able
                   to identify anybody in that pen from camera 5, would
                   you?
              MR HOULDSWORTH:     If you zoomed ^   y(^     you ^
                   very tight shot.
              LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH- w        „
                                      H - Wlth a massive crowd like that’
              MR HOULDSWORTH- Yes    Yon         • ,
                               Yes- You would pick out the ones that were
                   nearest to you, obviously, but you would not be able to
                  get a head and shoulder shot unless they actually turned
     1
     C
                  round and physically faced the camera, if everyone
     11
                  turned round and physically faced the camera, but what
 12
                  you could get is a profile shot, if you zoomed in, and
 13
                  it was a really tight zoom on the camera.
 14
          LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:        But you certainly would not need
 15
                  that to see that the pens were overfull.          That would not
 16               help at all.
 17
          MR HOULDSWORTH:       No.   The way in which camera 5 was set was
 18
                  that it was parked and it was only from my recollection
 19
                  about two-thirds zoom on the wide angle.          What it did
 20              give you was a very great depth of field.
 21
          LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       It was parked, was it, at that
 22            time?
 23       MR HOULDSWORTH:       Yes, it was at that time.
24        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       Where was it looking?
25
          MR HOULDSWORTH:       It was looking down over the terraces
26
          LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       We ought to have some shots of
27             that recorded.
28
          *    HOULDSWORTH:     That I cannot say, sir, because, as I say,
29
                 I had no control over what they were taping and what
30               they were not taping.
31
          JORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:  If it is flicking in and out,
32             you would expect that, would you not?
33
          1R HOULDSWORTH:       If it is on sequence, but   whether it was
34
                 on sequence at that time, I really do not know.
35
          ORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       Normally, as I understand it,
36
                they would override the sequencer, as you call it, if
37
                there was something interesting at which they wanted to
38
                look.   Perhaps that is not a question for you
39
          R    HOULDSWORTH:     It is not really, sir, because I was not


                                            26
      1
                privy to how the police operated the system.
      2
           LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     That is certainly’what I would
      3
                have expected.      If you are just flicking around the
      4
                ground generally, then you would go on to sequence, but,
      5
                if you are interested in a particular part of the
     6
                ground, then you override the sequence and fix the
     7
                camera on that particular thing and that is to what you
     8          are paying attention.
     9     MR HOULDSWORTH:    If you want to record it, yes, sir.
 10        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Just help me about this.      As
 11
                I understand it, the Club control room is very near the
 12             players' tunnel and it takes you, what half a minute to
 13             get on to the pitch.
 14       MR HOULDSWORTH:     Yes, 15-20 seconds.
 15        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     You were out there very
 16             quickly.
 17       MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes.
 18       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      It appears to me that the
 19            zoom facility was demonstrated to the jury at some
20             stage.
21        MR HOULDSWORTH:    That is correct.
22        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Who did that?
23        MR HOULDSWORTH:    I did it.
24        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Some time during the inquest
25             they all went to the ground.       Is that right?
26        MR HOULDSWORTH:    That is right.     I was requested to be
27             in attendance to demonstrate how the system worked.
28        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     They went up into the control
29             box.
30        MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
31        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: They would be able to see the
32             view from the control box.
33        MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes.
34        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     While they were up there,
35             did you demonstrate how the various cameras worked?
36        MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, I did.
37        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     And the shots were coming up
38             on the screens.
39        MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.


                                          27
      1    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       Did you demonstrate camera
      2         1?
     3     MR HOULDSWORTH:     I demonstrated all the cameras.
     4
           LORD    JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So they would see quite clearly
     5
                   from that what cameras 1, 2 and 5, which are the ones        in
     6          which we are primarily interested, could show.
     7     MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
     8     LORD    JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Can I just ask you       about some
     9            of the comments that you made?      This is in the bundle
 10               of documents.    At page 2 (page 86), you say under (1),
 11                I was able to see what the police could see on their
 12               monitors and he specifically remembers ...11    I think
 13               that that must be "I specifically remember", must it
 14               not?
 15       MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
 16       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       Anyway, you "specially remember
 17               checking to see the state of pens three and four when
18                the order was given to open the gates.     I could see very
19                clearly that the pens were full to the point of
20                overcrowding".     I think that that is the first time that
21                you have actually said that in writing.
22        MR HOULDSWORTH:     Yes.    I was never asked before about it.
23        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       You were never asked to give your
24             account about it.
25        MR HOULDSWORTH:     I was never asked to give my account about
26             it, no.
27        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       There is this question of the
28                blind spot, and perhaps you can help me about this.       I
29                have only got the photograph, but the jury would have
30                seen it on the ground.    The best view is photograph 51.
31             What I think is being referred to is that, because of
32             the angle of the fence and the fact that you have these
33             wires going back, if you have someone right at the
34             front, you would not actually see them.
35        MR HOULDSWORTH: That is the only thing that I can think
36             that that means.
37        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       I think that that is to what
38            the reference is.        You would not disagree with that,
39            would you?


                                             28
      1    MR HOULDSWORTH:  I would not disagree.        I would not refer
      2         to it as a "blind spot".                     ,•
     3
           LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Obviously, you can see what is
     4          going on.
     5     MR HOULDSWORTH:     Yes, you can see what is going on.
     6          The blind spot that I thought that it was referring to
     7
                when I read that part was the spot directly below the
     8          police box itself.
     9     LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     I do not think so, but, anyhow,
 10             I can check that.
 11                    You say at page 89, "Bichard admits that there was
 12             a video going of the situation on the west terrace from
 13             about 2.30".     It would be going all the time, would it
 14             not?   That camera was recording or, rather, was taking
 15            pictures all the time from 12 o'clock in the morning, as
 16            I understand it.
17        MR HOULDSWORTH:      It should have been, sir, yes.
18        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Well, it was.     I do not think
19             that anyone has ever suggested that it was not.
20        MR HOULDSWORTH:      I do not understand your
21             question.
22        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Perhaps,   it is not a question
23             so far.    Do you see under paragraph 7, "Bichard admits
24             that there was a video going of the situation on the
25             west terrace from about 2.30, yet no pictures from this
26             camera were ever made available to the inquiry or the
27             inquest". That depends whether or not they were
28             recorded, does it not?
29        MR HOULDSWORTH:    That would depend on whether he had put
30             that particular camera on to be recorded, yes, and he
31             would know, if he had put it on, because it would show a
32             duplicate picture.
33        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     If we have the tapes which show
34             that there is not anything, then we know that he did not
35             put it on.
36        MR HOULDSWORTH:    Correct.   As I say, sir, I cannot say what
37             was recorded or what was not recorded, I just do not
38             know.
39        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     We know what was recorded and


                                           29
     1         what was not recorded, because we have got the tapes.
     2         Maybe you have not seen them.
     3    MR HOULDSWORTH:    I have seen certain tapes.      I have seen the
     4         compilation tapes and I have seen the tapes that were
     5         found down at Yorkshire Television.       I have not said
     6         that I have seen all the tapes, no.       As you must
     7         appreciate, sir, my primary concern when I was looking
     8         at the tapes after thebeginning of last year         was camera
     9         5, which they were saying was not working.
 10       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      They did not quite say that.     If
 11            you think that that is what they said, they certainly
 12            did not say that it was not working.
 13      MR HOULDSWORTH:     It was faulty.
14       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       They said that it had been
15            faulty and it was not as good as it should have been.
16       MR HOULDSWORTH:     This is where I disagree.
17       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:        You disagree with that?
18       MR HOULDSWORTH:     I totally disagree with     that.
19       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       I was not sure whether you were
20            right, maybe this is perhaps not a matter to deal with
21            now.    Under paragraph 9     at the top of page 91, you make
22            a reference to what was       said at page 77 ofthe
23            transcript.    You say that that is a      reference tocamera
24            3.     I am not quite sure why you say     that, because I
25            thought it was camera 2, but I do not know that it is of
26            any great significance.      I think that I perhaps need not
27            trouble you with that, because I think that, if one
28            reads the transcript, I think that it is fairly clear
29            that it is camera 2.
30       MR HOULDSWORTH:    I think that he does mean camera 3 there
31            and not camera 2.    Camera 2 was the colour camera.
32            Camera 3 is the black-and-white camera which is on the
33            south stand nearer towards the Kop.       That had a very,
34            very powerful lens on it.
35       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Which one?
36       MR HOULDSWORTH:    Camera 3, which I have noted there or
37            someone has put down there.       The reason that it was
38            black and white was that, because of the stand cover
39            over the Kop, colour would not get into there and give a


                                           30
     1
               good quality reproduction. It was turned into black and
     2         white in order to cover that area.      The’area that that
     3
               was primarily sited to cover is the largest area of what
     4         was standing room at that time.      It had a very powerful
     5
               lens on.     Most of the problems that did occur in the Kop
     6         occurred at the very back of the Kop, which was a very,
     7
               very dark area. It had to be a really powerful lens to
     8         get into the back of there.
     9    LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    At any rate, you are referring to
 10           camera 3 as having the very powerful lens.
 11      MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct.
12       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      I do not think that we need,
13            perhaps, waste time about what Mr Bichard is talking
14            about.  I can check that myself.
15                  I am not quite sure what point you are making when
16            you are talking about Chief Inspector McRobbie.
17       MR HOULDSWORTH:     I did not write that, sir.    This is the
18            evidence that Mr McRobbie gave the Taylor inquiry.         It
19            is nothing to do with me.
20       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     So you are not making any
21            comment on that?
22       MR HOULDSWORTH:     I am agreeing with him more than anything.
23       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     The only comments are the
24            ones which are under "RH".
25       MS ADLINGTON:     The ones in italics, sir.
26       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     So far as the condition or
27            the reproduction from these cameras, I would like to
28            show you some of the video stuff that we have and ask
29            for your comments on the quality of it.
30                  Can we show that bit from about 14.30 onwards?
31       MR BONE:   It is 14.28 onwards.
32            (First Video shown)
33       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     These are the scenes at the
34            Leppings Lane end.     When I say the Leppings Lane end, I
35            mean Leppings Lane itself.      (14.28.14)   That is the Kop,
36            is it not?
37       MR BONE:   Yes.
38       MR HOULDSWORTH:    This is the colour camera.     How many
39            generation copy is this one?


                                         31
 1   MR BONE:    We got this via Trevor Hicks from Yorkshire TV.
 2   MR HOULDSWORTH:    The originals are far better than that.
 3   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     You say that this is the colour
 4        one?
 5   MR HOULDSWORTH:    That is the colour camera.        On the original
 6        ones that I saw from Yorkshire Television, you can quite
 7        clearly see that that is in colour, but the colour has
 8        been lost in reproduction.          This is the trouble when you
 9        are taping VHS to VHS on domestic systems, you do lose
10        quality in reproduction.
11   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Can you move it on a bit then?
12               What camera is that?        I thought that this was all
13        camera 3, I must say.
14   MR HOULDSWORTH:    I think that it is all camera 3.
15   MR BONE:    Can I just try the other tapes, where we have
16        this material from about 14.2 0 of pen three or what
17        appears to be pen three?
18   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      Yes.
19        (Second video shown - start of tape timed at 14.18.25)
20   MR BONE:    This is the same source via Trevor Hicks and
21        Yorkshire TV.
22   MR HOULDSWORTH:    This is camera 5.
23   MR BONE:    This is pen two looking intopen three,        is it
24        not?
25   MR HOULDSWORTH:    Yes, it is pen two.
26   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     (14.20.00)      Would you be able
27        to identify those people?
28   MR HOULDSWORTH:    On the original tape, yes, you can.
29        You have a smearing here which is a thing that occurs
30        when you tape from tape to tape.         I think that you are
31        somewhere around the fourth or fifth copy here.           On the
32        original tapes that I saw at Yorkshire Television, they
33        are quite identifiable.
34   MR BONE:    I think that they are pretty identifiable here.
35   MR HOULDSWORTH:    You see this smearing. That is       what
36        occurs when   you tape from tape to tape. It       really
37        should be done by a broadcast-level recorder, then you
38        will get far better quality.         No doubt, one of the
39        television companies could do it for you quite easily.


                                        32
      1
           LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:         (14.20.50)    You would expect
      2
                the original police tape to be of rath6r better quality’
     3
           MR HOULDSWORTH:      Yes.     It is definitely better.    I have seen’
     4
                the ones at Yorkshire Television, which were given by
     5          South Yorkshire.         I think that they are about second
     6          generation.      They are very, very clear.       If you play it
     7
                on what is called a pneumatic recorder, which is a
     8          broadcast-level recorder, they will come out far, far
     9          better.      That is the same format as they are recorded
 10             on.
 11        MR BONE: There is not very much left on this particular
 12             tape.
 13        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: This goes on to the end of the
 14             tape. We will stop it there.
 15       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:         It was some of the shots of
 16            Leppings Lane that I wanted Mr Houldsworth1s view on.           I
 17            think that it was the other tape at the beginning.
18             (First video shown again)
19        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:         (14.33.19)    That is the Kop
20             again.
21        MR HOULDSWORTH:      Yes.
22        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:         (14.35.3 0)   That is the
23             colour camera.
24        MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
25        MR BONE:   This is outside Leppings Lane.
26        MR HOULDSWORTH:      That is right. That is off camera 1.
27        MR BONE:   (14.35.36)        It has gone on to time lapse.
28             (14.3 6.47)     Is that camera 1 again?
29        MR HOULDSWORTH:     That is camera 1 again, yes.
30        MR BONE: It is one shot per second. This is time-
31             lapse mode.
32        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:         (14.37.42) How does this
33             compare in your opinion with the original?
34        MR HOULDSWORTH:     Can I just explain how it works without
35             getting too technical?        How time lapse works is that it
36             takes a shot every part of a second like a still
37            photograph.      When it is played back, if you play it back
38            on the same type of recorder - in other words, a time-
39             lapse recorder - you can actually get that working in


                                              33
 1        the time mode so that you can see those shots as
 2        individuals.     What has happened there'is that it has
 3        been shot and recorded in three-hour mode from 24-hour
 4        time mode.     What you are getting is that jerky movement,
 5        which, obviously, denigrates the picture somewhat.            If
 6        you could play the original tape back on a time-lapse
 7        video recorder, you would see it reproduced exactly as
 8        it has been shot.     That would give you a far clearer
 9        picture.     The idea of time lapse is to extend a three-
10        hour tape, but, when you get to the section in which you
11        are particularly interested, you can put it back into
12        its time-lapse mode and replay it in exactly the same
13        format as it was recorded.         If it is taking a shot every
14        point 25 of a second, you would play it back in every
15        point 25 of a second.
16   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      It is really not a very good
17        reproduction of the time lapse.
18   MR HOULDSWORTH:     No, because you are     doing it on a
19        three-hour tape on a three-hour        video recorder.    To be
20        able to get it properly, you need to get hold of the
21        original tape and play that back in time-lapse mode.
22   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      Thank you. We have no more
23        questions.
24   MS ADLINGTON:     There is something that I felt that I should
25        bring to your attention at this stage, whilst Mr
26        Houldsworth is here.       It is something that we will be
27        submitting a further submission on.            It is
28        Superintendent Murray's evidence to Taylor on 31st May
29        1989.
30   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      Is this in connection with
31        Mr Houldsworth1s evidence?
32   MS ADLINGTON:     Yes, it is.    It is Day 11, page 123.
33        This is Mr Glasgow's cross-examination of Mr Murray.
34        You can read it for yourself.        Mr Glasgow is asking Mr
35        Murray,    "Likewise there is not any way in which the Club
36        screens in their room can see what you are looking at,
37        is there?     (A) Well, my information is that one of the
38        monitors in the Club's control room is continuously
39        monitoring our recording camera.         (Q)     Yes, absolutely


                                        34
 1        right, Mr Murray.        In other words, they can look at
 2        whatever it is that you happen to be recording at that
 3        time?     (A)     That is correct, sir, yes.   (Q)   So, if the
 4        police recording equipment happens to be switched on to
 5        one of the gate cameras, for example, that is the
 6        picture that will show also in the Club room?"          (A)
 7        Yes, sir".
 8   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       Mr Houldsworth says that that
 9        is not correct.
10   MS ADLINGTON:     .That is the point that we wanted to bring
11        to your attention, because, clearly, Lord Justice Taylor
12        to some extent has been misled by counsel for the Club.
13   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       That is wrong, is it?
14   MR HOULDSWORTH:       That is wrong, yes.
15   MS ADLINGTON:        It may well be, sir, that one of the reasons
16        why Mr Houldsworth was not called as a witness was
17        because,, in effect, what is being said there is that
18        what Mr Houldsworth or anybody in the Club control room
19        could see was only that which was being recorded in the
20        police control room. Therefore, they are only extra
21        pairs of eyes.
22   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       Yes, thank you.
23                I do not think we need keep Mr Houldsworth any
24        longer.
25            (Mr Houldsworth left the meeting at 3.3 5 pm)
26   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:       There is just one other matter
27        that I wanted to ask you about, Ms Adlington.         That is
28        in relation to your submissions.       What I am not quite
29        clear about - and I should have asked Mr Jones about
30        this - is at paragraph 3 9 to 42 you deal with Chief
31        Inspector McRobbie.       I am not really clear what the
32        point is that is being made here.        It is not suggested,
33        is it, that this incident that Chief Inspector McRobbie
34        speaks about occurred shortly before 3 o'clock?
35   MS ADLINGTON:     No, it is not.    Simply the point being made
36        is that McRobbie praised the system or said that the
37        system worked very well.       He was not called as a witness
38        to the inquest, so the only evidence that, basically,
39        the inquest heard was about the camera not working or


                                        35


                                                                            J
 1        not being up to scratch, whereas McRobbie's evidence was
 2        quite t*o the contrary at the Taylor Iriquiry.
 3   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      McRobbie is referring, as I
 4        understand it, to what we have seen today on --
 5   MS ADLINGTON:    On the black-and-white camera .5, sir.
 6   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      Yes.   That is the incident at
 7        14.18.
 8   MS ADLINGTON:.   This is the group of youngsters on the
 9        terrace with the newspaper.
10   MR BONE:   Yes, that is timed at 14.18.
11   LORD JUSTICE'.STUART-SMITH:     Is it your understanding that
12        that is to what he is referring?
13   MS ADLINGTON:    I thought that he was actually referring to
14        someone who dropped his pants or something underneath
15        the police control box.
16   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      I do not know where you
17        get that from.
18   MS ADLINGTON:    -That is an extract from his evidence to
19        Taylor, but he has also made a statement, so it may
20        actually be in his statement.
21   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      You have seen the statement,
22        have you?
23   MS ADLINGTON:    Yes, I have.    It should be included in the
24        original bundles submitted to the Home Office and the
25        DPP's office back in March.       It was in the blue binders.
26   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      I will check it.   That is
27        where the dropping of the pants comes from?
28   MS ADLINGTON:    I think so, sir, yes.     I think that it was
29        at an earlier stage.
30   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      I think that it is the incident
31        that one sees on the television.
32   MS ADLINGTON:    I think that it is a different incident, sir.
33        If you look at his statement, I am sure that he refers
34        in his statement to someone dropping their trousers
35        right underneath the control box.
36   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      It may be that they did not
37        manage to record that.
38   MS ADLINGTON:    Also I think that it has been pointed out
39        in correspondence to CPS, the fact that McRobbie is


                                       36
 1        looking at the monitors.     He is witnessing an incident
 2        and he passes no comment at all about 'the monitor being
 3        faulty, which is one of the excuses which South
 4        Yorkshire police came up with on 1st April this year,
 5        that there was a fault on the monitor, as opposed to the
 6        camera.
 7   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     You are going to let me have the
 8        details of what the police said at one stage?
 9   MS ADLINGTON:     Yes.
10   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     How are we getting on with the
11        material with which you are going to provide us?
12   MS ADLINGTON:     I spoke to Alun Jones yesterday.    He has a
13        day in chambers on Friday and he hopes then to finalise
14        the further submissions for submission on Monday of next
15        week.
16   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    All I want is the material that
17        I have asked for in the letter.     I do not, actually,
18        need further submissions about it, other than those that
19        have been called for.     You think that we will get them
20        on Monday?
21   MS ADLINGTON: Yes, sir.
22   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:    Thank you very much.
23                   (The meeting adjourned at 3.40 pm )




                                      37
                   Appendix 4 - Analysis of police CCTV tapes

                          TB1                                  TB2
14.30:00   Cl shows Leppings Lane turnstiles      C3 shows comer of Spion Kop
           (outside Gate C)

14.30:32   C2 shows comer of Spion Kop

14.30:35                                          C3 pans left and right and tilts down

14.30:50                                          C3 tilts down

14.30:54   C2 remains static                      C3 remains static
   to
14.32.50

14.32:51   Cl shows police horse outside
           Leppings Lane turnstiles. Camera
           pans and pulls back

14.33:26   Cl tilts up and pans left then right

14.33:47   Cl zooms in on area outside Gate A
           (man on top of gate)

14.34:07   Cl tilts up

14.34:17   Cl pans left

14.34:23   Cl pulls back and pans left

14.34:29   Cl tilts down and pulls back,
           showing area outside Gates B & C

14.34:49                                          C3 switches to camera 2 on comer
                                                  of Spion Kop

14.35:00   Cl zooms in on area outside Gate C

14.35:16   Cl tilts up

14.35:20   Cl switches to camera 2 (comer of      C2 switches to camera 1 (outside
           Spion Kop)                             Gate C, Leppings Lane)

14.35:29                                          Cl pans left and tilts up
           TB1                   TB2
14.35:41         Cl pans left

14.35:45         Cl switches to 18 hr mode

14.35:56         Cl tilts up

14.36:05         Cl pans right

14.36:11         Cl pulls back (perimeter gates)

14.36:44         Cl tilts down (outside Gates B & C)

14.36:48         Cl pulls back and pans right
                 (outside Gate B)

14.36:57         Cl tilts up

14.37:07         Cl zooms in outside Gate B

14.37:10         Cl pans right outside, Gate A

14.37:26         Cl pulls back and pans right

14.37:36         Cl pulls back and tilts down (Gate
                 C)

14.37:45         Cl pans left (between Gate C/River)

14.37:53         Cl pans right

14.38:41         Cl zooms in on area outside Gate C

14.38:47         Cl tilts down

14.39:04         Cl zooms in on police horse outside
                 GateC

14.39:15         Cl pans to left and right

14.39:25         Cl tilts down

14.39:37         Cl pulls back and pans left

14.39:47         Cl tilts up
           TB1                   TB2
14.39:54         Cl pans left (outside Gate C)

14.40:37         Cl pulls back

14.40:56         Cl tilts up and pans right (view
                 along Leppings Lane towards Vere
                 Road)

14.41:02         Cl zooms in on shops

14.41:08         Cl pulls back

14.41:11         Cl pulls back and pans left

14.41:17         Cl tilts down (Gate C)

14.41:53         Cl tilts up

14.42:36         Cl pans right and zooms in people
                 on roof above Gate B

14.42:52         Cl zooms in on area inside Gate B

14.42:57         Cl pans left

14.43:00         Cl pulls back and tilts up

14.43:41         Cl pans left and shows crowds
                 outside Gate B

14.43:48         Cl pans left

14.43:56         Cl tilts up - shows Leppings Lane

14.44:05         Cl pulls back

14.44:16         Cl pans left and pulls back (Gate C)

14.44:23         Cl pans left

14.44:25         Cl tilts down, pulls back and pans
                 right

14.45:01         Cl pans right

14.45:08         Cl zooms in on turnstiles A to G
                           TB1                                  TB2
14.45:16                                       Cl tilts up (Gate B)

14.45:43                                       Cl zooms in, pans right and pulls
                                               back (inside turnstiles)

14.46:08                                       Cl pans left (Gate C)

14.46:13                                       Cl tilts down

14.46:25                                       Cl tilts up and pans left

14.46:44                                       Cl pans right

14.46:56                                       Cl tilts up, pans left and tilts down
                                               (Gate C)

14.47:09                                       Cl zooms in (outside Gate C)

14.47:20                                       Cl tilts up and down

14.47:24                                       Cl pans right and pulls back

14.47:31                                       Cl pans left and tilts down

14.47:39                                       Cl pulls back

14.47:45                                       Cl pulls back

14.47:52                                       Cl tilts up

14.48:21                                       Cl pans right, tilts down and pans
                                               left

14.48:26                                       Cl zooms in on Gate C, and pans
                                               right and left

14.48:43                                       Cl pulls back and pans right and
                                               left inside turnstiles A to G

14.48:56                                       Cl settles on Gate C

14.49:02                                       Cl pulls back and tilts up

14.49:25   C2 pans left (comer of Spion Kop)

14.49:31   C2 pans right
           TB1                    TB2
14.49:38         Cl tilts up and pans left (over river)
                 and right

14.49:48         Cl tilts down and up (Gate C)

14.49:55         Cl pans right and tilts up (Leppings
                 Lane, towards Vere Road)

14.50:00         Cl tilts down (turnstiles A to G)

14.50:11         Cl pulls back and tilts down

14.50:52         Cl pans left and right and tilts down
                 (Gate C)

14.51:09         Cl tilts up

14.51:20         Cl pans right and left

14.51:35         Cl pans left

14.51:46         Cl zooms in on crowds outside
                 GateC

14.52:04         Cl pans right on crowds outside
                 turnstiles A to G

14.52:14         Cl pulls back

14.52:26         Cl settles on Gate C - crowds
                 entering through open Gate - and
                 tilts down

14.52:41         Cl pans left

14.52:46         Cl at normal speed

14.52:58         Cl tilts up and pans right (turnstiles
                 A toG )

14.53:35         Cl pans left and tilts down (Gate C)

14.54:00         Cl pans right and tilts up
           TB1                 TB2
14.54:09         Cl zooms in on Gate A (inside)

14.54:15         Cl pans left - on crowds outside
                 Gate A

14.54:35         Cl pans right and zooms in outside
                 Gate A

14.54:40         Cl switches to 18 hr mode
                 Pans left to perimeter gates outside
                 Gate A

14.54:50         Cl tilts up and pulls back (view
                 along Leppings Lane towards Vere
                 Road)

14.55:00         Cl pans left (Gate C)

14.55:04         Cl pans left and pulls back

14.55:10         Cl pans right (turnstiles A to G)

14.55:55         Cl zooms in (inside Gate B)

14.56:00         Cl tilts up and pans right

14.56:04         Cl pans left (Gate B)

14.56:10         Cl pans left (turnstiles A to G)

14.56:15         Cl pulls back and tilts up (turnstiles
                 A to G and Gate B)

14.56:22         Cl pans right (Gate B and crowds
                 outside)

14.56:27         Cl tilts down

14.56:30         Cl pans left (Gate C)

14.56:38         Cl pans right and tilts up (Gate B)

14.56:44         Cl pans right (turnstiles 1 to 16)

14.56:53         Cl pans left and pulls back (Gate B)
                           TB1                                      TB2
14.56:58                                          Cl tilts down and up, and pans left
                                                  (all turnstiles and Gate B)

14.57:24                                          Cl pans left (turnstiles A to G)

14.57:28                                          Cl pans left (Gate C)

14.57:31                                          Cl tilts down

14.57:39                                          Cl pulls back and pans right (inside
                                                  Gates B & C)

14.57:44                                          Cl pans right (inside Gates A & B)

14.57:51                                          Cl tilts up and pans left (Gates A &
                                                  B and view along Leppings Lane)

14.58:00                                          Cl pans left (includes turnstiles A to
                                                  G)

14.58:06                                          Cl zooms in on Gate B

14.58:08                                          Cl pans right and zooms in on area
                                                  inside Gate A - crowds entering
                                                  through open gate

14.58:25                                          Cl pans left (crowds dispersing
                                                  outside Gate A)

14.58:33                                          Cl pans left and pulls back (Gate B,
                                                  and crowds inside and outside
                                                  turnstiles)

14.58:42   C2 pans left from the comer of the
           Spion Kop, along the length of the
           North Stand to the West Stand
           terraces

14.58:51                                          Camera 1 tilts down

14.59:05   C2 settles on pen 6

14.59:18   C2 pans left along fence to junction
           of West and South stands
                           TB1                                     TB2
14.59:44   C2 pans right and zooms in on gate
           to pen 1

15.00.01   C2 pulls back, tilts up and pans
           right (pens 1, 2 and edge of 3)

15.00:11   C2 pans right

15.00:12                                          Cl pulls back, pans left and tilts
                                                  down (turnstiles A to G)

15.00:40   C2 zooms in and pans left to gate to
           pen 1

15.01:33   C2 pans right and pulls back

15.01:50                                          Cl zooms in on area inside Gate B

15.02:07                                          Cl pans left and right (area outside
                                                  Gate B)

15.02:13                                          Cl pulls back (view of all turnstiles
                                                  and gates)

15.02:29   C2 pans right to area behind goal
           and pulls back

15.02:53                                          Cl changes to C5 showing front of
                                                  pen 4, and remains static

15.03.15   C2 pans right and zooms in on the
           goalkeeper Grobbelaar

15.03:46   C2 tilts up and pans left (pitch and
           area in front of pens 4, 5 and 6)

15.04:10   Tape ends

15.25:42                                          C5 switches to C3 showing pens 3
                                                  & 4 (including ambulance) and
                                                  remains static

15.34:51                                          Tape ends

Where no camera movement is shown, the last scene mentioned remains static.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (Am e nd e d 9 .8 7 )
           BLOCK OUT OATES                                                                        W est M idlands P olice
        WITNESS NOT AVAILABLE
                                         ' 'Pc+r'r V
                                                                                          S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E SS
    1  8 15 22 29      1 8 IS 22 29                                          (C.J. Act 1 9 6 7, s.9; M .C. Act 1 9 80, s. 102; M .C. Rules 1 9 8 1. r.70)
    2 9 16 23 30       2 9 16 23 30
    3 10 17 24 31      3 10 17 24 31
    4 11 18 25         4 11 18 25       Name      P C                                             c -        d   /f z .A         'e r f
    5 12 19 26         5 12 19 26
    6 13 20 27         6 13 20 27
                                                    2 C ..................................................
                                        A9e                          • v*        (y s )               D ate of Birth       . .
    7 14 21 28         7 14 21 28
                                        Occupation . .                        J & r S .............

   81     IS   22     1 8 15    22      Home or business address
2  9      16   23     2 9 16    23      and telephone number
3 10      17   24     3 10 17   24
4 11      18   25     4 11 18   25
5 12 19 26            5 12 19 26
6 13 20 27            6 13 20 27
7 14 21 28            7 14 21 28


                                       This statement, consisting of               page(s) each* signed by me, is true to the best of m y knowledge
’       8 15 22       1 8 IS 22        and belief and I m ake it knowing th at, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
2  9 16 23            2 9 16 23
3 10 17 24            3 10 17 24       have wilfully stated in it anything w hich I kn o w to be false or do not believe to be true.
4 11 18 25            4 11 18 25
5 12 19 26            5 12 19 26
6 13 20 27            6 13 2 0 27      Dated the             ^       Q      (5 ^          day of
7 14 21 28            7 14 21 28                                                                                   <-<£ Y
                    N0 OATES
                                       Signed      ^             ^     ^ ^^ _                                                Signature witi
         ' AV-
                                                                                                                                                    '    M iUx A ] \
                                                                                                                             O fficer's Nam e . . A - ( ^ v V                               f                                 ' '

                                                                                                                             Rank .            ’. '. '. 'V / T . .              No.                . .                              • • •


                                                                                                                                                                     -s & >.■..
                                                                                                  r. .                                                                        • •* 2 "......... y
                                                                                               . . . /tyulU^C^... rrs.                                                          .......... ~ .
                                                                                                                                    ..2 \               h & r f-
                                        t/r < ..                                                                                                                                                                                        ...
                                        &                .                   .             .             .             .                  .             ..........   .............................................   y . ......


                                       (s>/±.
                                        ..............




                                                                            ....                                      .. . j t . . . .                                                   ....                            .

                                                   • Jif6 (Scyv                                                  C-^2,                                           .*
                                                P ^ f 7. . . .tyJjC C *.(pi< ?y£P rpt. ri . ..                                                                                                                              ..
                                        "T?r5. ..                                             . . . S « ?,. . . ( • . .                                                                                   . b g & u y ........
                                                                                          . . C ^ y ^ is L                       .......................................                                                 ✓ ----- y
                                           G c s& y & ~ jZ .                                                           ............ T .. .. ( ^ . O ^ c d . ..
                                       Signed                                                                          Signature witnessed by
                                        DeM* as appucabia                                                                                     \J u lv                M \k V c v ,A                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                           WG 413
                                                                                                                                                    (Am ended 9 .8 7 )
                                                    West Midlands Police
                                            S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E SS
                                   (C.J. Act 1 9 67. s.9; M .C . Act 1 9 8 0, s .102; M .C . Rules 1981, r]70l


  Continuation of statem ent         ol     .                                                                             ..


                  a                                                        .$ "6 sc /^ o y v
        •J Q ... r & t f Q r .^ r r y a ..                  ___.. . 6 ^ * .

   p.          a :        z        ; < * > .;;;                                                                          ; tz *


 C*                               . r^ < j. J. s £ < ^ . .. b £ & r<                              b*                                  ... J T .                 y
      —           ^                      CCsjS. <*i £                                 O?        Zw
               . C tz ^ u ^ A /U Z tA j.                                               k C < j 2a a /. ^                  z    . , ..........................

            Z^L./ , .                             ...... _____________________________
 jT . . .                          6 \ ,..................................................................
     l A ____O        y t r r ^ y ^ f r ^ y ^ .0 ,2 v . . .           1            ...........................                                 . . ^ S 2 Sr<7

        ...                                                (^6. ....                 ...
                                                                                                                                . Q ^,y . . .<r?rv
 £              s s r r       ^                    ^
                                                                                                                                             .. <P<5v

                                                                       '.4 tx d /................... .-...._........... j ^ V " "
                                                                                                'C tn a M              / '-<?C-
                        02             Z.                                                                  ......................



           T                                              6£e                                                                          ,4 $ r« 0 * rV .fi-.
                                                                              ..6 ^ .....c £ ^ ....< ? t^ ..                                                        '
                                                                              ^                £ * ____ * > ^ r < J .
                                                LS~<X                                                               ....<CcJ\*         r '& r ^ Z .) J
                                                                                                          ..
                                                                                                   ^ n ....
                                  ... ,4&<p-irvtf/                 5S* < V ..................... , .........


                                                                                                                                           '.U .C M .



                                                   ...........                                                                                    .......
                   _..............,^V /?..          cV:                                                                                             ir
h g X s J L ,< t.......                                                                     .. . £ o . ..            (& u..... <C*-.. (od~ ^1
                                                                                            Z e e . 4".                        u l^ u o .
S ign ed                                         . . . . . .          S ig n a tu re w itn e s s e d b v           . .

                                                                                                      W AU                                 & \A
                                                                                                                                                                                 WG 4 1 3
                                                                                                                                                                          (Am ended 9 .8 7 )
                                                                           West Midlands Police
                                                            S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E SS
                                               (C.J. Act 1967. s. 9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r. 70)

  Continuation of statem ent                      f                        /! &   ■. £ ,C       -.                                                                     (X

   ...X ....! o 0 £ % t* e . .                                                     ____ .                                   .........
  C yl       >   6 ^                           Z c n sQ g y u t V j                      CisfcvH2 ..                                     C z . r o t ) ..
                                  ~                   A           x                       ....................................

                                                                t<yl
                                                                                                                                             W.'Tr.
           <^<(j2tsK       L<yc^y\. v . . . <^5
  C X ^ .S .S .,..            . . . . . . .LsVS&J 'jtz -S C z d .. . . . LSZFt***%^cJvug.. . . .
            Q C A S tx /h s\Of .                               . *. . . .i r L c * ... . h r ^ a t^ /C
                  ......................................................                               -r    .                              . fV ^

                                                                                                        iL*<4. ir<                bsCvri.
  Y Y & r~ yrtzS ^.... « ^ c / . C fk s w .


         .1J ^ iy y h . d ...                                  .. .t& v s d .. . .                                   . .CT^rCTC/^Qv........
                                          ... L .Z -Z . >... 6 ^ r . .. .          .. iS ^rC 6 c ^ > \...............................
                                           . .k ^ r        v-v<7r^<?... < ^ . . .. S .C tw C s C i^ .........^ r Q & .
 C.               'U <r1- d .___“ /.^#r                                                                               u ~3^ :K .
 ^y < -O Y . r . . , ^ i . . . .                                                                            ................. C ^ rrC > .     y ...........
                      £   .   ,   .   .   .   ^T.   . . .                                                                            y       ...........   s.. . . ,
                                                    ^ / v n ? /^ v C £ ....                          ........... ........................
(fr          s                                                                                               . y .                                                                             v

      <% /(s$Q.....rV ^-^V .                                                                       ......... V *y#*czsC
 ckC d .                          C tM .                /? & 5 s s { ? . C f ? . .                                                          ...
 . .U   jl        C r ^ P fi                        A y r ^ r r tA . . . . * . / * ' £                           . r. Q ». . r . .                                        ...........

. ifQ * .                                                      ....... <
                                                                       p y lt\                fT<?Vv'V?                  ^ r^ rrV ^ . .•...........................
                 J"                                         ^ 5 £ < (/£ .                                            ........l / l ^ - t T Z S r ^ .j
                                                       .




 c* < > o e£ s r .. .                                                 . . . . q c u r Z . . . ..                                              ...           <?b


         ^ t r r ^ A . '.... .%<Ui <s+ a ...... k e ^ L * ^ .* . .                                                     *                       „. . . .
                                                                             .                                     & & C . ■ ■ .                             .........................

        ___________                                                     ^ ri3 fy ^ r y y V ./ ......... & ~\-r< z(... . . £ . . , ..................
                                                                ....... ..... .. IsyrQ sS.             S’.v ^ V rO P ........C i^ J L ^ . .....

             T ? ^ . .                        . 4vD . . . . . ^ < ? y .5                     ^ V ^ rc f/
Signed                                                                                Signature witnessed oy
                                                                                                                                                   WG 413
                                                                                                                                            (Am ended 9 .8 7 )
                                                    West Midlands Police
                                           S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E S S
                                 (C.J. Act 1 9 67, s.9; M.C. Act 1 9 80, s .1 02 ; M .C. Rules 1 9 81, r .70)
                                                                                                                                               O s
 Continuation of statem ent o f ...........




                                                                                                      ...                  .....
             h b                                                    r                                                         , .................



                                                                                                       :^ ::.ff£^ ::.'.:.:
                            H jZ. ...                                         /           / /                        >Q.....
                                                                     ^
 cl^ p \S,       ... (z^o                                         .........................




 c e sp b .                                                                   y 7 t                  . _ . .,
                                                    V^_. . . . .                                                   .s
                     ............................................................
 ^           v          '          t           . . . . l6ic?    .^m21 .
                                             t        . .^^Cc?........../ !*r'^?Tvr"^
                                         .^’TV^rvv'tc ^ V .. ..                   ....... 5?

... T f - e                                  ... y ^ f ^ f e r v ^ .                           X ......
Vsi^r^?. .. 4-'XV                                     D. ? .^ 9 ^ V ^ y ^ V y X                                  ^            -*
                        ..... . < ? * < # . . C C - r v ^ ^ f r ^                                                             y    ,

 CL ^         S .b tr x J o c ,.. r                                                                                                                              (* icx s6 u
     ‘               L              " i s . . {s \*<sp W v .. y * lY * r M ...                                                         .............
                                              c ^ P V i^ tjS .                _______                 y
                                                     ^             v •■ . 6 * ^ .   f c . c d sC d . . . . .
                                            <&y~<y . .l/£ frV * 7 X ^ . . . < ?-< rp& -< 4£ ... y IZT..........
 <4^<?                                                                  .. .<*......< ?C< zzsl5< > y        y                         s
                    %<&>.                                          o J p T y \..                                                   t/~< ?
                    CcAA.                                          • ..Z                     ......... C?£sCd
     . Us<si .. M ^2L*V \SL^-........, ........ 7 .............................     / ..................................
           r       *l& .o v x & ^ L . . .O o ......a                     C & Y ^C ^ztX . . . . {J& SI& U L 4

Signed                                                                  S ig n a tu re w it n e s s e d b y   . . .f A ^ L K C .k 'C ) . . •           •


                                                                                                  vjuk<- A \V b 3 (£ v \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WG 41 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Am ended 9 .8 7 )
                                                                                     West Midlands Police
                                                                         S T A T E M E N T OF W ITNESS
                                                      IC.J. Act 1 967. s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M .C . Rules 1981, r.70)


  Continuation of statem ent of                                     . .



                                                             .&C-& y                 .   .                        4 *                    . . .




                                                                                                ... (Jflrt                                     fZ' - s-
                                         tV ^                                                .. .        1                                                                          ....... ( s < - 6 .

          . I r L a J tr & r .,. J ^ e                                              . rC -                                                                                             ...< * n .                     .£ * /a .                                                    .
  .^       C        ^   .U           c     ^     L                        0    &     rC           ra    t<    * t4       . i- r &        v     u   J   .*                          C ? *V t7 ^              ..


  b Z ^ j x * r r € . .... <£~.*.£ ....G :___ C^»rv^.C^kC<<^.. .hS & 6^ .. .<*..                                                                                                                                                                                       . .
/~£vLf__.. jP .& O rr^y...                           / T ”? ...........
         . ^ /-/-.                   C & f a . .. . t & A ; . . . r ^ C z -iC ^                                                                                                    .6 *
                                                                          . . . .kY^riSf-f4. £-£<*'€</........<?V>.. .. C/ ryi *#. .                                                                                                                             .                     %

                                                           . ,S<ZtyyJ                                   «*.




                                         o X v r& £ & ~ -. . ^ C z r z ^ fO '                                                                                                      .........
     .. f c ^ . ...                                                                      . . . . 6 0 ......... .. t& L s i* ..

         .r.                                                         [^J2X^p                                  ^ ^ K/ZSir1^.                                                        .^».           .                                   ^                 y ...
£>   _                             . .                                                                  . .   y f^ & g jZ * * .. > r f ^ ^ y . h C & ~ X sK ... . . .
     ^ 7.
                         y               ^Sc< uo                                                                   c y /6 r ^ Z ^ * C u    ^ r x x < t? (...............
               GO<f          C     y ^ &        s O         y T      C                           ( y y r € L !^      C       ^      fy    \,                      1^.               ....    I d        jl    ............ ^ v T 2 * " ^                        ....

                                                                                                    j                    fZ y v ? /                     ........................   ^V& tC-rd. .             . . . .    .^ -   ..................................................



 0 .0 ~         &   S   . ......................................................................                           2 T ..... ......................................................................                           ( p .< ? r < y                          .




6 a . . . sA ^ C & A Ia '                                                                                                ....                                                                                    _ . (" s y r n .y ..
 U f*s C iA A e .^                                                ...... . , . . . G&vLrPil.                                                                      .                                   r? h & y y € iz
L n ^ C        /tfA -      ■ . ^ O . . . . C ^ < ? .............. 3 T                     . ’.   7~:                     .•. . . r ? T                                                                                              .          .'

 %
 .C
  r^(JL....(S^rPLdjl ...<Ps                                                                                   ^k
                                                                                                               J-Q.cA.........

          X                                                          /2je ~ ^ $ v * s (J u /                                                                                           < S L > *s


                                                                                                                                                                        c rv \                    c?v

         s C w \Asct<v                                                                                                              ................(!^ c .                                           ,4 ^<nvvr\
Signed .                                                                                                                                     jy
                                                                                                                         Signature witnessed by                                                . . ^LhD^AC                                 .-........
                                                                                                                                                                                        \ 0w j l                      X V V ^ te^ ^
                                                                                                                                                                   (Amended 9.87)
                                                   West Midlands Police
                                        S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E SS
                               IC.J. Act 1 967. s.9; M.C. Act 1 9 80, s .1 0 2 ; M .C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statem ent of . . . ...................... ‘ C rr



                         k . ..                                                                                                     ...6 ^
   7T> (                      Q -SisA. Q .'i , ’. .. x? C o .. . ts y ^ h .                                                 [sC syv& yJr.



                                              .
                                                                                                                                       b& Xy



<?s
                                                                      .IslT& W S-.-,.../? }
                                                    .........
t^s^l/LsO...............................
 S h>&( C            K ScjsC                                              4< ..         £\su4. .hz&o/C.                                    Vv/^kO            .. .crr^i
                      ),J..r.                                              . ...<*.
                                                              <?V\. . . . 6 ? ! L t > ........../?<                                                                x .
  Le/CCtrre.                                                                                                        *r^cu6 0<?r<?4.. . .                                  <7V\.
 ty b s id             /P & S u te ^ /i                             h r^y ^.                             < * ^ 5 c? ^ >                                       •.



      r. . ^C^rv\                                                         &o.                                             '....ioQ.,.
                                                                     ..                                   <£ . >r>
                                                                     5 .......... < M , ___ £ ^ / P .
\*SU<0. .hrixd.                                                                c e S \2 r< ^ ..
 .. X .                                                              y t & C f L g .......
                                                                                                                                           .(A U t:

      T             C x ts ^ K                -d z o s O f             'r S J y ^ C                                      a .
      /fc s fis y x /^ '.                      ....... <C*&r?% £.'. . . .                                                                        /T                   .




                     . . t . . jr . . . y .                               ./.           Q fC lvQ y^. .$ r r 9 ..... ^ V v ' l .
                 ....'                         . . . r . ............. .......................................<?y\............ 6 i 4 ..................................
       .<U«^uj...cl....c£ ul                                                                                 ........ <z6?C       j. <^.tfh-..v .
                                                                                                                       WG 4 13
                                                                                                                (Am ended 9 .0 7)
                                          Wtist Midlands Police
                                  S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E SS
                         (C.J. Act 1 9 67. s.9; M.C. Act 1 9 8 0. s.1 02 ; M .C . Rules 1 9 8 1 , r.70)


 Continuation of statem ent of      M r F . & J / t M e y Z , .......


                            . . . .           ......... /      [        (        5
                                                 < Z ^\ri4 rfh < irL                   ‘f.-.tfZ ?. y f - r




Signed                                                      Signature witnessed by .


                                                                                                          lV\ferta
                THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

                         CONDUCTED BY

                   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH



                            Held at
                     50 Queen Anne's Gate
                        London SW1H 9AT

                              on

                  Wednesday 22 October 1997




           MR C F BONE (Secretary to the Scrutiny)




Ms Ann Adlington, solicitor, attended on behalf
     of Hillsborough Family Support Group




            Transcribed from the shorthand notes of
             Harry Counsell & Cc, 61 Carey Street,
           London WC2A 2JG; telephone 0171 242 9346



                EVIDENCE OF DR. EDWARD WALKER




                               1
 1   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:     Dr. Walker, I have read your
 2        written, what you call your response.      I expect you have
 3        got a copy of that?
 4        A.   Yes, I have.
 5   Q.   Is there anything more that you want to say to me in
 6        addition to what is in your written submission at this
 7        stage or would you like me to ask you - there are      one or
 8        two things I want to clarify with you about it.       Would
 9        that be the best way of doing it?
10        A.   Yes.
11   Q.   Just so that I understand about how you came to give the
12        statement, you received a letter, as I understand it, of
13        15 June 1989.   Have you got copies of these documents?
14        A.   Yes.
15   Q.   This is your enclosure 2.
16        A.   Yes.
17   Q.   I can't read it but it looks like "colleague" has been
18        crossed out and "Ed" has been put in instead.
19        A.   Yes.
20   Q.   So it was a personal letter to you?
21        A.   Yes,
22   Q.   And it tells you that you may be asked for a statement
23        from the West Midlands Police.
24        A.   Yes,
25   Q.   At some stage you wrote out the statement which I have
26        got in your handwriting, which is on West Midlands Police
27        witness form paper?
29        A.   Yes.
29   Q.   How did you get hold of that?
30        A.   This is what I can't remember.     I must have
31        approached somebody for that.
32   Q.   Or they approached you?
33        A.   No, I am sure I approached them.     I seem to remember
34        thinking that by this time it is rather strange, I
35        haven't been asked to make a statement.      I felt I ought
36        to make a statement.    The only point of contact I would

                                       2
 1        have had would have been Jim Wardrope, the Accident and
 2        Emergency consultant.    I am fairly sure"I approached him
 3        - as sure as I can be.
 4   Q.   At any rate, someone provided you with the witness
 5        statement paper?
 6        A.   Yes.
 7   Q.   And you made out this statement in your own time, so to
 8        speak?
 9        A.   Yes.
10        It was witnessed by Mr. Dicks, is that right?
11        A.   Yes.
12   Q.   And then it appears to have been countersigned by Julie
13        Appleton.
14        A.   Yes.
15   Q.   You say she didn't actually witness it?
16        A.   No, I have never met Julie.
17   Q.   But it is quite obvious that it got to the West Midlands
18        Police because she is a West Midlands Police officer.
19        A.   Yes.
20   Q.   And we have, indeed, obtained it through the Police.       So
21        far as the rest of the correspondence is concerned, there
22        is a letter of yours dated 8 February 1997 to Mr.
23        Wardrope.   Have you got that?
24        A.   No, I haven't got that one.
25   Q.   You say "I was not contacted by West Midlands Police to
26        provide an official statement nor asked to appear at the
27        inquest".    So that really is what you are saying - you
28        don't remember being approached by the West Midlands
29        Police to make a statement.
30        A.   No.
31   Q.   But at any rate you made an official statement.
32        A.   Yes.   At that time unfortunately I had completely
33        forgotten having made the statement at all.     Obviously I
34        kept a copy of my statement.     I gave an account of my
35        actions just to Mr. Wardrope on a dictated form.
36   Q.   Yes, I have read that.   That was more of an aide-memoir?

                                      3
 1        A.   Yes.   But I had completely forgotten having made the
 2        police statement.
 3   Q.   As far as the police statement was concerned, you said in
 4        it everything that you wanted to say, did you?
 5        A.   Yes.   I have no argument with the contents of the
 6        statement at all.
 7   Q.   And since you were free to say what you wanted because
 8        you were giving your account of the matter, you did say
 9        everything you wanted to say, I imagine?
10        A.   Yes, I think so.     I didn't perhaps raise some of the
11        more critical points that I had raised in the hospital
12        report.
13   Q.   They were more for the hospital's convenience.
14        A.   For planning purposes.    But I was obviously rather
15        perturbed to find out that my statement had been altered
16        - I don't know whether it is or not - perhaps to make it
17        appear as if Julie Appleton had been present when the
18        statement was given, which she certainly was not.         I am
19        not quite sure why she would have done that.
20   Q.   I don't know either.      But it has not altered the effect
21        of the contents of the statement in any way.
22        A.   No, the contents have not been altered.     I just
23        thought it was rather strange that somebody should have
24        done that to my statement.     Mr. Dicks is a staff nurse at
25        the hospital, as you probably know.      He just actedas a
26        witness to my signature, at my request.       Hehappened to
27        be the nearest person to hand.      And then I, presumably,
23        returned the statement to somebody.
29   Q.   Well, presumably it got back to the West Midlands Police,
30        and I imagine Miss Appleton was dealing with it.      I don't
31        think we need lose any sleep about that.
32        A.   I find it strange.
33   Q.   Was your letter to the BMJ of which I have been provided
34        with a copy, of 13th February, was that ever published in
35        the BMJ?
36        A.   Could I ask you which one that is?
 1   Q.    It is this letter.      (Letter shown to the witness)
 2         A.   No, it wasn't .
 3   Q.    So you never got any response to it?
 4         A.   No.    The whole thing started with me as a request to
 5         other doctors who were similarly involved as I was but
 6         felt that they had never given any formal evidence, to
 7         come forward and get in touch with the Family Support
 8         Group.     That is how the whole thing started off.
 9                 In the meantime one of the other medical journals,
10         more of a newspaper type journal, more of a news journal,
11         got hold of it and turned it into a news story.        And that
12         is when the whole thing blew up in the press.     I asked
13         the editor of the BMJ not to publish that letter even if
14         he was considering to. I felt that things had gone far
15         enough at that stage.
16   Q.    Can we get on to your statement to the police, what I am
17         going to call your police statement.     I am not going to
19         obviously read the whole thing out.     I just want to
19         clarify a number of points with you if I may.     Have you
20         got a copy of this to hand?
21   MS.   ADLINGTON:     I haven't, sir, because I was not told until
22         late yesterday I wasn't going to be attending until
23         today.
24   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      You seem to have an enormous
25         amount of stuff there.
26   MR.   BONE:    I can get it photocopied.
27   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      Well, I don't think there is
23         anything particularly significant.     Would you mind
29         getting it photocopied.
30   THE   WITNESS:     Everything but.
31   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      Perhaps I can ask you whilst that
32         is being done, why do you think that you ought to have
33         been called at the inquest?
34         A.   Because I was the very first doctor attending
35         casualties at the hospital, and I attended several of
36         them literally as they came through the doors.        I do not

                                          5
      1         have too much of a problem of my not being actually asked
     2          to give evidence at the inquest because there were lots
     3         of other doctors involved at the hospital who were not
     4         asked directly to appear either.       But I did find it very
     5         strange to find out that I had been referred to in all
     6         the inquests as an unidentified doctor.
     7    Q.   That is unfortunate that you weren't given the credit for
     8         the very good work that you did.
     9         A.   It is more than that.
    10    Q.   May I just say this.     You are referred to as
11             "unidentified doctor" in the Hammond inquest in
12             particular.     I think one of the problems may be that as
13             far as I can see there are no hospital notes in relation
14             to Hammond.
15             A.   No.
16        Q.   There are certainly none that identify you as having been
* ~i
i /            involved.     It is not for me to make excuses for the
18             hospital and so on - they were obviously working under
19             very difficult conditions.       But it is quite plain that
20             Mr. Wardrope knew perfectly well that you had been
               involved, but when one comes to sorting out precisely who
✓   /_         did what in a situation like this it is not always
23             particularly easy to identify the situation.       I think
24             that I can understand why you were referred to as an
25             "unidentified doctor" although obviously not altogether
26             satisfactory.
27             A.   No.    I think it has happened in more than one case as
23             well; and I am never actually mentioned by name at all.
29        Q.   That may be so, I am not sure.      I want to come to the
30             cases that you were involved in in a moment.      Just tell
31             me this.    Have you ever given evidence at any other
32             inquest?
33             A.   No.
34        2-   Although presumably you have been involved with attempts
35             to resuscitate people who has subsequently died?



                                            6
 1        A.   Yes.    There usually tends to be a consultant involved
 2        and, as happened in Hillsborough, it tends to be the
 3        consultant, the most senior person, that is asked to
 4        attend.
 5   Q.   That was Mr. Wardrope in this case.
 6        A.   Yes.    It is just that, given the unique circumstances
 7        of Hillsborough, I arrived there before Mr. Wardrope.
 8   Q.   You were the only person there for about a quarter of an
 9        hour or so?
10        A.   Yes.
11   Q.   Something like that, was it?
12        A.   Yes.    Well, the only person with any anaesthetic
13        training.
14   Q.   There were casualty officers?
15        A.   Yes, there were some casualty officers, one or two
16        around, I think.     But I was the only person there with
17        any anaesthetic training for about a      quarter of an hour.
18   Q.   It seems that one of the problems, as      I understand it,
19        was that nobody anticipated these kind of injuries being
20        inflicted.
21        A.   That is right; it was very unique.     As I pointed out
22        in my submission, I think, most major accident plans are
23        geared up to surgical trauma, amputations and that sort
24        of thing.
25                     (Statement handed to the witness)
26   Q.   Can we go through your statement.      It has actually got
27        "Continuation of Statement 1" at the top, do you see?
23        A.   Yes.
29   Q.   But I am calling it page 2.      You say at the bottom: "The
30        first casualty arrived within two or three minutes.       I
31        believe this patient to be a boy I know only as 'Lee',
32        who I believe was declared 'brain dead' on the Intensive
33        Care Unit."     That I think is Lee Nicole, is it?
34        A.   Yes, I think so.
35   Q.   You think that?
36        A.   Yes.

                                       7
 1   Q.   This is the young man who died a day or so later.
 2        A.    Yes.
 3   Q.   And there was quite an extensive medical record in
 4        relation to him?
 5        A.    I think so, certainly by the time he got to' Intensive
 6        Care.
 7   Q.   You have seen that, I think.
 8        A.    I have not.
 9   Q.   Well, I have seen it.     I don't, quite honestly, think
10        that you will get much from it.     I can't see any record
11        of you being involved in it.
12        A.    Again, at early stages there was no documentation.
13   Q.   No.   You say that he was in cardio-pulmonary arrest with
14        fixed, dilated pupils.     "I intubated him, established
15        venous access, and instigated routine resuscitative
16        measures.    His heart had stopped beating but we managed
17        to re-establish him in normal rhythm."     How did you do
18        that?
19        A.    When I say "routine resuscitative measures",   it means
20        cardiac massage - external cardiac massage.
21   Q.   Just what people do as first-aid, manual ---
22        A.    Yes, compression.   The idea is that the heart has
23        stopped beating, the idea is that you are literally
24        squashing the heart between the breast bone and the back
25        of the thoracic spine.
26   Q.   I just wondered whether you were referring to anything
27        different from that.
28        A.    No, intubating him obviously to get a tube into the
29        airway to ventilate the lungs and giving drugs.
30   Q.   Just clear my mind on this question of intubation.
31        Sometimes you can do it simply by putting a tube down the
32        mouth, is that right, and sometimes you have to make a
33        hole in the throat?
34        A.    Yes.   That is called a tracheotomy usually or a
35        needle crack (?) thyroidotomy or various things.     All the
36        patients in this situation had oral intubations using a

                                       8
 11
           laryngoscope which is a long blade that you pass over the
 2         back of the tongue to visualise the vocal cords and then
 3         put a tube in.
 4    Q.   The next one, you go on to say "Whilst I and another
           doctor were Lee, the second victim arrived.      He was of
 Q
           similar age   with blond hair.    He was also in cardio­
 7         pulmonary arrest.    I intubated him, and noticed evidence
 3         of gross inhalation of stomach contents.      He also had
 9         marked gaseous abdominal distension, possibly indicating
10         that he had had mouth-to-mouth resuscitation at some
il         time.    I also established venous access".   Venous access
12         means an injection of some sort, doesn't it?      Is this
13         right?
14         A.   Yes.
15    Q.   Because in your - well, first of all, are we talking
15         about Philip Hammond here?
17         A.   I am assuming so.    Again, it is impossible for me to
13         say with any certainty.
19    Q.   That is what I thought.     The reason why I ask that is
20         because when you are dealing with your criticism of Dr.
           Slater, page 4, you talk about - I think it is half-way
22         down the page, when you recite what he says - "It is r.ot
23         sound to assume that as no injection had been performed
24         no drugs had been given" and you gc on to say that you
25         gave it down the tube.
26         A.   The point I am trying to make is that drugs can be -
27         I mean there is obviously a discrepancy - if this is
23         Philip Hammond, case number 2, that we are talking about,
29         and I did establish venous access in him (and obviously I
30         did that in that case) Dr. Slater is saying, however,
31         that he could not find any needle puncture marks in the
32         boy that he did a post-mortem on who he assumes is Philip
33         Hammond.
34    Q.   Well, he knows it is Philip Hammond.
35         A.   Yes, sorry.    So there is a discrepancy there.   Either
35         that means I am mistaken in the boy that identifies

                                        9
 1         Philip Hammond or I made a mistake in my recollection of
 2         the actual details of the resuscitation.' 'But the only
 3         point I was trying to make of what Dr. Slater was saying
 A
 -t        is that, despite what I am saying about the
 5         identification of this particular boy, it is not sound to
 6         assume that just because there are not any needle marks
 7         - that is the conclusion that is drawn at the inquest -
 3         no resuscitation attempts had been made, because there
 9         were no needle marks.
10    Q.   We will come to that, because I don't think that is what
11         Dr. Slater was saying.
12         A.   That is impression I got.
13    Q.   I think that is a matter for me to decide what he was
14         saying, but that is not the impression that I had.      I had
15         the impression that he was saying that there were signs
16         of resuscitation because there were electrodes and so on,
17         but there was no sign of a needle having been used.         He
13         does not go on to say "That doesn't mean to say that
19         people didn't try and put drugs down his throat."      He
20         just does not mention that at all.
21         A.   No.
22    Q.   At any rate, you think you may be mistaken when you say
23         in your statement that you established venous access?
24         A.   I mean, there is obviously some kind of discrepancy.
25         If Philip Hammond had needle marks, either this
25         particular patient was not Philip or I am mistaken about
27         the details.
23    Q.   Dr. Slater would be pretty certain to pick up a needle
29         mark, wouldn't he?
30         A.   I don't know, to be honest.   I don't know how --
31    Q.   A pathologist would find it, wouldn't he?
32         A.   I honestly don't know how visible they would be
33         during the post-mortem.
34    Q.   Let us go on to the third patient.   At any rate, so far
35         as that patient is concerned, he died quite shortly
36         afterwards, I think?

                                     10
          A.   Yes.
 2   Q.   Then the third patient was aged around 20/ "with fair
 3        hair, of slim build.      He was cerebrally irritable but not
 4        actually fitting. I was able to intubate him without any
 5        drugs, and left him in the care of another doctor."           As
          far as you are concerned, he was somebody who survived,
          was he, or not?       Do you know?
 8        A.   As far as I know, yes.        I believe this may have been
 9        the patient, there was certainly one who came in in a
10        state similar to this, who was intubated without any
11        drugs.      Being intubated without any drugs means that they
12        had a severely depressed cerebral function because
13        obviously the laryngeal reflex is a very strong one and
14        to put a tube through without any drugs means somebody is
15        very ill indeed.
16              One boy - I think it may have been this one -
17        recovered after the intubation when he became more
13        oxygenated and actually pulled his own tube out and then
19        deteriorated again.      I think this may have been this one.
20        But that one, so far as I know, did survive.
21   Q.   I see.      But you have not been able to identify him?
22        A.   No.
23   Q.   "I next saw another unconscious cerebrally irritable
24        patient, with shoulder-length brown hair, and aged around
25        twenty.      I judged his airway to be adequate and left him
26        in the care of a non-medical member of staff."         Do you
21        know what happened here?
28        A.   I don't. I am afraid.
29   Q.   I wondered whether you knew anything about him?
30        A.   I don't.
31   Q.   And you have not been able to identify him?
32        A.   I haven't.
33   Q.   I don't think anybody else has.         "The next patient I
34        dealt with was in cardio-pulmonary arrest.         He was aged
35        around twenty, of stocky build, with ginger hair.         I
36        intubated him, and gave appropriate drugs down the

                                        11
 1        endotracheal tube, as he did not have any venous access."
 2        Why didn't he have any venous access?
 3        A.    Just because we had not got round to doing that.      It
 4        means a break from the resuscitation process only of
 5        about 20 or 30 seconds if you are lucky, if you get a
 6        line.    We are actually talking about, it's not a simple
 7        injection.    You introduce a plastic tube into the vein
 8        and with a needle, cannulating, it is called, and it
 9        takes about 20 or 30 seconds if you hit the first time.
10        That is a long break in terms of resuscitation, and you
11        want to avoid that.    So in the early stages I was giving
12        him drugs down the endotracheal tube.
13   Q.   I wondered, when you said "I was assisted by a doctor of
14        approximately my own age from the football ground", have
15        you discovered who that was now?
15        A.    I think that is Peter Marsh.
17   Q.   Yes, I thought so.    Then you say that "he re-arrested on
18        two distinct occasions, and developed bizzare ECG
19        complexes, with a very poor output.     At this stage I took
20        the decision to abandon resuscitative measures on this
21        patient."     And he presumably died?
22        A.    Yes.
23   Q.   Ar.d, again, you don't know who that is?
24        A.    We haven't been able to positively identify that one,
25        no.     It is strange because we have had great trouble
26        trying to find out a record of anybody with that
27        description having been brought to hospital.     I just
28        happened to see a photograph cf Kevin Trainer on the
29        television, and I was convinced that that was him; he
30        looked exactly like this person.     But Kevin is documented
31        as having died on the pitch.     So it is very confusing.
32        We have not been able to track that one down at all.
33   Q.   He had a number, presumably, but you were not able to
34        recall what number he was?
35        A.    The ones that I was seeing, even by this stage, had
36        not had major accident numbers allocated.

                                      12
1          Then you say "I next saw a patient of around forty, with
2          thinning hair and of heavy build.     He was having
3          cardiopulmonary resuscitation from another doctor.”
4          Again, this would be manual?
5          A.    Yes.
 6         "I intubated the patient to help with this."
 7         A.    That was presumably a non-anaesthetically trained
 8         member of staff who would have been dealing with the
 9         simple massage; and the alternative to intubating is just
10         to use a mask over the mouth and a bag to blow air down,

11         but that is unsatisfactory because it also tends to blow

12         air into the stomach.     And the idea of intubating is to

13         have a sealed route into the windpipe.
14         You need to be a trained anaesthetist, do you?

15         A.    You do.   Basically, most doctors are encouraged to

16         learn to intubate - especially more so nowadays than they

17         were at the time of the disaster - especially Accident &

18         Emergency staff.      But certainly people with surgical

19         training aren't usually able to intubate because they

20         don't do it on a regular basis.
21    }.   What about ambulance staff?
22         A.    It depends, again, on their level of training.

23         Ambulance technicians would not intubate whereas

24         paramedics would.      And I don't know at that time what the

25          balance of paramedics to technicians was in the service.

26    2.    I am afraid I don't know the difference.
27          A.    It is all to do with level of training.   Ambulance

28          personnel, ambulance technicians, are trained in very

 29         basic first-aid and drive the van.      Paramedics are

 30         trained to a much higher level - able to do a lot of the

 31         things that we do in the hospital in terms of
 32         resuscitation.
 33   Q.    You don't know what happened to him, I suppose?
 34         A.    I don't, no.
 35   Q.    Have you been able to identify him?
 36         A.    No, neither of us, I am afraid.

                                         13
 1   Q.    "I was then asked to see a boy of around fifteen with
 2         black hair, who had already had resuscitative treatment.
 3         He was however fitting, and had a poor airway.            I gave
 4         this boy appropriate anaesthetic drugs to sedate and
 5         paralyse him, intubated him, and transferred him to the
 6         ITU.     I believe he as since made a good recovery."           Do
 7         you know who that was?
 8         A.     Again, Idon't, although it may be       possible to     track
 9         him down.      I    saw him the following day on Intensive Care
10         in the morning sitting up in bed, chatting to his
11         parents.
12   Q.    I think I know who that is.          Is it McDermott?
13   MS.   ADLINGTON:        No, sir. McDermott was taken to the Royal
14         Hallamshire.
15   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:         So you don't know who that was?
16         A.     I don't.
17   Q.    But at any rate, he is somebody who appears to have made
18         a good recovery?
19         A.     Yes.   And, again, he was extremely ill by the time he
20         was asked to see me.
21   Q.    You then performed a virtually identical procedure on a
22         boy of similar age with light brown hair, transferred him
23         to ITU also.         "I do not know what happened to this boy."
24         That remains        the position, does it?
25         A.     Yes.
26   Q.    "I was then briefly involved with a male of around thirty
27         in the resuscitation room.           He had already had
23         considerable effort put into his resuscitation but was
29         still asystolic", so that he had got no heart beat at
30         all?
31         A.     No.
32   Q.    "I placed a central venous line on this patient.           I
33         believe resuscitative measures on this patient were
34         abandoned."        Then you went up to Ward 60, where people
35         were being sent, as I understand it, who didn't need
36          intensive treatment?

                                           14
 1        A.     It is strange, because they obviously didn't during
 2        the time they were transferred from Accident & Emergency
 3        to the ward - by the time they had got to the ward two
 4        patients had deteriorated to such an extent that they
 5        required to be ventilated.
 6   Q.   Anyhow, you helped up there.        Is there anything of any
 7        importance about that stage of the operation as far as
 8        you are concerned?
 9        A.     What - that is not mentioned here?
10   Q.   Yes.
11        A.     I don't think so, no.    It is very difficult looking
12        back; it must be the same for everybody involved.
13   Q.   Can I just go to some of the criticisms that you make. I
14        think we have dealt already with the question of what Dr.
15        Slater said about Hammond at the inquest.
16        A.     Perhaps on the top of page 5, there is a statement
17        from a PC Taylor that I have seen, who says that he was
18        involved with resuscitation attempts on Philip at the
19        ground and also for 20 minutes at the hospital.        I have
20        not got the full inquest transcript here, but great
21        lengths seem to have been gcr.e to to suggest that Philip
22        was dead by the time he arrived at the hospital.       And the
23        coroner mentions to Dr. Slater that the police officer
24        may have been feeling his own pulse rather than Philip's
25        pulse, this sort of thing.
26   Q.   Dr. Slater was expressing an opinion here.
27        A.     Yes.
28   Q.   I don't know whether you have read all the documentation
29        with this, but the summary - have you got the inquest
30        into the death of Philip Hammond, the documents dealing
31        with that?
32        A.     Yes.
33   Q.   The summary says that he died in hospital, at E.        He died
34        at the Northern General Hospital.
35        A.     Yes.



                                         15
 1   Q.   So that was the view of the Police.     Then at 598, this is
 2        Dr. Slater.     At E he describes the very serious internal
 3        injuries that he had, and then at F: "My autopsy showed
 4        evidence of medical intervention in that three ECG
 5        electrodes were positioned on the body.     It was my
 6        opinion that the fracture to the rib was not a
 7        consequence of any attempt at resuscitation" and so on.
 8        Then on the next page he says at D:
 9        "Of the autopsies I dealt with at Hillsborough, this was
10        an unusual cause of death, as you will appreciate.       The
11        cause here was the accumulation of blood within the
12        actual lung substance.     Now if we get fluid on our lungs
13        this can be removed by various means.     There are
14        medications that can remove this if you can get to people
15        quickly enough but when blood develops in the lung
16        substance this cannot be removed at all and so, in fact
17        there is no known effective medical treatment for this."
13        I take it you would agree with that, would you?
19        A.   No, because if blood accumulates within - it is
20        called a haemothorax - we deal with them all the time at
21        work - you just put a tube into the chest wall and drain
22        the blood out.
23   Q.   I see.     But you had not appreciated at this stage that
24        that was the problem?
25        A.   No, it does not really affect the initial management.
26        The initial management, whatever the cause, is to get
27        oxygen into the patient ar.d try and get the heart
23        beating.    And the finer points, if you like, come a bit
29        later.     And the accumulation of this amount of blood in
30        Philip's chest would not really cause me concern during
31        the initial stages.     You would not want to leave it
32        there.     But it certainly would not cause me concern in
33        the early stages of resuscitation.
34              I        am very confused by what Dr. Slater says at the
35        end of paragraph E here:     "Blood is very heavy and
36        accumulates in the lung and in fact there is no doubt

                                      16
 1    that in this type of death unconsciousness would have
 2    occurred extremely rapidly".        If he is saying that
 3    because Philip had blood in his chest he became rapidly
 4    unconscious, that is absolute rubbish.         I am sure that is
 5    not exactly what he is trying to say.
 6    It is what he is saying.
 7    A.   We see people all the time who have been car
 8    accidents and got fractured ribs and come in with maybe
 9    two or three litres of blood in their chests and they may
10    be sat up talking to you.      It is not the cause of
11    unconsciousness.
12    No, but there were very serious injuries in this case as
13    well, weren't there?
14    A.   The only ones seem to be a lung laceration, one
15    fractured rib and a haemothorax, in other words, blood in
16    the chest cavity.     Those by themselves are most certainly
17    not fatal injuries.       It was the hypoxia again in Philip

18    that killed him.
19    Then at G he is asked "Can I just turn to the marks of
20    medical intervention?       I think you mention three ECG
21    electrodes, is that right?          A.   That is correct, sir.
22    And then he explains what they are.
23          Then on the next page it seems to be in answer to a
24    leading question from Mr. Fraser who was acting for the
25    families, he is asked:
26         "Q. Dr. Slater, correct me if I am wrong, but I
27                think by the time Philip had got to hospital
23                he was dead?"
29    And the doctor says:
30          "Q.   Yes, I shouldn't be surprised in my
31                profession.     I was somewhat surprised that
32                Philip was taken to the Northern General
33                Hospital because my autopsy finding was such
 34               that I would have thought he would have died
 35               extremely quickly."



                                     17
    1         And so on.     So this is an expression of opinion from the
    2         doctor based on his autopsy findings.
    3         A.    Yes.   Again, that just doesn't add up.   If you are
    4         saying that Philip's injuries that he found at post­
    5         mortem - in other words, the lung laceration the
    6         fractured rib and the haemothorax - were such that Philip
    7         would have been, and he says, sorry, "My autopsy finding
    8         was such that I would have thought he would have died
    9         extremely quickly and become unconscious instantaneously
10            at Hillsborough."     Again, that just does not add up with
11            my clinical experience which is that those by themselves,
12            without the crush element and the asphyxia, are perfectly
13            survivable injuries.     I don't quite understand what point
14            he is making there.
15       Q.   But this boy was got to hospital pretty quickly, wasn't
16            he?
17            A.    He was one of the first to arrive. I can't say how
19            quickly after sustaining his injuries he got to us, but
19            he was certainly one of the first to arrive at the
20            hospital.
21       Q.   You don't remember what time he arrived?
22            A.    The first one is 15.22.    Philip was literally about
23            two minutes later.
n   a    Q.   In terms of the response to the disaster, that is pretty
    -1
25            early on?
26            A.    Yes.
27       Q.   And once he got to the hospital he had the appropriate
28            treatment as far as you are concerned?
29            A.    Yes.
30       Q.   I mean you are not suggesting that there was any medical
31            negligence or oversight or anything of that sort?
32            A.    No, I don't think so because blood in the chest,
33            which Philip apparently had, causes problems with
34            ventilation of the lung.     The lungs will still inflate,
35            but there is blood preventing the full inflation.      As
36            long as you can get some oxygen under pressure into the

                                          18
 1        lungs, it is not an immediate problem.    And I don't
 2        remember noticing anything strange about the way Philip's
 3        chest was moving at all.
 4              There are other things you look for obviously at the
 5        early stages of resuscitation, like air in the chest
 6        cavity and air under pressure in the chest cavity called
 7        a tension pneumothorax.    So you do actually look for
 8        abnormalities in the chest wall.    And there was obviously
 9        nothing to suggest that in Philip, or I would have stuck
10        something into his chest to try and let air or blood out.
11        But, as I say, blood in the chest cavity we do not worry
12        about in the early stages.
13   Q.   But he in fact died fairly shortly after these
14        resuscitative attempts, as I understand it?
15        A.   Yes, if it is Philip that we are talking about, he
16        came in in cardiac arrest and we re-started his heart.
17        I l is a difficult concept because people think that
18        somebody who is arrested, has had a cardiac arrest, they
19        are dead.    I have tried to make the point in my
20        submission that death is not an event as far as we see
21        i~; it is more of a process, especially in young people.
22        Even by the time somebody heart has stopped, it is
23        possible to re-start a heart.   So it is a difficult
24        concept, to try to discuss the concept of death.
25   Q.   This is the whole object of this heart massage, as I
26        understand it.
27        A.   Yes.
28   Q.   You find somebody in what appears to be in extremis,
29        because there is no pulse, you give them heart massage
30        and sometimes you can start it again?
31        A.   Yes, the heart massage, it is not so much the heart
32        you are trying to protect, it is the brain, because
33        obviously you need to get oxygenated blood to the brain.
34        The idea of massaging the heart is not so much to restart
35        the heart.    It is, hopefully, to try and get a bit of
36        oxygen into the blood up to the brain while you are doing

                                     19
 1        something else that might restart the heart, and that is
 2        usually injections of adrenaline and atropin and various
 3        drugs and possibly electrical shock to the heart, that
 4        sort of thing.    The heart massage itself is not primarily
 5        aimed at restarting the heart.
 6   Q.   I don't know that I really need to ask you about this,
 7        but if you look on what is page 603 in my bundle, at F -
 8        this is the police officer who is summarising the
 9        evidence -
10              "Attempted resuscitation was then carried out by
11              Police Constable Taylor, Ambulance Officer Jane
12             Moffatt and Ambulance Officer Alan Smith.     The
13              ambulance was then driven to the Northern General
14              Hospital by Police Constable Shiel and during that
15              journey the Police Constable and the ambulance
16              crew continued attempted resuscitation.
17                    Upon arrival at the hospital Philip was taken
18              into the Casualty Department where further treatment
19              was carried out by a doctor who unfortunately
20              has not been identified."
21        That is you.
22        A.   Yes.
23   Q.   He goes on to say:
24              "After some twenty minutes the doctor stated
25              he could not detect any pulse or signs of life
26              and Constable Taylor took Philip into the plaster
27              room which was being used as a temporary mortuary
23              at the hospital.
29                     Dr. Janet Rosemary Doore shortly afterwards
30              examined Philip in the plaster room and certified
31              life extinct."
32        Is that correct as far as you are concerned?
33        A.   Yes.    "After some twenty minutes the doctor stated he
34        could not detect any pulse or signs of life."     That is
35        consistent with 20 minutes of resuscitation during which
36        time you may for a short while get the heart restarted,

                                      2 0
     1        have electrical activity, in other words have an ECG
 2            trace and possibly even an output with that, which means
     3        a pulse that you can feel as well.       But I think it was
 4            the case with Philip that at one stage we did restart the
 5            heart and he re-deteriorated again and the heart stopped
 6            again.      And obviously there is only so long that you keep
 7            that up, particularly in a situation like this.
 8       Q.   At all events, you were satisfied after 20 minutes that
 9            it was hopeless?
10            A.   Yes.
11       Q.   And he was transferred to a temporary mortuary.
12            A.   Yes.     But I would not have tried for 20 minutes if he
13            had been dead when I saw him.
14       Q.   No, I follow that.     The only point on this is that Dr.
15            Slater in answer to a leading question expresses the
16            opinion that he thinks he might have been dead when he
17            arrived, and it looks as though he was wrong about that.
18            A.   Yes.
19       Q.   I think that there is some elaboration on page 605 but I
20            don't think I need     ask you about that.     Then he is asked
21            whether the police     officer might mistake     the pulse.
22            Obviously he might.
23            A.   There again he    might not.
24       Q.   You don't think he     did or. this occasion?
25            A.   No.    As I understand it, he felt, I can't remember
26            whether it was a growing pulse or an act(?) pulse.            What
27            we are taught at medical school not to do is feel
28            somebody's pulse at the wrist with your thumb because you
29            will feel the pulsation of your thumb.         Feeling
30            somebody's pulse in the neck is usually done with three
31            fingers, and the same in the groin, and it is difficult
32            even for a non-medically trained person to misinterpret a
33            pulse.
34       Q.   Provided you don't do it with your thumb?
35            A.   Sorry?
36       Q.   Provided you don't do it with your thumb?

                                           2 1
 1        A.   I suppose so, but when they for the neck most people
 2        I assume tend to go with the fingers.
 3   Q.   There it is.     It looks to me as though Dr. Slater may
 4        have been mistaken about that.     You have looked at the
 5        hospital records, have you, and tried to identify the
 6        people you dealt with and have not been able to do so?
 7        A.   No, there is nothing useful in the records I have
 8        seen.
 9   Q.   I have read what you say about the 3.15 cut-off.     This
10        was the decision of the coroner which he came to on the
11        basis that he had got to take a time limit at some stage;
12        and whether he is right or wrong is another matter.      And
13        I do not think that I really need trouble you with what
14        the coroner actually said about it.
15                The position was this, was it not, that those who
16        died had clearly sustained the injuries from which they
17        eventually died by certainly at the latest 3.15 and
18        actually probably earlier.
19        A.   Yes.
20   Q.   That obviously not everybody who sustained injuries died
21        because we know that a number of people were resuscitated
22        cn the pitch, a number of people recovered in hospital
23        and so on and so forth.
24        A.   Yes.
25   Q.   3c it does not follow that simply because you sustained
26        injury and even became unconscious, that you were going
27        to die.
23        A.   No.
29   Q.   It is a factor, as I understand it, of how long the
30        compression on the chest lasts for so that you are unable
31        to breath for I think you say four minutes, don't you?
32        A.   Yes.
33   Q.   I think it is common ground that in a situation like this
34        if you can't breath for about four minutes - the
35        estimates vary a bit between three and six - then there
36        is precious little that can be done about it?

                                       2 2
 1        A.    Yes, I would agree with that, precious little, but
 2        not nothing.     There is something that can be done about
 3        it.
 4   Q.   You can try to get the heart going again.
 5        A.    Yes.
 6   Q.   By manual massage.
 7        A.    Yes.
 8   Q.   That is what people were doing on the pitch.      I don't
 9        know whether you know that.
10        A.    Yes, and also by mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
11   Q.   Is there anything else that you can do at that stage?
12        A.    Not with the facilities that would have been
13        available at the time.     Ambulance personnel would have
14        been able to do more.     The most important thing to get
15        into those people is oxygen, even if you had a bag and a
16        mask with no oxygen supply, using atmospheric air, which
17        is about 21% oxygen.     If you are doing mouth-to-mouth air
18        you are using expired air, blowing out, which is only
19        about 15% oxygen, which is even worse.      Ambulances are
20        equipped with 100% oxygen, which gives people the best
21        chance, because the damage is all being caused by
22        hypoxia, lack of oxygen to the brain and the heart.
23               It is also an important factor that in a lot of
24        cases I understand it was not just a fixed crush, that
25        was it, four minutes, and then unconsciousness. There was
26        obviously swaying and movement, during which time there
27        would have been a pressure on the chest that was then
28        relieved, the patient would have been able to take a
29        breath.      It was just so variable.   It is the variability
30        of all the cases that concerns me when they decide on a
31        blanket cut-off time - to say that nothing made any
32        difference in any of those cases.       I just do not .
33        understand that, because there was so much variability
34        even with the patients that we saw at hospital, some who
35        were in cardiac arrest.      All those that were in cardiac



                                       23
 arrest we think died, but the ones that were unconscious,
 fitting, what have you, some of those survived.
But, as I understand it, the ones who were not dead were
sent to hospital?
A. I don't know.   I cannot comment on that.     One of the
problems we have---
I have read the evidence that was given by Taylor, and we
have the evidence of what was happening and how the
people were being selected to go in hospital.      No doubt
mistakes were made in a situation like that.     But
basically that is what happened.     People who were thought
to be capable of being resuscitated were being sent to
hospital, and those who were already dead, certified
dead, were not.
A.   But only 14 of those who died every made it as far as
hospital.     It makes me wonder what happened to the other
82 what actual sort of state they were in at times when
non-medically trained people decided that nothing could
be done for them.    That is probably my biggest concern.
Perhaps there were people making decisions who were not
really qualified to make it.    It is an impossible
situation.
I think perhaps you maybe have not read the evidence
about that.    I mean there was a good deal of evidence
about who was making the decisions and who was deciding
who should be sent to hospital and who should not; and as
far as I am aware they were all medically trained people.
They were either ambulance personnel, senior ambulance
personnel or doctors.    But, again, it is possible that
there may have been mistakes,   I don't know.
      I follow what you say about the difference between
traumatic asphyxia and crush asphyxia but, as I
understand it, traumatic asphyxia is really asphyxia
caused by the application of outside force.
A.   Yes.
                                                                             I




     1
          So, as a general statement, these people suffered from
     2    traumatic asphyxia.
     3
          A.    Yes.    It comes down to semantics really.     But you are
     4    correct to describe traumatic asphyxia as the
     5    transmission of force to the chest wall.      Traumatic
     6
          asphyxia aiso tends to be used as a diagnosis, as a term
     7
          to encompass - I mean, the term "crush asphyxia" had not
     8   been coined before Hillsborough.
     9   No.     That is what I thought.
10       A.    It was sort of invented to ---
11        It rather came out of Dr. Wardrope's article, didn't it?
12       A.    Yes, I think so.    He says "We have used the term
13        'crush asphyxia' to describe..."
14       Sc it would not be surprising if some of the pathologists
15       used the term "traumatic asphyxia"?
16       A.    No.     I- is just that "traumatic asphyxia" gives the
17       impression, certainly amongst medical people, that it is
18       ar. irrecoverable situation, somebody is crushed to death
19       basically - that is what traumatic asphyxia means.         And
20       you imagine that someone who is crushed to death has a
21       ter.-tonne weight fall on them or is run over by a lorry.
22       Ccviously we know the situation at Hillsborough was
23       cirferent.      If someone had dropped a 100-tonne weight on
24       zzp of 96 people then,     yes, they all would have died
25       immediately of traumatic asphyxia.
26       Weil, I don't think anybody was thinking in terms of
27       that.
28       A.    No, buc obviously crush asphyxia is a separate
29       e7."ity.
30       I. is a sub-division of traumatic asphyxia.
31       A.    Yes.
32       Ar.d, in the light of Hillsborough, it is a helpful sub-
33       division cz traumatic asphyxia.      Is that the proper way
34       of looking at it?
35       A.    Yes.    3ut it also implies that it is a more
36       recoverable situation, as I have tried to point out. The

                                      25
     1        injuries are different.     There doesn't tend to be so much
 2            damage to the organs inside the chest.     It is more a
 3            picture of pure asphyxia, not being able to breath,
 4            without the other components that go along with being
 5            crushed to death, like a ruptured aorta or a torn
 6            pulmonary ---
 7       Q.   Yes.     Those are other injuries which are not strictly
 8            necessary to the process of asphyxia.
 9            A.     No, but they tend to go along with traumatic
10            asphyxia.     There also tends to be a lot more damage to
11            the lungs themselves during traumatic asphyxia - bruising
12            and bleeding into the lungs themselves.
13       Q.   In Hammond's case ----
14            A.     He had, I am sure what Dr. Slater was saying was that
15            it was a haemothorax.     But blood in the chest can either
16            be actually within the lung substance - if you think of
17            the lung as a sponge, and it is as if somebody has dipped
18            it in blood and allowed it to fill up with blood.      A
19            haemothorax is blood in the chest cavity but in between
20            the lung - the lung collapses down and there is blood in
21            between the cavity, in the plural space.
22       Q.   But the fractured rib had punctured the lung, hadn't it?
23            A.     Yes, but blood does not just tend to seep into a lung
24            like a sponge.     That was not a very good analogy.
25            Usually what happens when you get a spicule of rib that
26            damages the lung, you get air leaks out of the lung which
27            gives you a pneumothorax or air into the cavity, and you
28            get fresh bleeding from the lung surface which drains
29            down into the chest cavity, and you usually end up with a
30            haemo-pneumothorax, in other words, blood and air in the
31            chest cavity.
32                    But, again, it is not - traumatic asphyxia would
33            tend to actually bash and bruise the lungs so much that
34            they bleed within their own substance, and that is an
35            irrecoverable situation: the lungs are so completely
36            damaged.

                                          26
 1   Q.   Interestingly, the coroner at one stage uses the
 2        expression "crush or traumatic asphyxia", and it is quite
 3        plain that he is using them as alternative words in the
 4        context of what everybody realised had happened in this
 5        case.
 6        A.   Yes - whereas in the BMJ article that comes out in
 7        November 1991 after the inquest, they go out of their way
 8        to draw a distinction between the two.
 9   Q.   I take your point that it is a useful distinction between
10        the two, but at the time I think not a distinction that
11        all pathologists were making.
12        A.   No.   But I am sure that the medical staff at the
13        hospital seem to have making it, the non-pathological
14        staff.     They presumably didn't just come to this
15        conclusion after the inquest finished.     Perhaps if more
16        medical evidence had been heard from non-pathologists...
17   Q.   I don't think I have got any other points that I wanted
18        to   ask you about.    Is there anything else you wanted to
19        say to me?
20        A.   I think most of what I have to say is in here.      There
21        is nothing in my statement itself that is going to be
22        very useful.    It is very mundane stuff about what I did
23        on the day and who I did it to.
24             My biggest worry concerns the 3.15 ruling.       I saw
25        patients after that time that were salvageable, and I
26        cannot reconcile that fact with this idea that by 3.15
27        everybody was irrecoverable.     That is really my biggest
28        problem.
29   Q.   I don't think that that can have been what was had in
30        mind because obviously everybody knew that patients had
31        gone to hospital with a view to being resuscitated, and
32        that some of them had in fact been resuscitated.       I don't
33        know whether you have read the evidence of Dr. Wardrope,
34        but my recollection is that he talks about 87 people who
35        were taken to hospital.     He says that 17 of them were
36        unconscious and were taken to the Intensive Care Unit.

                                      27
 1         And we know that - I forget the precise figure - of them,
 2         only nine, I think died.     So obviously the remaining ones
 3         recovered.     It is all a question of what people knew and
 4         assumed and so on, isn't it?
 5         A.   Yes.    But I understood that the impression was given
 6         at the inquest that it didn't make any difference to
 7         those that died what intervention they received after
 8         3.15 and therefore it was not necessary to hear evidence
 9         of anything after 3.15.     Is that a fair ---
10   Q.    I am not sure about that.        No, I don't think that that
11         necessarily is so.
12         A.   If that is the case I think it is most likely to be
13         incorrect; and perhaps evidence of what happened to some
14         of those who died, or what didn't happen to them, after
15         3.15, should have been heard.
16   Q.    I am not sure that this is the right moment to debate
17         this, but one has to have in mind what the purpose of an
18         inquest is and its limitations, and that is really a
19         question for me and whether or not this 3.15 cut-off
20         point is something which was appropriate in the
21         circumstances.
22         A.   And it also comes down to some of the families who I
23         have spoken to who, because of the 3.15 ruling, didn't
24         find out what happened to their own deceased, which,
25         again, I understand is one of the functions ---
26   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:      That is a matter which as far as I
27         can I amlooking into.     The fact is that at the mini
28         inquests what was known about tracing the person from the
29         time they were last seen to the certification of death at
30         a post-mortem was all given.        I am not saying, of course,
31         that there may not have been mistakes and confusion in
32         that, but that is what was attempted in the mini
33         inquests.     I am simply telling you this for your own
34         peace of mind, if I can put it like that.
35   THE   WITNESS:     But then before the generic inquest the 3.15
36         rule was introduced - is that correct?

                                       28
 1   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:   At the outset of the generic
 2       inquest, yes.   Thank you very much.   I am very grateful
 3       to you for coming.
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

31

32

33

34


                                    29
                    105        150589        0P3037                       DOCUMENT             RECORD        PRINT

                                                                    ( p _______                     OFFICERS         REPORT         NUMBER           R375

                                                                                                                                                    Station

surname                         FROST

                                DAVID        JOHN

                                                                                 Date          of    birth




)c c u p a t i on              POL      PC2130

elephone

lumber     of       Pages

'ated                          090589                                                                                                                S i gne d


             I came          on    duty      at   8.30         am    at    Heeley           DHQ,        along      with      other        members        of

             the      Crime        & Vandal         Squad           with which              I work:            I nsp.     Beresford,            Sgt.

            Eddison,              Bob    Crookes,          Russel          Wilks,           Andy       Justice,           Gary       Griffiths,

            John          Trewick,        Andy      West        and       riartyn S m i t h .              With      us    that       day      as    a
                                                                                                           Pc
             replacement 4 - w a s                p 1 o a o e d— to        o o o -w»y— o l d — f r i e n d         Alan     Hampshire.

            T h e m ood           am o n g s t us     at       utml         w-a6 n a p p y          a nd— j o v i a l ,■o h -ftow —             — w o ‘i— Vc

            change»             Briefing          from         Inspector             B.

            i*rfter -“ v a n n i n g u p " N|jL t r a v e l l e d                to       the       g r o u n d , a g a in m u c h      g o o d .h u m o u r

            f r o nt- a H .         On arri v a l ,            parked          our    van       in a       prominent          p o s i t i o n , r c n ewe d

            o-Ld— a c q u a i nt a n t ts         a n d — s-W -itt-frcd ■■a b o u t .

            Briefing              in the      stand        by Ch.          Supt.          D u e k e n f i e l d . plus      t h e— u o u a -1— -ar-r o y

            a-£— £-fxa.a1-art , y aah,              yaah        h e a r d — it all— bof or e-»— y & ti— c a n                1 1—   t e 1-1— irrr-

            a n y t h u u ) ..I ’,ua      b a a n . h » ra ..t a f B M — W i <ierou^— t iinoo                       U rorvg-r-

            As      Serial        21    we   were        standby            in L e p p i n g s          Lane      pen.      We t o o k up       our

            p o s i t i o n s * 1 i m o 1y     b a n t e r f r om           allmy         usual         * t a rr.f oo 1 o r-y *     I no p .
                                                                           t

           ftgfesfflfjl pat+i-w g " t h                    the      fe n ee t h .at.w-ao               fro CQ'St— s-o m a n y          o«P— t h e i r

            L i u a s ,— H —            — ail, a     k   ,.j    jnl-B . - « • » »          ^         bnan               — t oo m a ny t i m es

            b e f o re w ithout" i n c i d e n t               h o w ■do y o u            prepare         ok    c iipoct      w hat— l ay       a h ead .

            A    call       from       the    control          box    to       be    deployed             at    the      turnstiles

            Penistone             R oa d . I p a i r e d       with/^John T r e w i c k                 at     turnstiles             allowing


    LEEDS OfRCFS          BRITANMA CHAMUfcKS 4'3               _______ _
                          JOSEPHS well! HANOVEH VMflX 1FPPS LSn 1AB TFLEPHONP (0632) 450645 TELEX 9 S » i-ma voouu (
                                                                                                                                                                           PAGE
                                                                                                                                                                           R375

         Notts.         Forest           fans      i nt o       the         kop.           As     in       t he          past          fans       are      in        the       main

         friendly            and       well     behaved with                      the        odd         exception.

         A   number          of    fans       had        cans          of     b ee r       and         were         asked          to       finish           it       before

         entering            the       ground,           a a — p r o b l e m,— j u s *— a n i? or— t w o m o a -na— a b o ut— t+re--

         p ^ r c h a t B— pr.i c e ,— i t. .Sfmnda4--afc.-i-f—                         1                                 h -a-d—           — ttp ■t h e— p-r i c -e -e f
                                                                                           f'C
         al»^»h »4 ■■l o r t h e m a t c h .                   I assisted^, A n d y                        West          to     eject             a Liverpool                   fa n
                                                                                  viar. \O.N&u-                                                                     V*a
         for     jumping           the       turnstile,                            — r o uti ne-, to                     the       Police              room,          details
             T«s»' Vt
         and^ejected.                    I r o roe tTib e r— t h i*>kiog— a4 >— the                            time        h ow— b u sy — t he               c h a rge

         r oom w a s .            We     co-u-l-dn-' t g e t in a rvd di-d— th e                                nocwoify                    outoidi?.                 Time

         1415      pm C r o w d s         building             now          but    again              apart          from          the          odd     drunk             all

         quiet         and    well        behaved.               I returned                      to     John         Trewick                on       the
•                                      Po
         turnstiles.                   &*■!; B r o u g h a m            <E2>       had           duties             at     the         Pelican             crossing                 in

         front         of    us.        Dick       arrested             a very              drunken                 fan       I assisted                   him        to       the

        Police          room       which        now       is     thronged               with            b o b bi o s— a n d v r e s p e c i

         prisoners*               u° 7       nnicy       a     I n t    n f       erniiCB             j r r n n l    r        r1 \     6        — MO 1G e6      .         A ftC r

        rriaf-~» n 3    tiif? Rt-j1'' ».!-»«- r\„ u                    j returned                 to      t he       turnstiles                      passing              a

         number         of m y C A V/ w o rk m a t w - t a r r y i n g , d r a g g i n g                                           2       or    3    prisoners                 wno

        were      throwing              themselves               ab o u t ,        shouting,                    swearing.                       Twj     of      the

                                   » l«hr> T j n i.i i rl' ■ -»n rl flnrty                                 .

         I went         outside           the      ground again.6 y                         now         very         busy          many          people             asking
                                                                                                                                                     V",,e ,*-^oo\
        about          tickets          "Where        can we            bu y       tickets"                    both       Notts             and       Scousir             fans.

        Al l -t he          lads       oro    now     returned w o '
                                                                   i i o c u s o t h e^ir                                     a rratW                 I do n t

          offiontbor         how e r w he n                    must         h a ve      been            £.55         pm       (1455)             we     were          called

         into     the        ground          and    s e nt      along             the       perimeter                    t ra c k .             I was        at       or       near

        the     front         of       the    u n it .         I remember                   looking                 down       the          front          of       the

        North          Stand       it     seemed          like         chaos,                    line          of    bobbies                were        facing                the

         c r o w d as        we    approached                the       Leppings              Lane       e n d of the s t a n d p e o p l e w e r e
                                                                                                            a-c* V c n & s
         all     over        the       track.         I saw a                                     a n d a l a d <D 1 1 7 8 !>■) s«erued as -a

          (had e t w i-th hit*, s t r u g g l i n g w i t h a fan.   — losing.        I went                                                               to       their
       T *5* :
          a s s i s t a n c e a n d got the f a n in a n a r m l oc k a n d m a r c h e d h i m                                                            back           to    the



    LEEDSCWCFS         BraTANNiACH4W0ERS 4/SOXFCHU►W * usm      • ---------- . .
                       JOSEPHSWEuJ mANOVEHVM*LKLEEDSU531AB TFUPHONf (0532)430648 TElfX883B6 FAX426B6BJ
          .                                                                                                                PAGE
    ^                                                                                                                                                                R375

        charge              room       rushed           him         through       the       office              area         which          was         full     and

        straight                i nt o      the       cell.           This       was     also            full        of      drunken^blood                      covered

        fans         and        about         5 teo fcbi o 6         just        to    keep           the       pea c e .           The       atmosphere                 was

        very          volatile.                 There         were        about        12       prisoners                 all        but      2     or     3 were

        screaming                 and      shouting              about        they w a n t e d               to w a t c h           the       game,            -i-%—

        t t a m a d - l h a t         t h o-fe-o— c r a a e d - a n i m a l c          *>aul d - d i e              if—           -«^ame          w o n 't —


      M h U u w lM U N U b .                 1 -T -em a m b a r         h o t in g — tho rn           f o <s- t h e i -r - - t ft» * > t a l i - t - y — I —    — a o 4


     Ainda r s t and—i-4-.

        I remained                  in     the       charge          room      for      a       couple            of m i n u t e s           because             I

      thought                it w a s        going          to      erupt      any      secono.                  The? -o-dd o n o — w-a o -fH^l-i»d— ®-«t

     to        be       booked           in.         Absolute             chaos.            A    fan        witn a            beard          with         cut        lips

     and          blood all                over        his       face      was      going         berserk.                    I tried              to     calm         him

     and          sit        him      down.            He     sprayed          blood            in m y         face        as      he       shouted            and

     swore.                  The     match,            the match.-

     My       ^                                 -waa        y a u    -" d i n^y     b a s t a rd'1- A i d fr*                   I decided                 to     leave
                                                                                                                    **e,c.                      cV V ^ ^
     the          charge            room and              get       back      outside,            there                       enough           fci.nh h i         there.

     On        leaving              I walked              towards          the m a i n           track           gates.              The        radio          wit

     g a m b le d a n d 1 f r a n t i r .                     I saw a          line         of    Police              dogs         and       handlers             from

     near           the        gym       door        r i gh t       round      to     the        ground             gates,           where           they       were

      intermingled                      with         horses          and      bobbies.                 I began             to      run       my      mind       working

     f a s t.               I thought               it's      really          blown         now        the       crowd          was         very        noisy.            I

     am        on      the        perimeter               track         now    running            towards                 the      Leppings              Lane
                                                cVV'MCv'i                                                                                     _* , 1
      people                and    some        bo bbi               ahead .           T Thu u )hT hn r m 'irr ^ **                              r 1 1 er       u«a i ue s

         ■ i n r> -i n ■j    a l n r v .] — t h B    r 1 f l-M — W -i          H K -g—      fO   Ot       W O rfc     1-0 ’3 * e 5      8    f 1 a> C T 3       a n ti


     aretaai                 the      ba-H-»           I— t-e-e-k— f o r w a r d        a g -a-t-n.            People           every          where           outside

     the          fence at              Leppings             Lane         end.        R a s X — ija-t— t h e r e -qui                              On    arrival              at

     the          other           end,       very         strange          scene        people              sat       down         by       the      fence

     watching                  the       game        whilst          others         frantic               looking             in     towards              the

     fence.                  I pushed               through          to    the      fence         near           to       the      gate         far       right.

     The          holding            area           was     still         near      full         fans          pouring             o ut .          I l ook           inside




I.FPT5 OWCFS            BWTAW«auvtwucrw
                        JOSEPH* w c n j W N 0V 6H W M X LEEDS LSn tAB TFIEFHQNE (0632) 4iQW a
                            P                                                                                                                        R375

^          and    see      1*10117    Justice               spread       eagled        against         the      fence.            Protecting                  a

           bobby     between            his          legs        giving     mouth        to m o u t h       and      cardiac          massage.

           Both     their       faces           are        strained,           "ftwriy^ i s     being         knocked           all       over       by

           fans     rushing           past           towards        the     open       gate.        I forced my             way       to         the gal

           and    climbed         above              the     escaping          fans      forcing         my     waythrough.                     I
                             3 uav'^c
           reached                .        We        broke        away    the    fencing          with       other         Police          outside

           and    f ans     inside.              Everything               was    so ^ r a nl^i c— C-4 -t— i-s— dif f i e u l t                  to

           rLa s m h a      Tha       cnrop l e v m e n t al—                           ) , the       fans        just      kept          pulling         at

           the    fence      even          after           it w a s      broken.         I forced            t hem off          and       we     got th<

        body        out.        T+ieught         9   >— tih<ani>!— go-od we » 9— t h a t ^ a         .all— ov o r s             In m y     w i n d — %-Ke

       •^ a n iTioiiii n g a n d "tha                6   c a n e u n f o l d i n g — i-s— 1-i-k e -t>h e a 4 >re "-cu r t a i n s — be i ng
                                                NA
             1 60 d ■      As    A ndy       and           I moved        towards        the      centre        of    the        penjwJ^^^mJT
                                                                                                                                      /
-SOW    another           two    bodies              right        d o w n at    th e     front       under          the    fencing.                 Blue,

        dead      eyes      open.           Both            of    us w ent      to     them      and     each        started          mouth          to

        mouth       and     cardiac             massage.

       -I. h a s i la ? ail fn r -a t a r n m l                   inhilst— I— iLhm..jht                         t                              th,-       ^   1   ,

       fia t. -on biith         it .        Sound            o f m eans an d - ^ r w n c            ao      air     fo r c e d — i-ft a n d — t h e n

        p » p ipe0 ■        L i v e >— l i * e>            breath        c o m e -»f>r-

       The       fence      above          is        being        ripped       down     flecks         of     blue        and    white          paint

       f all      around.             Money           on     the    ground       everywhere,                Hands         picking          up.

       Fence        is w r e c k e d        people               pouring     out      force       the       two     bodies         out.         ~^Thanl-

       G«-d— t h at        i-s ftvc-f.               Fans      above      shouting          and     swearing              "You     fucking

       B a s t a r d s ."

       A     brief       state        of    calm.              W hat     n e ;<t,— » i t h Ar>d y £ l i m b          the        fence          i nto      the
                                                vx •»*
       centre        pen. fro b feia c e v e r y                  where     now.        Fans      part) c a n ’ t b o l i e v c m y                  »y»t

       a     pile    4 or       5 deep           of        bodies.          Smell           at* i n k;      uf i n o > c h i-t-.           Start -

       dragging           the     bodies             out       passing       them       through          the      fencing         one       after

       another.             Bobby          ties          back      the    ripped        fencing.             A r m s— a c h i n g k e e p -go i no

       gtri t h e m       o ut w h <a t e l se               is    t here— Vo— &o-.           All     out.          Move        further

       towards          South        Stand.                I d a n tt> b e l i eve        it m o r e        t u r t o i rw (l^ore b o d i e s                 ii




LEEDS OFRCFS      BWTANNIA OW*«tHa «»s>         — ___
                  JOSEPHS WEU.J MANOVEH WMK LEECS LSn tAB                TFLEPHQff   (Q632)480645 TE1.EXSBM6 Iaa ^ ooc^_j_____________ ______
                                                                                                                                                                             PAGE
                                                                                                                                                                             R37“

    another                pile       in     front             of      the       g a te.              Se--a<r>a 1 1 - a nd— u-s»a-l-e"*-&-.                         Again       ge

    them          out.           Megaphone                 giving               orders,               i-V' Q - a b o u t.- W -wte-»                    -Koop         •pm     can, t.

 ■1 -ad 9 ■           6   w e -atr -frour i ng            dow n my               fa-c-o . -K -eey« g o i n g -;— <rh e y                               are      being        pass

 from             behind.             .H o w        m a ny      d e ad?           B o t-tr1 e nec                ”'|wo         chains              of

 passing                  bodies           out        now meeting                   at         the        gate.

                 a (>         ■^aco ^ dc            chaos.               M e m i n g— a-$a4 <v,— l oo k -a-t—                                 — w a s to— B-f- y o u n g

—1 1 f « «            Call         comes            through            this         ones              alive           I shout                 repeatedly                in a

 choked               voice,              "This        on e      alive."                  r   43      *-*■« " 3       hi               tears..           Broken          bodies

 being             dragged                apart        trapping                 each          other.                .R a p e       nf         m    nri .

All          out          onto       the          p it c h ,    make            shift           -stretchers                        and            away.          Mo t ice      fa r-

 t-t>a .fi r s t              I i w>a— ga.f f a r e a r a— n ow                    abo-ut .                 W h o ro - h a ^ c            t-fooy— b o e ft.             4'Jhy »»>*

             nr-3 r‘ " *                    ■■■=« i -itp                 TK^...jKt .                   A nyway             y u o d— t c r « « — t h e m — i n wi-ttr

■t he        ladii

■
f e e l i ngs               ■■ v e r y - p r o u d                                             n a 1— f o e 1 i ng— e-f— b e * ng
                                                           of— €-ol 1 o-a g o o -s-,— p-e-r-so -

 in a d e q u a t e . ' W hy                d i d — titi.c h a p p e n , — wi i-1— the. b o d y — I--br e a t h x a -i-nt-o— l-i-v*-s

n.r     ^a   c    T       c n e p a r t     a l    r n a H y    rl i   a t\ ,    K ilt,       t h a      . t n i i l . „ h n n l " t     ft             f-   V Q .U -tlQ —



te                                                      ■gtasfta^e t h ey w i -i-l — iL-i v e »                                D-i-d— I— <to— 4-t— r i g h t r— i-s-

AT a y            fa u l t.           W ho— i 6 or w a g h e.                       •

All          the          bodies          are        out       on      the       pitch             now. Pobbies                        working               away      on    them.

Walking                and         lying           wounded             everywhere.                         Fit         fans            venting               anger       blaming

us.              " Y o u ’re all              useless               bastards."                         Y o o 1 t h e y aro— r                            .. Loads            more

abuse.                 Form a             chain         across             halfway                 line          Notts            f ans           changing,              they

d o n ’t know.                      Ctouor             fans         want         someone                 to      fight            with            tremendous

feeling                of       tension.                W h e r e 'A n d y J u s t i 'C O .                         P o u n d— h iffi--f-oe,l--< -o-n f uaod-

l w t f               Wo      go    b«ack— t o - t h e— l o n c e - d as ed.                               A lo n g - wi t h              a om e - F— D t v 1— G— &—-V-
         ©<w_f c i f V ' s-
'a-rret— Art*y w e n t                to      r e ar       of L e p p i n g s             Lane.                  Fire           engines                everywhere.

D o w * - by— t h e                r i ver-i— no— rwi— no->— m o r t— bodi'PS— c o v o r-e d .                                                    1—            — to-do—

s e n»»t^ i a $ ,--t h a t .ia --wh y                          I -am w a n d -ar i.ng ■. a r o w d »                              L-et -ffte— hoi py--g i-ve m e -

a a <Tia                     4 a— -d a 1

A     lad         called            Colin            barely            conscious                   laid          by       th e         fence           amongst           the
                                                                                                                                                          PAGE
                                                                                                                                                          R375

             d ead.              Nearby              a son             sits     by    the      covered       body       of    his   dead       father.            Tt

             and         keep Colin                      conscious.                  H o id           h a n d - to 1U to                     Doctor

             examines.                        S o r-ioua ■h a m u s t                ha    "»»<■■       My umrin         jc    u a r y — sjiui 11    now. A n d

             p of i onal > ■ the -o-n i y ■o t h e r- ■> n i t                                ie . ftnriy J u s t ice antl.Colin.                   Colin        goe

             in      the         Ambulance.                        I help         lift        him    in.     'P i » w ^ i u                    Whe r e 1 ■a— A rrr-

                               ■ h im        my     c o a t h a t ao4 rf?a d i a ■ a r c.                        n g v— w h o re. a r e— t-koy r ■ w ho          c a>

             Back          into              the     ground.              Onto        the      pitch       find     others      in t h e       unit     re­

             group.                W cjw i f v t a i ts                  tu     h it h m n c .
                                                                                   V w e v jo o '
             We      return               to        the       fencing          a _§ notree          lady    comes       rou nd.         We    are    just

             standing                    staring.                  She    holds           our a r m s      and    says,       thanks         lads.      I begi-

             to      cry.

            Sometime                     later         we         van    up.       UJha re ■■i 6           — f r i a n d l y — chat t e-r— rvow.-

            General                patrol             a r o u n d Hi 11 sbo r o u g h ( «a

            □830          Off        Duty

            0 8 6 0 U a a a .hraakdawni--

            This          account                   of m y         experiences              on    that      day    is   garbled         and     blurred,

             thrrg             e r g t h o u g h ts— t h at                   h a ve- -wot— b e e n — inc 1 u d e ^ .         How       can   you     describe

             such an               event.              It         is    impossible,              I feel      to    *u r r o u -nd   o    r » a d o-r— un -t-fr

             <m i c » > " h              u      o    n        m    l                                         ---P l e aoe       let      o o ffie-g -»<wl € o s>e

            •t H i t - O - f     O i l       " t h i O 'i —




:nd o f   rep o rt
APPENDIX 7



Comments on amended South Yorkshire Police Statements



Chief Inspector Creaser

Mr Creaser’s original statement contained the following passage:

        ‘At approximately 12 noon I visited the Police Control Room and there spoke
       to Superintendent Murray. I asked him if he had any preference as to the
       manner in which the spectators should be allowed to fill the Leppings Lane
       terraces. I was informed that the filling o f the fenced pens would be allowed
       to take place in a natural fashion and that no control would be exercised by
       the Police on the supporters regarding which particular pen would be filled.
       This instruction was exactly in line with the instruction given the previous
       year, when Liverpool supporters had occupied the same parts o f the stadium.
       I only raised this question because I was aware that on previous occasions
       different methods had been used to accommodate spectators’.

The solicitors advised -

       ‘I feel that the comment about packing the pens on page 4 should either be
       expanded to include detail o f when (in his experience) this had been done, or
       the entire section dealing with this should be deleted’.

In the event the passage was deleted from Mr Creaser’s statement. The whole
question of whether supporters should be allowed to find their own level or pens
filled sequentially was an important one and considered at length by Lord Taylor.
He made findings critical of the policy of allowing supporters to find their own
level. In my opinion this passage is factual - it may have called for some
elaboration but it should not have been omitted.

But PS Goddard’s statement also refers to this conversation. He says:

        ‘Inspector Creaser came into the Control Box and asked Superintendent
       Murray about the Leppings Lane terraces and it was stated by
       Superintendent Murray that the standing fans would fin d their own levels in
       the pens rather than trying to fill one pen at a time. ’

Although the solicitors suggested this might be reconsidered, it was left in.
PC 446 Groome

Apart from Mr Frost’s statement, this statement was more extensively altered than
any other:

       Deleted - 'An officer o f Inspector Calvert’s experience o f policing would
       have been fa r better placed at the Leppings Lane end o f the ground’

      Deleted - ‘The control room seemed to have been hit by some sort o f
      paralysis’

       Amended - ‘It was noticeable that the only supervisory officers above the
       rank o f Inspector on the pitch were Chief Inspectors Beal and Sumner and
       Superintendent Greenwood. Certain supervisory officers were conspicuous
       by their absence. It was utter chaos.’ This was changed to ‘On the pitch
       were Chief Inspectors Beal and Simmer and Superintendent Greenwood’.
       The words in italics were deleted.

       Deleted - ‘Why, during the period 2.00 and 2.45 pm when the Leppings
       Lane end and the West Stand were not very full, except fo r the centre pen,
       was the kick-off not put back and the delay broadcast to the supporters
       outside. You cannot pass 30-40 thousand through the turnstiles at the
       Leppings Lane end in one hour. At 2 pm I would estimate that only 12,000
       were in the ground.

       Why was there a 10 per cent reduction in manpower from the previous semi­
      final in 1988. 80 more police officers at the Leppings Lane end could have
       made a difference, filtering fans at the Leppings Lane end. Approximately
       980 officers were used fo r the semi-final in 1988, 1,000fo r the semi-final in
       1987 and 1,200fo r the semi-final between Wolves and Spurs.

       The control room staff are not used to working in the pressure o f a control
       room. The stafffo r control room duties should be from weekly leave staff or
       mornings, as they are used to making decisions under pressure.

       ... The policing at Hillsborough has become complacent over the least (sic)
       2-3 years

       ... various officers working the track and in the ground had warned that
       things were starting to go wrong over this period, yet no action was taken.
       Manpower levels were steadily c u t...

       The decision to replace Chief Superintendent Mole before the semi-final
       needs to come under some scrutiny. This man had many years experience o f
       policing big matches at Hillsborough.’.

Although these criticisms are trenchantly expressed they are all matters of opinion
and comment (the underlying factual matters are not necessarily correct). They
were all matters which were considered at length in Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, where
findings adverse to the police were made.


PC 115 Huckstepp

Omitted was:

        ‘The crush outside the ground could have been better controlled with more
       police officers and a better regulation o f the flow o f fans ... knowing the
       ground as I do and how the Leppings Lane end fills up it might possibly have
       been better to direct the fans coming in through the open gates into the flank
       areas. ’

This is a pure statement of opinion, but it might suggest that other methods of
filtering supporters had been used in the past. There seems to have been some
confusion in this case between the police and the solicitors. In a letter of 12 May
1989 the solicitors recommended removal of comment from a statement by a PC
‘Hickstep’. There was no such person, and the solicitors presumably meant PC
Huckstepp (whose handwritten statement was evidently processed in the South
Yorkshire Police typing pool on 7 May).

The unamended version of PC Huckstepp’s statement went to the West Midlands
Police and Lord Taylor’s Inquiry - they saw the passage in italics above and PC
Huckstepp was cross-examined on the point (Day 15, page 113).


PC 1669 Walpole

The original statement contained this passage:

        ‘By 2.55pm the central pen fo r standing at the Leppings Lane end appeared to
       be absolutely packed solid whilst the pen towards the Police Control was
       about halffu ll and the pen towards the North Stand was perhaps only one
       sixth full. For normal big games the standingfans at the Leppings Lane
       terrace have filled each pen slowly well before kick off. I did not hear any
       radio message fo r the entrance to the central pen to he closed off, despite this
       being packed solid. ’

In the amended version the last sentence (which I have emphasised) is omitted. It can
probably be regarded as comment; but it does carry with it the implication that in the
past the centre pens had been closed off, though I doubt whether this adds much to the
preceding sentence.

A number of comments at the end of the statement were in my view properly
excluded.
Inspector White

A somewhat similar point can be made in the case of an omission from this officer’s
original statement:

        ‘During the briefing no mention was made about the tunnel gates being used
       to control ingress o f the crowd. Although on rare occasions in the past I
       have used the gates nearest the concourses to control flow away from the
       tunnel around to the south pen. I did this only fo r a few moments merely as
       a psychological support to turn the fans round to the south pen. I would not
       use them fo r any length o f time as when they are in the closed position they
       would be an obstruction in an emergency evacuation situation as they would
       have to be opened against the crowd and also because this is the only
       ingress/egress fo r fans in the central pens to get to the snack bar and
       toilets. ’


PC 1842 Brookes

A similar point arises here. The following passage was omitted:

       ‘Why were the sliding doors at the back o f the tunnel not closed at 2.45
       when those sections o f the ground were fu ll as at the Manchester United
       match this season. ’

This is comment, but contains factual material about what happened previously.
But PC Brookes’s reference to ‘sliding doors’ is unclear - the doors at the back of
the tunnel were hinged, not sliding, and could not safely be used when spectators
were in pens 3 and 4 because they might impede escape. But moveable barriers
had previously been used. It might have been better to seek clarification of this
part of PC Brookes’s statement rather than exclude it.


P C 2102 Eustis

Deleted is the following:

        7 remember that last year the crush behind the goal was immense and was
       appalled that people would stand being in amongst people so tightly packed.
       Whenever anything happened on the field fo r example the Liverpool goals
       last year the crowd in the pens below us at Leppings Lane ju st became a sea
       o f waves the crowd from behind pushing forward time and again to create
       waves o f people. I passed comment to fellow officers last year about how
       glad I was not to be in amongst the crowd. ’

This is a factual statement, although it seems to be at variance with other evidence,
including that of the supporters who had by the time PC Eustis’ statement came to
be considered (5 June 1989) already given evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and
made no particular criticism of the condition in the pens in 1988. I think it might
have been better to invite PC Eustis to reconsider this passage rather than delete it.


PS Crawford

The solicitors suggested review of part of Sergeant Crawford’s statement, with the
result that the following was omitted -

        7 personally thought we were very light on manpower at this end compared
        with previous years.

        I have worked this end o f the ground either outside the turnstiles, inside
        searching or in the West Stand fo r several years at Cup ties, FA Cup Semi-
        Finals and league matches with a lot more manpower. In fa ct I have seen
        more manpower at this end during league matches. Normally we have had
        a serial at the centre tunnel to direct fans to the North or South pens when
        the Centre pens had been filled. This was not the case at this match and
        several o f my serial remarked on this. ’

His personal feelings are irrelevant, and the numbers of police on duty are a matter
of record. But his past experience relating to the shutting of the centre pens is a
question of fact. It may be that the solicitors saw some confusion in this part of
his statement between what happened at League games as opposed to FA Cup semi­
finals. If so, it would have been better to ask him to clarify the point.


PC 2302 Powell

Referring to the position in Leppings Lane at 2.45 pm, the following passage is
omitted:

        ‘The first thing I said was, “Where are all the bobbies, there’s hardly
       anybody there”. I saw numerous people climbing over the tops o f the
       turnstiles and the few Police Officers that I saw appeared to be doing
       nothing about it. My main observation at this point was the lack o f Police
       presence. I couldn’t understand how such a large crowd could have possibly
       gathered. I recall in previous games there was usually a large Police
       presence concentrated on this part o f the ground usually forming some sort
       o f cordon. ’

This passage contains material about PC Powell’s own feelings, which are
irrelevant. But the reference to the cordon is an assertion of fact, although the
statement is somewhat vague as to where it was. The question of a police cordon
(on Leppings Lane) was an important issue at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, over which
he criticised the police.
PC 2547 Ramsden

The solicitors advised the deletion of the following:

        7 also fe lt in relation to the entrance outside Leppings Lane end that there
       should have been some sort o f semi-sterile area. We, that is Rotherham
       officers, had this particular dutyfo r the F.A. Cup Semi-Final in 1987 which
       was played between Leeds United and Coventry City.

       On this occasion we kept the crowds back outside the metal railings and gates
       to allow m yselfand other officers to carry out searches etc. Also there seemed
       to be a general lack o f information comingfrom within the groundfrom
       ground control via the radio or the public address system, either giving
       information to us, or information and requests etc., to the crowd. ’

This is another statement in which comment (the first sentence) and fact are
intertwined. In fact only the first two sentences were deleted.

The result was that the previous occasion was not identified, although the substance of
what happened was retained. The point is perhaps a minor one since anyone reading
the statement would ask - what omission is referred to? Comments at the end of the
statement were in my view properly excluded.
APPENDIX 8 - correspondence about amendments to statements


                          THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - UP-DATE II

TO:    Officers of the South Yorkshire Police submitting evidence to the West
       Midlands Police in connection with the Public Inquiry into the disaster at
       Hillsborough Stadium

Hammond Studdards, Solicitors, are acting on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police in the preparation
and presentation of evidence to be submitted to the Inquiry.

As part of this process the firm initially requested that all officers directly concerned should, as soon
as possible, prepare a note of their recollections, in the form of a statement including matters of
comment and impression, whether or not this amounted to evidence.

These accounts are of immense value to our Counsel.

Subsequently, the South Yorkshire Police were advised by the West Midlands Police that it would be
appreciated if South Yorkshire Police officers, who were at Hillsborough, could effectively prepare
their own factual statements for submission to the Inquiry. This was agreed and the obvious way of
proceeding was to look at the statements which had been initially prepared at our request, on the
basis that if matters of hearsay and comment could be removed, these would be suitable as the factual
statements requested by the West Midlands Police.

Some officers have expressed concern about alterations being made to their original statements prior
to submission to the West Midlands Police.

What must be kept in mind is that the statements for submission to our own Counsel were intended
to have an entirely different purpose to those submitted to the West Midlands Police.

The initial reports submitted contained a mixture of fact, conjecture and opinion. In editing them for
use as a factual statement by the Inquiry it has been necessary for the solicitors to remove conjecture
and opinion and to leave only matters of fact.

All statements which are submitted to the Inquiry may be taken into account in reaching conclusions,
whether or not the officer making the statement is called as a witness. It follows that the statements
must contain only direct factual observations, as opposed to matters of impression.

No amended statement will be submitted to the West Midlands Police until it has been seen,
approved and signed by the officer making it.

Assistant Chief Constable
(Staff Services)

** Distribution:

   All Chief Superintendents
   Supt Parker        - HQ Communications & Computers
   PC Middup          - Secretary, Police Federation
   Mr Stothard        - Special Constabulary Commandant
   Mr Richardson      - Civilian Personnel Officer
                                                              TREASURY SOLICITOR
                                               HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
                                               TOWN HALL
                                               SHEFFIELD
                                               SI 2HH

                                               Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                               Fax       0742-736900

                                               7th June, 1989
J. Mervyn Jones, Esq., Msc.,
Assistant Chief Constable,
Fumival House,
Fumival Gate,
Sheffield
SI 4QN.




                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS

       Thank you for your letter of today’s date, which we have already discussed.

        The main difference between the initial and final versions of the South Yorkshire Police
Officers’ statements is that any expressions of opinion were (as I understand it, on the advice of
Mr Woodward) removed from the final version. As I understand it, Andrew Collins’ view is that
there is absolutely no reason for excluding such expressions of opinion when they touch on matters
relevant to the Public Inquiry and that, in the circumstances, there is no objection in principle to
written statements containing such opinions being submitted to the Inquiry.

         Clearly, in view of the personal undertaking which you have given to the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire, Andrew Collins agrees that it would not be appropriate to use the original statement
for the purposes of the Inquiry when this has been superseded by a subsequent statement. However,
what I understand may have happened in the case of the Officer who gave his evidence yesterday is
that the original unamended statement was circulated because of the need to circulate statements to
all parties as much in advance of the calling of the relevant witnesses as possible and because at the
time of circulation of the relevant batch of witness statements the revised, final version of the
statement in question had not yet been received. I understand that in total there are three cases where
this has been necessary: P.C.s Best, Huckstepp and Illingworth. However, in such cases only the
final, revised version of the statement was given to the press.

       I trust that this problem will not recur in the future.

        I have not copied this letter to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, but am
naturally happy for you to do so.



                                              D. Brummell
APPENDIX 9


I deal in this Appendix with a number of questions that have been put to me by the
families of particular victims about the exact circumstances in which their relatives
came to die and with difficulties which they have told me exist with the police
documentation.


The individual cases which I discuss are those of


               James Aspinall
               Paul Carlile
               Gary Church
               Ian Glover
               Philip Hammond
               Sarah Hicks
               Victoria Hicks
               Richard Jones
               Michael Kelly
               Graham Roberts
               Andrew Seflton
               Christopher Traynor
               Kevin Traynor
               Kevin Williams
James Aspinall


At the mini inquest on 19 April 1990, Detective Sergeant Killoch said when
summarising the evidence about the death of James Aspinall that:

       “Sometime after the crushing had occurred in the West Stand terracing, James
       was removedfrom the enclosure, placed onto the pitch and taken to the
       gymnasium. It has not been possible to identify the persons involved in these
       actions ”.

There is however a statement on the body file for James Aspinall from Detective
Constable Fox which Mr Fox identifies himself with James in a photograph (MW1/2)
and says that he tried, without success, to resuscitate him. This statement is dated 25
March 1990. An addendum to the summary on James’s body file refers to DC Fox’s
statement, though there is no date indicating when this addendum was made.

Mr and Mrs Aspinall asked me why DC Fox’s evidence was not mentioned at the
mini-inquest. I asked Dr Popper about this. He could not offer an explanation but
there can in my view be no conceivable reason for anybody to suppress this statement
deliberately. Inspector Layton, who was in charge of the visual identification from
photographic material, gave evidence at the mini-inquest and referred to the
photograph MW1/2. But he did not take the statement from DC Fox.

I think the most likely explanation is that there was some delay in adding DC Fox’s
statement to the body file, so that when Detective Sergeant Killoch and Inspector
Layton examined it for the purpose of giving evidence it was not then available. If
so, that would clearly have been an unfortunate error. But it does not affect the
verdict of the Inquest.
Paul Carlile

At my interview with her Mrs Stringer said she was convinced that there was
photographic evidence that showed her son Paul Carlile outside the ground and in the
vicinity of Gate C at 14.54 and 14.55, but also inside the ground, on the terraces, at
the earlier time of 14.49.

Inspector Layton gave evidence at the mini-inquest held on 3 May 1990 that Paul
Carlile had been identified by his two sisters on the photographs taken outside the
ground at 14.54 and 14.55. These photographs are of good quality. Mrs Stringer told
me that she had recently come into possession of a video still, apparently from a BBC
video, timed at 14.49 showing Paul on the terrace. She said she could identify him.

Quite clearly both identifications cannot be right. There is another video still of the
terraces timed at 14.58, and again Mrs Stringer said she could identify her son in it.
While it is not impossible that he could be outside at 14.55 and inside at 14.58 it
seems unlikely. The quality of the video stills is in my view very poor and that at
14.49 shows less than half of the person’s face.

I have not been able to draw any definite conclusions and am not sure that it would
now be possible to do so. However, the photographs which show Paul outside the
ground at 14.54 and 14.55 are far clearer than the two video stills of the terraces at
14.49 and 14.58. In my view the West Midlands Police and the Coroner cannot be
criticised for accepting the identification made by Paul Carlile’s sisters.

The other area of concern that Mrs Stringer has is about the evidence of Mr
Hollinghurst, an off duty nurse. There is a passage in a statement by Mr Hollinghurst
dated 15 May 1989 which suggests that when he first saw Paul Carlile he was alive,
but on the ground in the crush. Mr Hollinghurst was aware of a hand grabbing at his
leg. Very sadly, when Mr Hollinghurst got an opportunity some time later to attempt
to resuscitate Paul, he was dead.

Mrs Stringer’s concern was that this was not mentioned at the mini-inquest on Paul
Carlile or when Mr Hollinghurst later gave evidence on Day 26 of the Inquest. But
this aspect of Paul Carlile’s case was considered in frill by the Divisional Court.
There is certainly no new evidence in relation to it.
Gary Church

At their meeting with me Mr and Mrs Church complained that PC Webster and PC
Hays claimed in the statements to have done too much on the day of the disaster, and
could not have been in the ground at 3 o’clock as they claimed. As I understand it
their argument is that these two officers could not have been involved with Gary
Church at 3.25.

There is no evidence that PC Hays was involved with Gary at all and he never said
that he was.

PC Webster made a statement which is undated but evidently made soon after the
event. He said he was on duty on the day of the disaster on a mobile patrol which
included PC Hays. Shortly after 15.00 they were in Penistone Road North area when
they received a radio message that there was crowd disturbance at the ground. On
arrival at the pitch he went to the West Terraces and tried to help. After the gate from
pen 3 onto the pitch was opened he formed part of the chain of police recovering
bodies.

He describes one youth whom he helped to resuscitate (not Gary Church), apparently
successfully. In a statement dated the 12th October 1989 he identified himself on
BBC film between 15.25 and 15.27 carrying a young lad, who he identified from
other photographic evidence as Gary Church. He placed him on the pitch and tried to
resuscitate him, unsuccessfully.

Another police officer, PC Haigh, also attempted with this resuscitation.

I cannot see that there is any valid criticism of this evidence.
Ian Glover

The police originally had on the body file a statement dated 7 July 1989 made by PC
Fojut, in which he purported to identify a person whom he had helped to carry across
the pitch to the gymnasium as Ian Glover. The identification was based on a
recognition of clothing shown to the officer in a photograph.

There are a number of inconsistencies between this statement and that of Joseph
Glover, Ian’s brother, who saw him brought onto the pitch from pen 3, and helped to
take him across the pitch. In these circumstances, it is not surprising that at the mini­
inquest Joseph Glover was asked if any police officer had helped to carry his brother
across the pitch to the gymnasium. He said that they had not.

In the result, PC Fojut’s evidence was not included in the inquest summary of
evidence of Ian Glover’s case because it was appreciated that his identification must
have been mistaken. This matter was fully explained at the mini-inquest. In my view
it is clear that PC Fojut had mistakenly identified the person he helped with as Ian
Glover.

Mr and Mrs Glover told me at my meeting with them that they were still confused
about this. It is of course unfortunate that PC Fojut misidentified the person he was
dealing with as Ian Glover, but I do not consider there is now any room for doubt that
Joseph Glover was right and PC Fojut was mistaken.
Philip Hammond

Counsel for the Family Support group submitted to me that Dr Walker’s evidence
was of critical importance in the case of Philip Hammond, and shows that evidence
given at the mini-inquest in his case was wrong (para 64 written submissions). I do
not accept this. At the mini-inquest P S Killock summarised the relevant part of the
evidence about Philip as follows (2 May 1990 p8 D-G):-

        “Shortly after 1505 hours, following the severe crushing in the West Stand
       terracing, Police Constable Stephen Taylor went into the tunnel leading to
       the West Stand terraces. A t the end o f the tunnel he saw a boy who he now
       knows to be Philip lying on the ground. The Officer, with assistance from
       Police Constable Andrew James Shiel, carried Philip and placed him in an
       ambulance which was in attendance at Leppings Lane.

       Attempted resuscitation was then carried out by Police Constable Taylor,
       Ambulance Officer Jane Moffatt and Ambulance Officer Alan Smith. The
       ambulance was then driven to the Northern General Hospital by Police
       Constable Shiel and during that journey the Police Constable and the
       ambulance crew continued attempted resuscitation.

       Upon arrival at the hospital Philip was taken into the Casualty Department
       where further treatment was carried out by a doctor who unfortunately has
       not been identified, sir. After some twenty minutes the doctor stated he
       could not detect any pulse or signs o f life and Constable Taylor took Philip
       into the plaster room which was being used as a temporary mortuary at the
       hospital.

       D r Janet Rosemary Doore shortly afterwards examined Philip in the plaster
       room and certified life extinct”.

In answer to the Coroner Sergeant Killock gave further details of Philip’s case,
including the fact the doctor tried for twenty minutes to revive him. The
unidentified doctor was Dr Walker. The hospital record of Philip Hammond has no
relevant information on it and it was not appreciated at that time that he was the
second patient referred to in Dr Walker’s statement of 20 July 1989.

Dr Slater, who was the pathologist in this case gave evidence. He said that his
autopsy of Philip showed signs of medical intervention in that three ECG electrodes
were positioned on his body (inquest, page 3F). In answer to a leading question
from Mr Fraser, who appeared for the family, he said (page 5E):

        “Q. Dr Slater, correct me if I am wrong, but I think by the time Philip had
       got to hospital he was dead? - A. Yes, I shouldn’t be surprised in my
       profession. I was somewhat surprised that Philip was taken to the Northern
       General Hospital because my autopsy finding was such that I would have
       thought he would have died extremely quickly and become unconscious
       instantaneously at Hillsborough. I have asked the Officers involved with this
       and I understand Philip was not seen by a doctor at Hillsborough. I think
       this explains that only essentially lay people saw him and, in my opinion,
       Philip would have been brain dead at Hillsborough”.

Having heard the evidence summarised by P S Killock Dr Slater was recalled and
asked about it. He accepted that it was theoretically possible for the heart of
someone in cardiac arrest to be restarted. But he thought that a lay person, namely
a policeman might be mistaken in detecting a pulse. Mr Wardrope, Accident and
Emergency Consultant at the Northern General, also gave evidence in relation to
Philip Hammond. He said (page 23C):

       “In the initial part o f the incident I was sending people who came in with a
       cardiac arrest, patients undergoing mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and
       external cardiac massage, I sent them to the resuscitation room initially to
       see whether they could have a chance o f being brought round, to start the
       heart going. The fact that the only post mortem evidence were three ECG
       electrodes, I think possibly he was sent to the resuscitation room but the
       ECG showed no cardiac activity, and because o f the great pressure on the
       resuscitation beds at that time he would be sent to the mortuary ”.

Mr Wardrope also said that if someone underwent a resuscitation attempt he would
not have been triaged dead. (P26B). What Dr Walker’s evidence does is to
confirm that Philip was not dead on arrival, but he died very soon afterwards. This
would mean that Dr Slater’s opinion - which was in any event at variance with the
other evidence given at the mini-inquest - was wrong to that extent.

I entirely understand that it is important to Philip’s family that he died somewhat
later than Dr Slater thought. But it is not something that can impugn the inquest
verdict of accidental death. Nor does it support the conclusion that Dr Slater’s
opinion in other cases was wrong.

In written submissions to me dated 3 December 1997 Mr Hammond, Philip’s
father, claims that Mr Fraser, the solicitor acting for the Hillsborough Steering
Committee was not acting for all the families, including the Hammonds, when
arrangements were made in respect of the mini-inquests. He also says that Mr
Fraser was being paid by Municipal Mutual Insurance (MMI), insurers for the
South Yorkshire Police, the implication being that he did not properly represent the
families.

These claims are based on a misunderstanding. It is clear from Mr Fraser’s letter
of the 9 March 1990 addressed to the firms of solicitors acting directly for the
families (in the Hammonds’ case Bartlett & Son) that Mr Fraser would be acting on
an agency basis for these solicitors at the mini-inquests unless the client wished
otherwise, in which case they could appear in person or through their own
solicitors.

So far as MMI paying his costs are concerned, it is quite clear that Mr Fraser was
not retained by MMI and there was no conflict of interest. In fatal cases where
civil liability is established, it is perfectly proper for the dependants to recover, as
part costs in the action, reasonable expense of legal representation at the Inquest. In
my view what MMI accepted in this case was that the attendance of Mr Fraser,
whether as directly representing a client or as agent for other solicitors representing
the families, could be regarded as a reasonable expense for this purpose. To that
very limited extent they were meeting his costs, but he was not retained by them
and was in no way acting on their behalf or under their instruction.
Victoria and Sarah Hicks

Mr and Mrs Hicks had the terrible misfortune of losing their two daughters Sarah and
Victoria.

Victoria

When I met Mr and Mrs Hicks in Liverpool in October their main concerns in respect
of Victoria related to the evidence of Paul Taylor and that of PC Marshall. I have
dealt with Paul Taylor’s evidence in Chapter 4. In a submission which I received on
8 January 1998 Mr Hicks disputes the part which PC Marshall says that he played in
recovering Victoria from pen 3, taking her to the ambulance and accompanying her to
the hospital.

Mr Hicks says that he has no recollection of the presence of any police officer other
than PC McGuinness assisting with Victoria. He believes that PC Marshall’s
evidence is untrue and that he played no part in assisting with Victoria.

A number of witnesses in addition to Mr Hicks himself helped with Victoria.

PC McGuinness made three statements. The first is undated. He said:

        “Eventually I made my way back through the West Stand and onto the pitch,
        assisting officers to carry another girl onto the pitch. Whilstfire and Police
        Officers attempted to assist her Iran to the gymnasium where I collected an
        oxygen cylinder and mask.

       I brought this to the girl and attempted to resuscitate her. Together with the
       girls father Mr Hicks we put the girl ‘Vicky ’ into an ambulance and travelled
       to the Northern General Hospital Mouth to Mouth was administered
       throughout the journey to the hospital and then on arrival the hospital
       medical staff took over. After assisting a doctor at the hospital I was told that
       Vicky was dead. ”

PC McGuiness’s second statement is dated 8 May 1989. It is much to the same effect
but he says that he performed mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on Victoria in the
ambulance.

His third statement is dated 6 July 1989. It is concerned with visual identification
from photographic material. He identifies himself at 15.38 running towards the
ambulance with the oxygen bottle.

Two things should be noted about PC McGuinness’s evidence. The first is that there
is no mention of a second police officer in the ambulance, but neither is there any
reference to ambulance man Tony Edwards, the nurse or anybody else other than Mr
Hicks who was on the scene or travelled in the ambulance. Secondly, he does not say
that Victoria was passed over the radial fence into pen 2.
Paul Winston Turner was a spectator in pen 3. He made two statements. In the first
dated 31.5.89 he said that he assisted in taking bodies from police officers through the
perimeter gate to pen 3. He said:

        “We then returned to the gate and the same four officers met us with a young
         woman. I don’t know where they had collected her body from. Me and the
         dark haired lad had an arm each to carry her and one Police Officer had
       both her legs. We carried her passed the 2 men we had already taken onto
       the pitch and we laid her perhaps 8 or 10 yards (8 or 10 yds) further into the
       playing area from the touch line. ”

In a statement dated 16 November 1989 he identified the girl as Victoria Hicks from
photographic evidence.

PC Marshall made a statement dated 10 July 1989. He said:

        “After moving numerous bodies I helped an officer lift a young girl out o f
        the pile o f bodies. We walked to the fence with her and I jumped onto the
        perimeter, carrying her in my arms towards an ambulance.

        After leaving her on the grass for a short while a further officer approached
        me holding an oxygen bottle, he said, Come on do you know first aid... we
        can save this one I carried the girl to the rear o f an open ambulance placing
        her along the seats. Almost immediately two others were placed in the van,
        one a youth being put on its floor. The ambulance then shut its doors and we
        set o ff at speed to the N. G.H.

        Throughout the journey we attempted to revive the girl using chest and heart
        massage, the mask o f the oxygen being placed intermittently over her mouth
        as we tried to pump air into her body. The girl was Victoria Hicks. Her
       father was trying mouth to mouth after I had cleared the vomitfrom her
        mouth. The second girl in the ambulance was I believed her older sister.

        Upon arrival at the N.G.H. I carried the body o f the girl into the hospital and
        placed her on a wooden bench, the only free furniture in turn I then carried
        the youth, my strength seemed that o f ten, the hospital was in chaos with
        bodies everywhere and medical staff running about. ”

He said that Mr Hicks had been abusive to him in the hospital.

 Fireman Peter Mulcrome also assisted with Victoria. In his first statement he
wrongly described her as having blonde hair, but he later corrected this on being
shown photographs. His reference to blonde hair was obviously a mistake.

Tony Edwards was the ambulance man concerned. I have discussed his evidence at
length in the main body of my report. He says that there were three bodies in the
ambulance, a nurse, two police officers, two spectators (one of whom was Mr Hicks)
and himself. He treated Victoria and showed how to do mouth-to-mouth resuscitation
while the spectator did cardiac massage. He remembers nothing of the journey.

In his very detailed comments which reached me on 8 January 1998 Mr Hicks makes
a number of criticisms of PC Marshall’s evidence, and for that matter PC
McGuinness’s evidence as well. Although PC Marshall may be inaccurate in matters
of detail, I can see no reason to doubt that he assisted in recovering Victoria from pen
3, putting her in the ambulance and travelling with her in the ambulance. There were
obvious omissions from PC McGuinness’s statements, but there is nothing otherwise
inconsistent between them. Mr Edwards’s statement confirms the presence of a
second police officer in the ambulance.

The evidence of PC Marshall was accurately summarised in the summary of the
evidence on the body file for Victoria Hicks, and a copy of this was sent to Mr Hicks
before the mini-inquests. No point was raised in relation to PC Marshall’s
participation. I find it entirely understandable that in the terrible circumstances in
which he found himself Mr Hicks, whose concentration must have been almost
entirely on Victoria and Sarah, did not take in what others around him were doing.

Mr Hicks, in his latest submission, says that the reason why he did not question what
was said in the summary about PC Marshall’s participation is because he was
beginning to doubt his own memory and that he was still in a state of deep shock.
Had the matter been raised at the time, it is possible that some of the minor
discrepancies which exist, such as PC McGuinness’s omission to mention others in
the ambulance, and who exactly performed resuscitation on Victoria, might have been
capable of resolution. I do not consider that it will be possible to resolve these matters
now and I have not thought it right to delay submission of my report in an effort to do
so.

In his latest submissions to me Mr Hicks raises a very large number of points of detail
relating to the contents of, or omissions from, the body file relating to Victoria. It is
not possible for me to deal with all these extremely detailed questions. None of them,
singularly or cumulatively, could affect the verdict of accidental death, and neither do
they affect the question of where and when Victoria died. They do not justify the
suggestion that there has been some deliberate concealment or suppression of
evidence. For reasons I have already explained, it is only to be expected that there
will be differences of recollection among witnesses.

But I will nevertheless try to deal with some of these points.

Omission o f statements from Victoria’s body file

Mr Hicks complains that the following statements by PC Stephen Taylor, PC Andrew
Sheil, Iain Boileau, Neville Udall and James Wardiope were wrongly omitted from
the file.

PC Stephen Taylor refers in an undated statement to meeting a Liverpool supporter
at the Northern General Hospital who said that two of his daughters had been killed.
He goes on to describe what happened. Mr Hicks says this must be a reference to
himself although he is not identified as such. He disputes some of the detail, but it is
not clear whether he accepts that he had an encounter with a police officer on the lines
described by PC Taylor. In a further statement dated 3 May 1989 PC Taylor makes
no reference to this incident.

PC Andrew Sheil made two statements, in one of which he refers to one of the 11
bodies which he saw in the mortuary at the Northern General Hospital as being
female. Again Mr Hicks says this must have been a reference to Victoria, although
she is not identified in the statement.

Iain Boileau was a spectator. He made two statements. In the second dated 9
January 1990, he speaks of helping to put a girl into an ambulance and says that her
father was present. From the context of the statement this appears to be a reference to
Victoria and he identifies Mr Hicks as the man, having subsequently seen him on
television.

Neville Udall was a mortuary technician who was involved with all the bodies in the
mortuary at the Northern General. He refers to one having been identified as Victoria.

James Wardrope, consultant at the Accident and Emergency Department at the
Northern General Hospital, made a statement referring to the resuscitative treatment
given to those who were taken to hospital, including Victoria.

Mr Wardrope gave oral evidence about this on Day 1 of the main inquest. But it
might have been preferable if the statements of PC Taylor, Iain Boileau and Neville
Udall had been on the Body file. However it is entirely understandable that a
conscious decision may have been taken to exclude them. The involvement of each
of these witnesses is entirely peripheral, and adds nothing of consequence to the
evidence of other witnesses. In my view, PC Sheil’s statement has no relevance.

Sarah

There was clear evidence of what happened to Sarah. She was removed from pen 3
and placed on the pitch. Attempts were made to resuscitate her by, amongst others,
Dr Flenley. These were unsuccessful and Dr Flenley said Sarah was dead. She was
taken to the gymnasium end on an improvised stretcher, where again attempts to
resuscitate her were made until a person who was unidentified, but believed to be
medically qualified, said she was dead. She was taken to the part of the gymnasium
where those who were believed to be dead were placed. Her death was confirmed by
Dr Bull at 16.20.

In his latest submissions, Mr Hicks has expressed his concern about two matters in
particular. The first is a statement by a Liverpool supporter, Tony Bambrock. He
made a statement to the police, dated 2 May 1989. He says that he was in pen 4 and
managed to make his escape onto the pitch and then assisted with the injured. Among
those he helped was a girl who he thought was about 22 years old. She was recovered
from pen 4 and laid on the pitch. He says he knew she was dead. He says that a man
came up and said he was her father. He then left the girl. He says he later found out
that the girl was only 19 and her name was Sarah Hicks.

Mr Hicks had a copy of the statement in December 1989 and sent it in February 1990
to Mr Fraser, who was both his personal solicitor and representing the Families as a
whole. It does not appear that any point was taken on it at the inquests. This is not
surprising. It is clear in my view that this is a case of misidentification. Sarah was
never in pen 4. Mr Bambrock’s account is wholly inconsistent with that of all other
witnesses if it related to Sarah, which in my opinion it does not. There is no reason
why Mr Bambrock’s statement should be on Sarah’s body file.

The second matter relates to the police video tape taken in the gymnasium (VRM 2).
A copy of this had been supplied by South Yorkshire Police to Yorkshire Television
at the same time as tapes TB1,2,3, and 4. Yorkshire Television allowed Mr Hicks to
view it and copy it. The relevant footage showed someone on the floor in that part of
the gymnasium set aside for recovery. The person concerned is surrounded by people,
mainly firemen, evidently trying to resuscitate him or her.

It is only possible to see the person’s body from the waist down. They are dressed in
light blue jeans with sharp tum-up of 1-2” and dark shoes. It is just possible to see a
white garment on the top part of the body. The footage lasts about one minute. It is
not timed but would appear to have been taken at some time between 15.50 and 16.20.

Mr and Mrs Hicks say that the body is that of a female, and they consider it is Sarah.
I have examined the tape carefully. The body may well be that of a young woman,
but I do not think one can be sure. The jeans are much lighter than those in the
photograph of Sarah’s clothes which is on the body file and the shoes do not appear to
me to be the same, though this is more difficult to tell. In my judgement it is not
possible to make a reliable identification from the video footage. It does not cast any
reasonable doubt on the very clear evidence to which I have already referred.

I have carefully considered Mr Hicks’ comments on the witnesses relating to Sarah. I
do not consider they justify any suggestion that evidence has been concealed,
suppressed or slanted in favour of South Yorkshire Police.
Richard Jones

At my interview with Mr and Mrs Jones about the death of their son Richard they said
that they were concerned that statements made by Mr Jones had apparently gone
astray and not been provided by the police when he asked for them. Mr Jones told
me that he made three statements to the police in the early hours of the Sunday
morning after the disaster (16 April). One of his statements identified Richard, one
identified Richard’s girlfriend Tracey Cox, who was with him and was also killed, and
the third was an overall statement. He said they hadn’t got the statement relating to
Tracey.

In the body file for Richard Jones there are three statements made by his father. The
first, dated 16 April 1989, deals with the identification of both Richard and Tracey.
The second and third dated 15 August and 23 November 1989 deal with identification
from photographic material. I think these would have been the only matters upon
which Mr Jones could or would be likely to give relevant evidence.

Mr Jones also told me he had doubts of the reliability of the evidence of PC Bromley.
PC Bromley was involved in the rescue operation. In a statement dated 3 May 1989
he said he saw a man lying unconscious on the pitch. Two supporters were attending
him, but he thought he was dead.

PC Bromley said that he assisted another person to the gymnasium and then returned
to the pitch. He saw a group of supporters carrying a body on an advertisement
hoarding -

        “The body on the hoarding was, I believe, the same body I had seen earlier on
       the pitch. All lean remember about the clothing on the body was that the man
       was wearing grey coloured trousers. ”

He said that, with another officer, they attempted resuscitation without success and
that he then accompanied the body to the gymnasium and stayed with it until Mr
Jones identified it as that of his son. Mr Jones said that Richard was in fact wearing
blue jeans and he therefore considered that PC Bromley cannot have been with
Richard’s body as he states.

There is a photograph of Richard’s clothing including his trousers on the body file.
The colour reproduction in the photograph may not be perfect but the trousers could
easily be described as grey, although I suspect they are much washed jeans. I do not
consider this is a sufficient basis for doubting PC Bromley’s evidence.
Michael Kelly

At her interview with me on 8th October 1997 Mrs Sinclair raised her concern over
the evidence of PC Maugham in relation to the death of her brother, Michael Kelly.

In a statement dated 15th February 1990 PC Maugham stated that he was approached
at the West End of the pitch (the Leppings Lane end) by two men carrying a person
who they said was their friend. They asked him to help. He saw that the man was
blue in the face and appeared not to be breathing. He attempted to resuscitate him.
After a while he started to breathe but kept slipping back into unconsciousness.

PC Maugham assisted in carrying this man to the other (Kop) end of the ground,
where he was handed to the care of a St John Ambulance man. He then went back to
the Leppings Lane end where he rendered further assistance. He later identified the
person he had helped to carry as Michael Kelly from photographic evidence, though
he was by no means certain.

PC Maugham’s evidence was accurately summarised at the mini-inquest by Inspector
Layton who also said that since that time PC Maugham had discussed the
identification with Michael Kelly’s sister and he was now satisfied that it was him.
At the family’s request PC Maugham was called to give evidence at the main inquest,
and he said that when he handed the person over to the St John Ambulance man he
was still breathing.

All this evidence was considered by the Divisional Court, because it was alleged to
them that Inspector Layton had misled the Court in his summary of PC Maugham’s
evidence. The Court rejected this.

The point that now troubles Mrs Sinclair appears to be that PC Maugham was
summoned away from Michael Kelly to form a cordon across the pitch instead of
attending to the dead and dying. This criticism seems to me unfair. PC Maugham
handed over the person he was carrying to qualified hands. He did not neglect the
people who were still in trouble at the West End of the ground. He said that he
rendered further assistance there until he was asked to help make a cordon.

I have examined the body file for Michael Kelly. It is clear that there is a marked
conflict between the evidence of PC Maugham, if he has correctly identified Michael
Kelly, and that of two other police officers, PC Wilmot and PC Lally.

Both PC Wilmot and PC Lally, in statements dated 3rd May 1989 and the 7th May
1989 respectively, describe finding a man lying unconscious on the pitch near the
goal. He was checked for signs of life and there were none. They took him on a
stretcher to the gymnasium where he was again checked for signs of life. At 15.59 Dr
Byrne certified death in PC Wilmot’s presence.

PC Wilmot remained with this person’s body, which was given the body number 72.
Evidence from other witnesses proves that the person was later identified as Michael
Kelly. It is true that there is a period of about 20 minutes between 15.40 and 15.59
during which PC Wilmot does not appear to have been with the body.

This evidence was summarised at the mini-inquest and the conflict with that of PC
Maugham must have been apparent. The St John Ambulance man referred to by PC
Maugham has not been identified and it is not known what happened to the person
whom PC Wilmot handed over to him.

It is impossible to resolve this conflict now and it is not in fact one which Mrs Sinclair
raised with me. It seems to me more likely that PC Maugham was mistaken in
thinking that the person whom the two men had brought to him at the Leppings Lane
end of the ground was Michael Kelly.
Graham Roberts


There are two problems in this case.

The first is an apparent conflict between the evidence of two police officers as to
when Graham Roberts died.

PC Yates described treating a man (later identified as Graham Roberts) lying on the
terrace about 15-20 feet from the tunnel entrance, partially concealing the body of a
youth. It appeared that he had been dragged there by supporters. He pulled the man
off and left him in the prone position. He said he appeared to be dead.

PC Best helped to carry a number of persons from the area near to and in the tunnel.
One of these he identified as Graham Roberts. He said that he carried him to an area
of the lane near the gates and as he put him on the ground he was breathing. Moments
later he returned with another body and saw that the man was dead.

Neither PC Yates nor PC Best gave oral evidence, and so far as I am aware there was
no request by Mr Fraser, solicitor for the Steering Committee representing the
families, that they should. But the conflict between their accounts was explored as
far as possible at the mini-inquest. It is not possible to resolve it now. In the light of
the pathologist’s evidence, it seems probable that PC Best was mistaken in believing
that Graham Roberts was breathing when he put him down.

The second conflict was between the statements of PC Sinclair and PC Wadsworth.

PC Sinclair stated that about 16.15 on the 15th April he went to the Leppings Lane
side of the stadium and was allocated a body. He stayed with the body while Dr
Ashton certified death at 16.25 hours and when it was taken to the gymnasium, until it
was identified at 01.50 hours on 16th April as that of Graham Roberts. This was the
evidence given at the mini-inquest.

PC Wadsworth said that he attended the Leppings Lane End and gave mouth-to-
mouth resuscitation to a casualty with the aid of a resuscitator. He did this for about
10 minutes whilst an ambulance man and another attendant fitted a drip to the man’s
arm. PC Wadsworth said that the man was put in an ambulance and that, before that
happened, he had a pulse.

In a subsequent statement he purported to identify this person from photographs as
Graham Roberts. This evidence was not referred to at the mini-inquest, and PC
Wadsworth’s statements do not appear on the body file.

It is quite plain in my judgement that PC Wadsworth was mistaken in his
identification. Graham Roberts was never taken to hospital. It is true that some
bodies were collected and taken by ambulance from the Gate C area at Leppings Lane
to the temporary mortuary in the gymnasium. But there is no evidence that this
happened to Graham Roberts. In view of the resuscitative treatment which the
person whom PC Wadsworth describes had received, and the evidence that he had a
pulse, it would have made no sense for an ambulance to have taken him to the
mortuary rather than to hospital.

The inconsistency between PC Sinclair and PC Wadsworth was one relied upon by
Counsel for the Family Support Group in their written submissions to me. When
however I pointed out that Graham Roberts had not been taken to hospital and
therefore it seemed that PC Wadsworth was mistaken, I understood Counsel to accept
this. I have had no further submissions from the legal representatives on this matter.
Andrew Sefton

I met Mr and Mrs Sefton, Andrew’s parents, in Liverpool together with their daughter
and son-in-law and Professor Scraton. Counsel for the Family Support Group also
discussed Andrew Sefton’s case in their written submission to me.

Both at my meeting with his family and in Counsel’s written submission to me it was
said that police officers had made inconsistent statements about Andrew Sefton. The
two officers concerned are PC Shipley and PC Kearney.

PC Shipley made two statements and I was told that these were inconsistent with each
other. In an undated statement, he said that only when he reached the Leppings Lane
goal area did he become aware that people were dead and dying around him. He tried
to calm and comfort people, and

        “A t some stage I assisted in getting injured supporters onto hoardingsfo r
       transportation towards any available medicalfacilities”.

PC Shipley then spoke in his statement about trouble between Liverpool and
Nottingham Forest fans. He continued

       “after a short time I continued to assist the injured to reach medicalfacilities
       at the rear o f the Kop, in the new formed medical area, ie the gym area”.

In a further statement, dated 13th September 1989, PC Shipley said that he dealt with
several persons who were injured or dead but he could only identify one. That was
Andrew Sefton, whom he identified from photographs shown to him. He identified
himself as being involved, with other people, in carrying Andrew Sefton on a
hoarding. This photograph is timed at 15.30. He did not say that he had performed
any resuscitative measures.

At the mini-inquest on Andrew Sefton Inspector Sawers summarised the evidence of
Patrick Shannon, a Liverpool supporter who attempted to resuscitate him and later
carried him across the pitch with PC Shipley. Mr Shannon said that as he gave
Andrew Sefton mouth-to-mouth ventilation a police officer gave heart massage.
Inspector Sawers said this officer was “believed to be PC Shipley”. I do not know the
source of his belief and Inspector Sawers was not asked about it by Mr Fraser who
represented the family. It may be the belief was mistaken. But there seems no reason
to doubt that some police officer gave heart massage as Mr Shannon says. I can see
no inconsistency between PC Shipley’s two statements.

Counsel for the Family Support Group said in their written submissions to me that PC
Kearney had given conflicting statements as to where he took custody of Andrew’s
body. In his first statement dated 19th May 1989 he said that he was ordered to move
from the pitch to

       “behind the north stand to the area o f the gymnasium and police room. Whilst
       at this location an unidentified man (Andrew Sefton) was carried into the area
       on an advertisement board. I checked his bodyfo r signs o f life but none could
       be found. The body was then taken into the gymnasium where it was placed
       on the flo o r”.

PC Kearney remained with the body until it was identified. In a statement dated 4
July 1989 in which he identified himself beside the body in a temporary mortuary, he
said “I took over this body outside the gym after half a dozen fans had dumped him
there. ”

I cannot detect any inconsistency in these statements. Counsel asserted that in his
statement of 19th May PC Kearney had said that he “took custody of Andrew’s body
when it was brought into the gymnasium”. But this is not what he said.

In her interview with me Mrs Sefton expressed concern that Andrew had in fact died
much later than the evidence presented to the mini-inquest indicated, because when
she identified his body at 0300 on the Sunday morning (16 April) his face was still
warm. I do not think it is right to draw this conclusion. The Coroner asked the
pathologist (Dr Shortland) about this at the mini-inquest on Andrew Sefton.    He
said (transcript 19 April 1990, page 3)

        “Q - One o f the things that worried Mrs Sefton was that when she went along
       to identify the body .... she thought that the body still appeared warm to
       her?....A - Yes, I think that there are certain features which you have to take
       into consideration, first o f all, the build o f the individual... the ambient
       temperature is important and possibly the proximity with the large number o f
       bodies, the proximity o f the bodies together actually retained heat within them.

       Q - I think Mr Sefton was either in a body bag or wrapped in some form o f
       blanket.... Would that make any difference? A - Yes, I think it would’

       Q - I f he had been...? A - Enclosed”.
Christopher and Kevin Traynor

Mr and Mrs Traynor had the great misfortune of losing two of their sons, Christopher
and Kevin. In their interview with me they expressed concern about what they
considered inconsistencies or inadequacies in the mini-inquest evidence and body
files.


Christopher

At the mini-inquest on Christopher Traynor Det Sgt McCombie summarised the
evidence relating to Christopher. This included that of Mr N J Langley, a spectator,
who said in a statement dated 3rd May 1989 that he had fallen in one of the pens and
had been helped up by someone he later identified as Christopher Traynor. The
problem with this evidence was that Christopher was undoubtedly in pen 3 and Mr
Langley said that on leaving the tunnel he had gone to his left into pen 4. It is clear
that attempts were very properly made to reconcile the conflict over a period of time,
but it had only been resolved on the evening before the mini-inquest when it emerged
that Mr Langley had been spun round on leaving the tunnel and may have been
disorientated. He may in fact have been facing the tunnel when he said he had gone to
his left, which would put him in pen 3.

All this was explained at the mini-inquest (27 April 1990, p4-6). There is in fact no
copy of Mr Langley’s statement on the body file. I think this was an error. It should
have been there, since Mr Langley identified Christopher Traynor in his statement.
However his clear statement that he had gone into pen 4 makes it understandable that
doubt may have been entertained as to the relevance or accuracy of his identification.
In the event the matter was resolved at the mini-inquest and Mr Fraser, who appeared
for the families asked no questions.


Kevin

There is a discrepancy between the evidence of PC Turner and that of PC Howell. PC
Turner helped to remove Kevin from pen 3, laid him on the pitch and a little while
later with the assistance of fans carried him on a hoarding to the gymnasium. He
stayed with Kevin’s body until it was identified.

PC Howell thought that he had assisted in carrying a body, which he subsequently
identified as Kevin, from the pitch in front of the terraces to the Kop end where he
was placed on the pitch at the comer. Having seen photographs taken of the deceased
in the mortuary and of his clothing, he said he was 99% certain it was Kevin. PC
Howell’s statement was not on the body file relating to Kevin. This is obviously
because it was thought that his identification must be mistaken. There is in my view
no reason to doubt PC Turner’s evidence.
Kevin Williams

I have discussed the evidence of PC Bruder and WPC Martin in Chapter 4, part 1.

In her memorial to the Attorney General Mrs Williams, Kevin’s mother, submitted
transcripts of interviews with two other witnesses conducted by researchers compiling
the Cook Report TV programme. These people said that they had helped to carry
Kevin Williams across the pitch on a hoarding.

I have not been provided with any signed statement by either of these two witnesses,
nor have I been invited to interview them. The first, Mr O’Keefe was a qualified first-
aider. In spite of some persistent questioning by the Cook Report researchers it is
extremely difficult to discern a clear answer from Mr O’Keefe as to whether he
thought Kevin was still alive when he and the others carried him across the pitch and,
if so, why.

At one point Mr O’Keefe said Kevin appeared to be alive, but the next moment he
said he didn’t really know. Mr O’Keefe’s main reason for thinking Kevin might have
been alive at that time was that he and the others were rushing him across the pitch,
and he didn’t look as blue as some others.

The second witness interviewed by the Cook Report researchers is Steven Hart. His
evidence is equally difficult. When the researchers first ask him what condition Kevin
was in, he does not really answer the question. Effectively he appears to say that he
does not know if Kevin was alive, but that he was not off colour and they were
anxious to get him to the other end of the pitch as quickly as possible. But after what
appears, from the transcript, to be a break he appears more positive, “He was alive
because you knew he was alive”. Mr Hart says he could see that some people were
clearly dead. Kevin did not look like them. This appears to be the basis of his
opinion, rather than that there were definite signs of life.

Mr Hart also made a statement to the police, dated 24 May 1989. In this he describes
seeing a policeman giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation to a young lad on the pitch.
He later describes coming back to the lad who was lying alone with his eyes closed.
He thought he was unconscious and with a couple of other supporters placed him on a
hoarding. “As we lifted him on to the board a policeman came forward and pulled
the lads jumper up and over his face and I realised then that he was dead”. They then
carried him to the other end of the pitch. It seems clear that this must have been
Kevin, although he never identified him as such, since this is the only casualty that he
refers to as being dealt with in this way.

In my view this evidence adds nothing to the evidence of PC Bruder.

It is I think necessary to refer to the evidence that Dr Slater gave about PC Bruder’s
account at the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams (4 May 1990, page 13B):

       Q. “In the light o f what you heard and what we have heard now, do you feel
       that this lad died, if you like, in the totality sense, I don’t mean that his skin
       was dead, but in lay terms at the point in time when Mr Bruder was with
       him? ”

       A. “Yes, sir, lam quite confident o f that. When one speaks to lay people who
       have experienced people dying, a word which is recurrent in these
       descriptions o f death is the way that individuals turn grey. In fact, I was very
       impressed by the content in PC Bruder’s statement o f the word ‘grey ’,
       recurring several times. To me as a doctor that implied that that was the point
       o f whole body death. In fact Ifeel that it was probably around that time that
       Kevin’s whole body died His brain had died twenty/twenty-five minutes
       before that at the time o f the crushing, but his whole body died at the time PC
       Bruder was with him. ”

Assuming, therefore, that Kevin was alive at 15.35 or shortly thereafter when PC
Bruder and the St John Ambulance people were attending him, I do not think it is
possible to say that his life could have been saved. In a report dated 29 October 1993
which was considered by the Divisional Court, Dr Iain West, Consultant Forensic
Pathologist at Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospital, who was then advising Mrs Williams
referred to the injuries to Kevin’s neck. His report continues:

         “This type o f injury is amenable to treatment in the form o f an emergency
        tracheotomy or a crico-thyroidotomy. Whilst an emergency tracheotomy is a
        relatively major procedure, this crico-thyroidotomy is a simpler procedure
        which involves the passage o f a tube through the membrane between the
        thyroid and cricoid cartilages. It is possible that i f one o f these procedures
        had been carried out at the scene then he would not have sufferedfrom the
       fatal asphyxia which led to his death.

       Both crico-thyroidotomy and emergency tracheotomy can be performed in the
       field although, in the latter instance, with difficulties owing to an increased
        likelihood o f haemorrhage at the operation site ”.

There is a difference of opinion between Dr West and Dr Slater. Dr West’s opinion is
based upon photographs and Dr Slater’s post-mortem report. He did not therefore
have the advantage of carrying out the post-mortem. Their difference of opinion has
been enlarged upon in letters to me from Dr West, dated 12 December 1997, and from
Dr Slater, dated 22 December 1997.

It is Dr West’s view that the sole injury was to the neck. He points to the absence of
bruising on the chest. Dr Slater accepts that there was an injury to the neck, but
contends that the primary cause of death was the crushing of the chest, with the injury
to the neck being contributory but secondary. He relies on ‘the extensive cyanosis
extending down to the upper part of the chest. This was particularly severe down to
the level of the clavicle and unequivocally present but less severe to a level
approximately below the nipples’. The absence of bruising to the chest was a
common finding in those who unequivocally died of crush asphyxia at Hillsborough.
Dr Slater supported his conclusion by a finding of bruising within the heart itself. He
also points out that there was no bruising of the neck muscles. Oedema and swelling
of the larynx was also absent; this might be expected to be present if the sole injury
was to the neck. It is unfortunate that there is this difference of opinion between
distinguished pathologists. I am very far from being persuaded that Dr Slater is
wrong.

Mrs Williams considers that Dr West’s view is supported by a change in some
information on the Coroner’s Certificate after the inquest. The original certificate,
dated 28 March 1991, gave the cause of death as ‘Traumatic Asphyxia’. At that time
certain information was also required for statistical purposes. In answer to the
question ‘parts of body injured’ - the answer was ‘chest’. As a result of her
communications with Dr West, Mrs Williams wanted this changed to ‘neck’.
Mr Dorries, who by then had taken over as Coroner from Dr Popper, raised the matter
with Dr Slater. He was not disposed to dissent. By this time, 1996, the same
statistical information was no longer required and similar questions to those in the
1991 form were not asked.

Mr Dorries was however prepared to issue an amended certificate, dated 4 April 1996.
The cause of death was still given as Traumatic Asphyxia. But in Part V of the form
in answer to the question ‘Details of how accident happened’, the form now reads:
‘Sustained crush injuries at football ground’; Type of injury: ‘Crush’; Parts of body
injured: ‘Neck’. This is not inconsistent with Dr Slater’s opinion, since the only
visible external injury is to the neck. But I think that if Dr Slater had foreseen the
problems that Mrs Williams was to continue to have on the matter, he might have
been wiser to point out to Mr Dorries that his opinion as to the cause of death had not
changed and that the primary cause remained the crushing of the chest, although the
only external injury was to his neck.

Even if Dr West is correct, in my view there was no realistic possibility that Kevin
Williams’ life could have been saved. The St John Ambulance personnel, in whose
charge he was, were neither trained nor equipped to perform either operation
suggested by Dr West. I cannot see that there was any basis upon which a diagnosis
could have been made which indicated the need for such an operation. Dr West
described the symptoms which indicate the need for a cricothyroidotomy as ‘only
being apparent in somebody who was still alive and would be shown by the
difficulties that individual is experiencing in breathing. This would take the form o f
increased and exaggerated respiratory movements involving the chest accompanied
by fairly characteristic noises emanatingfrom the throat and resultingfrom the
individual attempting to draw in air through a severely constricted airway ’.

This is quite inconsistent with the evidence of PC Bruder, who is the only reliable
witness on Kevin’s state.
APPENDIX 10


Ten ‘unresolved’ questions?


1.     At the time of the ‘Hillsborough ’ television programme in 1996 the
       programme makers, Granada Television, identified in a letter to Mr David
       Maclean MP, then a Minister at the Home Office, what they said were ten
       unresolved questions about the disaster. Eight of these questions were
       addressed quite plainly by Lord Taylor. He answered them in as far as
       answers are possible, and I think the answers he gave were right.

2.     Lord Taylor did not specifically cover the other two questions. But the
       answers to them are again in my view quite evident.

3.     I set all ten questions out below, together with some discussion of them which
       I have mainly taken from Lord Taylor’s interim report. Collectively they
       point to the ''failure o f police control’ which Lord Taylor concluded, and I
       agree, was the main cause of the disaster (paragraph 278 of his interim report).


Whv was ChiefSuperintendent David Duckenfield put in charge o f a major semi-final
only 21 days before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced at policing
matches?

4.     Lord Taylor gives a clear account of this aspect of the disaster. He said in his
       interim report

              ‘At the 1988 semi-final, policing had been under the control o f Chief
              Superintendent Mole, then Commander o f F Division within whose
              area Hillsborough lies. He was still in post on 20 March 1989 when
              the FA broached the 1989 semi-final, but he was due to hand over
              command o f F Division on 27 March to Superintendent Duckenfield on
              the latter’s promotion to Chief Superintendent. Both were present at
              an initial meeting on 22 March, but on 27 March Mr Mole bowed out
              and Mr Duckenfield took over ....It might have been wiser to have left
              Mr Mole in charge o f this operation. On the other hand, it is quite
              understandable that Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take
              command o f events in his Division from the date o f his promotion’
              (paragraphs 47 and 275).
Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a huild-up
outside the Leppings Lane end o f the ground if. as the fans insist, there were the
previous year?

5.      There is a conflict between the evidence of the police and that of supporters.
        The fans say that in 1988 the police operated barriers and cordons along
        Leppings Lane to filter out those without tickets and control the flow of
        people towards the ground. The police say they did not. Both fans and
        police however agree that there were no such barriers or cordons in 1989.
        Lord Taylor examined this question. He concluded

                'As to 1988, there was a very large and consistent body o f evidence
                that, on the day, the police in Leppings Lane conducted an efficient
               filtering exercise I do not believe that so many witnesses without
                either opportunity or reason to put their heads together could be
                mistaken about what they experienced on that occasion. Yet the police
                maintain that no filtering exercise other than on a random basis was
                carried out in 1988 and that their policy and practice then were no
                differentfrom those o f1989. The answer .... m ust.... be that whilst
                the policy was no different, in practice the policing in 1988 was more
                efficient and was not put to the same test and strain as a year later
                (interim report, paragraphs 214 and 215).


 Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers thought it should have
 been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the Liverpool
fans safely into the ground before the 3 p.m. ldck-o ff?

6.      Lord Taylor examined this issue also. He gives his answer at paragraphs 226
        and 227 of his interim report.

               ‘At various stages in his evidence (at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry) Mr
               Duckenfield gave three accounts o f why he thought it too late to
               postpone kick-off. Once it was that one o f the teams had already come
               onto the pitch. Then it was that a group o f photographers at the
               tunnel had wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out.
               Finally, he did not know why he thought the teams were coming out.
               They did not in fact come onto the pitch until 2.54 p.m., two minutes
               after Gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had askedfo r a
               postponement o f the ldck-offbefore Gate C was opened. It should not,
               however, have needed a Police Constable in the thick o f the crowd
               (and there were others o f like mind) to think ofpostponing the kick-off.
               The need should have been clear in the control room.

                The truth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had
                discussed with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be delayed unless there
                were some major cause for delayed arrivals, eg a jam on the motorway
                or fog     Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous,
              crowd safety should have been the first consideration. Kick-offshould
              have been delayed’.


Why didn’t the police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when eve
witnesses, including football commentator John Motson. were aware o f the problems
fifteen minutes before kick-off?

7.     This again is a question which Lord Taylor discusses in his interim report.
       He has a chapter about it (Chapter 13). He concludes

              ''As the stream from Gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in
              the control room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3
              and 4. They had a direct view o f them from an elevated position
              through their window. Although they had no field-glasses, there was
              the zoom facility on the TV camera... pens 3 and 4 became more and
              more crowded, surges took place, fans were showing and signalling
              distress. None o f this was seen or recognised in the control room ....

              ... the combination o f no instructions (to police) as to overcrowding
              and a strong prohibition on opening the gates (from the pens onto the
              perimeter track) was likely to make police recognition o f crushing slow
              and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
              between 2.50p.m. and 2.59p.m. went unheeded or certainly
              unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the
              rule required the consent o f a senior officer before a gate could be
              opened....

              Naturally, one would hope that common sense and humanity would
              make some officers cut through the rules and open a gate if fans were
              clearly in distress...

                This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress
               and even then not immediately... there was a period during which the
              failure to recognise the problem and the inhibition against tackling it
               caused vital time to be lost ’ (interim report paragraphs 244 to 248).

8.     Elsewhere in his interim report Lord Taylor says (paragraph 78)

              ‘In the control room no-one noticed the overcrowding or anything
              amiss in pens 3 and 4 until the first fans spilt out onto the perimeter
              track just before kick-off Then, the officers in command assumed that
              there was an attempted pitch invasion... ’.
Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became full, the
procedure adopted at the previous year’s semi-final?

9.     Lord Taylor’s interim report says (paragraph 230)

               "Since pens 3 and 4 were fu ll by 2.50 p.m.. the tunnel should have been
               closed o ff whether Gate C was to be opened or not. The exercise was
               a simple one and had been carried out in 1988. All that was
               necessary was for a few officers to act as a cordon to the tunnel and
               divertfans elsewhere. Unfortunately the 1988 closure seems to have
               been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time. It did not
              figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the
              planning for 1989’.


 Whv did Chief Superintendent Duckenfield mislead the Secretary o f the FA by telling
him thatfans hadforced open Gate C. when the officer knew he had given the order
for it to be opened?

10.    Lord Taylor says of this (paragraphs 283 and 284 of his interim report) that

               ‘Most surprisingly (Mr Duckenfield) gave Mr Kelly and others to think
               that there had been an inrush due to Liverpool fans forcing open a
               gate. This was not only untruthful. It set o ff a widely reported
               allegation against the supporters which caused grave offence and
               distress .... I can only assume Mr Duckenfield’s lack o f candour on
               this occasion was out o f character. He said his reason fo r not telling
               the truth was that if the crowd became aware o f it there might be a
               very hostile reaction and this might impede rescue work He did not
               wish to divulge what had happened until he had spoken to a senior
               officer. However, reluctance to tell Mr Kelly the truth did not require
               that he be told a falsehood. Moreover, although Assistant Chief
               Constable Jackson was at hand, Mr Duckenfield did not disclose the
               truth to him until much later.

               The likeliest explanation o f Mr Duckenfield’s conduct is that he simply
               could notface the enormity o f the decision to open the gates and all
               thatflowed therefrom. That would explain what he said to Mr Kelly,
               what he did not say to Mr Jackson, his aversion to addressing the
               crowd, and his failure to take effective control o f the disaster situation.
               He froze ’.
 Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10foot
spikedfence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the pitch
too small to be effective in an emergency evacuation?

11.    The sequence of events is clear from Lord Taylor’s interim report. He says
       that

              ‘At about 3.10 p.m. a request came from the perimeter fence fo r bolt
              croppers to cut the wire mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police
              garage close by without success. A t 3.13 p.m., PC Bichard requested
              Headquarters to call the fire service to bring hydraulic cutting
              equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance .... fire appliances arrived
              at both Leppings Lane and Penistone Road at 3.22 p. m. A t both
              entrances their arrival surprised police who were uninformed as to
              why they had been called or where they should g o ....

              A t the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency
               tender and station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a
               crew. The emergency tender came along the roadway by the south
               stand but owing to its height was unable to proceedfurther.... Mr
               Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand carrying
               cutting equipment and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the
              fence, the cutting equipment was not required as by then the last o f the
               dead and injured were being removedfrom the p en s....’ (interim
               report, paragraphs 101-104).

              ‘The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
              intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder
              or an emergency. The kind o f emergency contemplated was not
              massive crushing but, fo r example, the collapse or illness o f an
              individual.... The need to provide fo r speedy and large scale
              evacuation from the front o f the pens to the pitch was not anticipated!1
              (interim report, paragraphs 258-9).


Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as to what
was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the ground to
help, until 3.30?

12.    Lord Taylor’s interim report says

              ‘Apartfrom the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for
              medical assistance about 3.30p.m., no information or advice was
              broadcast on the public address system. Mr Duckenfieldfeared that
              the crowd might turn hostile or might all attempt to leave together
              thereby hampering the emergency services if they were given
              information about what had happened. The result was that apartfrom
              those close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for
              themselves, the majority o f the crowd were left in ignorance ’ (interim
              report, paragraph 97).

13.   Lord Taylor had more to say about Mr Duckenfield’s reluctance to address the
       crowd at paragraph 284 of his interim report. I have quoted that above.


Why. when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the pitch where
the dying and severely injured were in urgent need o f trained medical help?

14.    As I mentioned when discussing the rescue operation in Chapter 3 of this
       report, Lord Taylor made it quite clear that ‘no valid criticism can be made o f
       the response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS (the South
       Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service) or the fire brigade ... I fin d that
       all three ... services.... responded promptly when alerted, that they brought
       appropriate equipment and that their personnel operated efficiently ’ (interim
       report, paragraphs 296/7).

15.    The video evidence is that three ambulances went onto the pitch, one St John
       Ambulance and two SYMAS. They drove very slowly because of the large
       crowds of people moving about. It would have been impracticable for
       substantially larger numbers of ambulances to have come onto the playing
       area. There was only one route for them on and off, which was also being
       used by fans and police carrying the dead and injured off the pitch towards the
       gymnasium and would have formed a bottleneck.

16.    It would have been extremely difficult for triaging to take place on the pitch
       given the chaotic conditions there. The gymnasium, which was used instead,
       was the only practicable alternative for those victims who had been brought
       out from the front of the Leppings Lane pens. In the circumstances it was
       quicker for victims to be taken there in the way that they were, on stretchers
       and improvised stretchers, that it would have been to use fleets of ambulances.
       As it was the ambulances were mainly used to take injured people from the
       gymnasium to hospital. I think that this was in the circumstances the most
       effective way of using them.


Why did only 14 o f those who died go to hospital?

17.    Part of the gymnasium at the ground was used as a temporary mortuary and
       the bodies remained there for some hours until they were removed to the
       Medico-Legal Centre at Watery Lane, Sheffield, where the post-mortems were
       carried out. I have dealt in Chapter 5 of this report with suggestions that
       people were confirmed as being dead on the basis of insufficient examination.
       It is clear that this was not the case. The bleak but simple truth - one of many
       bleak truths about that terrible day - is that the ambulances were better used to
       take the injured to hospital rather than the dead.
