                                                            WEST
                                                            YORKSHIRE
                                                            POLICE

                                    FORCE TRAINING SCHOOL
Your Ref:                           BISHOPGARTH, WESTFIELD R O A D ,
                                    W AKEFIELD WF1 3QZ
Our Ref:    B22/JD/LC/125           Telephone: Wakefield (0924) 375222, Extension



                                                                19 March 1990


            Dear Mrs

            WIDER USE OF ATTENDANCE CENTRES FOR FOOTBALL HOOLIGANS

            I have read the extract of the recently published report by the
            Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
            and my views are as follows.

            To make the recommendation effective it would be necessary for the
            Centres to be open each Saturday during the football season and the
            hours would have to be in the afternoon to prevent attendance at
            football matches.

            This way we would be certain that exclusion from football matches would
            be effective, it would also highlight who was not complying and swift
            action for non attendance would be called for to make the order effective.

            My Centre attracts offenders who support Leeds, Huddersfield and Bradford
            Football Clubs and their attendance on alternate Saturdays ensures their
            non attendance at matches. This does not however prevent them attending
            on the other Saturdays so weekly Centres would have to be commenced.

            Another point would be that a regular attender could complete a 36 hour
            order in 12 weeks in the case of a Senior Centre this would not of course
            cover the football season.

            Football Hooligans are quite a unique breed of criminals and a lot of it
            is caused by group pressure, a disadvantage of the system would be to have
            large numbers of young men some of whom support opposing teams under one
            roof. This would not present a problem during attendance Centre hours
            but could perhaps present public order situations in the local community
            developing after the session has closed.
            I personally think Attendance Centres are effective in excluding offenders
            from football grounds but would welcome stronger action to be taken against
            non-offenders.
..   >


            Yours sincerely


            O’ DANIEL
            Detective Inspector
            Officer in Charge
            Dewsbury Senior Attendance Centre

            Mrs M Sadler
            Cl Division
            Home Office
            Queen Anne's Gate
            LONDON
            SW1H 9AT
