             G R A N A D A                                             T       E       L    E     V          I   S        I



                                                                                       Cc                  MjL-
27th November 1996
                                                                                                  M f. fr J tls e * .

RtHon.David Maclean,MP,                                                                         [4 r. & *& £*** ^
Minister of State (Police)
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London                                                                                                 •(}           L.OCithx         P ^
SWIH9AT                                              tfo d u m ,
                                                                                                M c- £ r ra'A*ed 6                     c£>
                                                                  AsdiL’                        M r.         ‘z**1‘
                                                                           M           s%


                                                                                                                      A/v- V U W
Dear Minister

As you may be aware, Granada Television has produced a drama-documentary about
the disaster at the Hillsborough football ground.         The press screening of
HILLSBOROUGH is being held this morning, and the film will be broadcast on ITV at
9pm on Thursday 5 December. In view of the subject matter, and the personal interest
it may hold for you or your constituents, I thought you might find it helpful to have
some information about the film before it is transmitted.

I therefore enclose a copy of the press information on the film which explains the
background to the project and some details of the film’s content.

We are very proud of this film, which was made at the suggestion of the Hillsborough
families themselves. It has strong journalistic and creative credentials, and has been
made with the full support of the Hillsborough Families’ Support Group. We believe
it will give a voice to those most affected by the disaster - the victims and their
families.

I hope you find this material helpful; please contact me if you have any further
questions about HILLSBOROUGH.

Yours sincerely,




IAN M<®RIDE
Head of Factual Drama
      G             n     a                  T   E    L   E   V    I   S   I       O   N         L     I     M   I    T       E   D
      REGISTERED           OFFICE:        QUAY STREET.             M A N C H E S T E R M60 9EA
      T E L E P H O N E : 0 1 6 1 8 3 2 7 2 1 1 G E N E R A L F A X : 0 1 6 1 8 2 7 2 02 9 T E L E X : 6 6 8 8 5 9
      REGISTERED              NUMBER: 840590           ENGLAND
         P R E S S                   R E L E A S E




                       HILLSBOROUGH
o                                  (TX: Thursday December 5 1996 at 9pm)


        Hillsborough is a powerful human drama by award-winning writer JIMMY
CO      McGOVERN (Cracker, Priest, Hearts & Minds) who tackles a true story for the first
        time. This remarkable drama documentary sheds light on how the worst disaster ever
        to hit English sport happened, and its devastating consequences.

        The two hour film follows three families from their initial excitement as they get
        tickets for the game, through the disaster, to the emotional turmoil and legal struggle
        which follows.
UJ
         Trevor and Jenni Hicks (CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON, ANNABELLE APSION)
    j   lost their two teenage daughters Sarah and Vicki in the disaster. Ian Glover, 20, son of
         John and Teresa Glover (RICKY TOMLINSON and RACHEL DAVIES) and Adam
         Spearritt. the 14-year-old son of Eddie and Jan Spearritt (MARK WOMACK and
^       TRACEY WILKINSON) died.

r—,     The film uncovers new evidence, and examines the treatment of the victims and the
         bereaved, and the inquest into the tragedy.

        Lord Justice Taylor placed most of the blame for the tragedy on the police; the film
        shows that no criminal or disciplinary proceedings followed.

         The drama documentary was initiated by the Hillsborough Family Support Group
r\      approaching Jimmy McGovern, asking that their story be told. It has been researched
         by investigative journalists and is based entirely on fact using court transcripts and
         eye witness reports.


            For further information, please contact Michael Park or Paul Tyrrell at Granada
                            Television on 0171 261 3393 or 0161 827 2237




           CJ UAY S T R E E T     M A N C H E S T E R   M60  9 E A TEL: 061-832  7211    FAX:  061-953         0 2 ’ >
           A N D 36 G O L D E N   SQUARE        L O N D O N WIR U H  TEL: 071-734 8080    FAX: 0 7 1 - 4 3 9   6084
                     HILLSBOROUGH
                                     SYNOPSIS


When Liverpool and Nottingham Forest were drawn to play each other in the FA Cup
Semi-Final in 1989, football fans from all over the world looked forward to a
fascinating and closely matched game. For Liverpool fans, the search for tickets was
on.

Ninteen year-old Sarah Hicks (SARAH GRAHAM) and her sister, 15 year-old Vicki
(ANNA MARTLAND) were Liverpool fanatics, regularly driving from their
Middlesex home with their parents, Jenni (ANNABELLE APSION) and Trevor
(CHRISTOPHER ECCLESTON), to see the games. On the day of the semi-final they
arrived early at Hillsborough. Sarah and Vicki stood In their favourite position -
behind the goal. Trevor, in an emptier side pen and Jenni, in the seats above, began to
worry about overcrowding where the girls were standing.

After the game was stopped, Trevor managed to find Sarah and Vicki on the pitch but
even though he was able to get Vicki to an ambulance, both girls eventually died.
Jenni spent hours trying to find her family before she was re-umted with Trevor.

Joe Glover (SCOTT WILLIAMS) went to the match with his younger brother Ian
(STEPHEN WALTERS). They were caught up in the crush outside Leppings Lane
but they managed to get through the turnstiles and went straight ahead into the packed
central pens.

When he escaped from the crush, Joe found Ian unconscious on the pitch and
desperately tried to revive him. With the help of other fans, he earned Ian on an
advertising hoarding into the nearby gymnasium where a doctor believed he might be
revived, but ultimately was unable to save Ian. The boy’s father, John (RICKY
TOMLINSON), left his wife, Teresa (RACHEL DAVIES), waiting for news in
Liverpool while he went over to Sheffield to look for his sons.

Eddie Spearritt (MARK WOMACK) was delighted that he managed to get a ticket for
his football-mad 14 year-old son Adam (KEVIN KNAPMAN). Father and son
travelled to the match together, leaving Jan Spearritt (TRACEY WILKINSON) at
home watching developments on the BBC’s Grandstand. Arriving at the ground when
the crush at Leppings Lane had already developed, Adam and Eddie stood to one side.

When an exit gate was opened to relieve the crush, father and son went through the
gates and into the tunnel directly ahead which led to the already crowded central pens.
Adam fainted soon afterwards and Eddie lost consciousness before he was able to free
Adam from the crush. Adam died in hospital, where Eddie was being treated in the
same Intensive Care Unit.
That evening, as the Hicks and the Glovers were interviewed by the police, they were
shocked by the questions asked: How much had their children drunk? Did they have
tickets? How many drunken people did they see? Did they arrive late? It was the first
indication of the difficulties to come.

United by tragedy, the three families joined other victims in forming a support group
and began their struggle to reclaim their lives and to fight for justice. Rumours about
drunken fans causing the disaster and lurid tabloid headlines falsely accusing fans of
horrific behaviour, did nothing to help the families in the midst of their grief.

When Lord Justice Taylor’s report into the disaster exonerated the fans and largely
blamed the police for the deaths, the families looked likely to succeed in their quest to
prove their loved ones were innocent victims. But things were never quite that simple.

Together they challenged the authorities to try to find out the truth. They led the
protests against the newspapers which branded their children hooligans and they
managed to keep fighting when many would simply have given up.

Teresa and John Glover strongly supported their son Joe, haunted by feelings of guilt.
Never wanting to diminish the memory of Adam, the Spearritt’s decided to have
another child and the imminent birth of their son lightened moments through the court
battles and bureaucratic nightmares. The Hicks found it impossible to rebuild their
lives together without their girls and eventually split up. Jenni went to Liverpool, but
they remain a constant source of strength to each other.

The film follows the three families through the inquest, taken by the coroner, Dr.
Stephan Popper (IAN McDAIRMID), as they listen to testimony from numerous
witnesses, including that from Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield (MAURICE
ROEVES), the police officer in charge on the day. The film interweaves their personal
stories with the ongoing legal and political fights. It ends at the verdict - Accidental
Death - and with the devastating effect that has on these three families.
                       THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER:

                        TEN UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS


ONE

Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a major semi-final
only 21 days before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced at policing
football matches?

TWO

Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build up
outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the
previous year?

THREE

Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers thought it should have
been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the Liverpool
fans safety into the ground before the 3pm kick-off?

FOUR

Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when eye
witnesses, including football commentator John Motson, were aware of the problems
fifteen minutes before kick-off?

FIVE

Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became full, the
procedure adopted at the previous year’s semi-final?

SIX

Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA by telling
him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew he had given the order
for it to be opened?

SEVEN

 Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10 foot
 spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the pitch
 too small to be effective in an emergency evacuation?
EIGHT

Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as to what
was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the ground to
help - until 3.30pm?

NINE

Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the pitch where
the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained medical help?

TEN

Why did only 14 of those who died get to hospital?
