INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                            London SW1H 9AT
                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370

Mr M Webster LLB                              Your R e f :
Head of Department                            GP/262/WJD
Administration and Legal Department
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
S1 2HH
                                            Date
                                              23 January 1990




Dear Mr Webster

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
INTERIM REPORT - RECOMMENDATION 2

I am writing to thank you for your letter of 4 December 1989 to
Mr Whalley and to apologise for the fact that you have not
received an earlier reply.

You mention Recommendation 2 and the different terrace capacities
resulting from alternative interpretations.   We are aware that
this is an issue which, although not a major source of anxiety,
has nonetheless caused some uncertainty, and I hope you will be
assured "that Lord Justice Taylor fully appreciates the points you
make.  This is, of course, an Interim Recommendation and at this
stage, I feel I can do no more than acknowledge the position and
suggest that you await the Final Report.

I am sorry that I cannot be more helpful at present.

                                             Yours sincerely




                                             JONATHAN SWEET
                                             Hillsborough Inquiry
                                          Iv

                                          k
Mr Whjjlley                               (^<-(0 U ^   v-y w     K    f -- *
                                                   *^vU»   |toi*. U,0 I
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL LETTER
RECOMMENDATION 2 OF THE INTERIM
                              IM REPORT       -


I am sorry that it has taken me so long to let you have my
                                                                     Ikw U»1’ £—
                                                                               i
thoughts on Mark Webster's letter of 4 December and on the             Ik |7x>"Mr
interpretation of Interim Recommendation 2.       I have talked
briefly about this to David Mould, with whom I had discussed a
similar question informally some while ago.
                                                                       t Vfi1)
2.   Whilst my initial reaction then had been to favour
Alternative 1 (15% after you had done all calculations) I came
down (and still do) in favour of Alternative 2 (15%        from the    Vy^-t
initial terrace capacity figure) as a more accurate        reflection of        p
Lord Justice Taylor's intentions.
                                                                               tti

3.   The Recommendation is concerned with ensuring safety on the
terrace rather than along ingress/egress routes.       It is intended
primarily to prevent overcrowding within individual pens and was                     N
drafted because of the fear that clubs were basing terrace                     $NlvJ
                                                                                  #•»
capacity on packing density figures which were too high int he
light of actual terrace conditions.     Its concern is     foremost with
packing density.     There is no explicit reference in     the
Recommendations to means of escape/egress routes.


4.   The adoption of Alternative 2 would in my view by consistent
both with the intentions behind the Interim Recommendation, and
with the rationale underlying Chapter 16 of the Green Guide.           In
particular, it would be consistent with paragraphs 219 and 220,
where terrace capacity is expressly distinguished from exit route
capacity.     The Guide stipulates that these are in effect
alternatives:     you make your calculation of terrace capacity
(based on multiplication of the area available for standing by
the appropriate packing density), compare that with the capacity
of the exit system, or the emergency exit system and adopt
whichever is the lowest figure.


5.   On occasions when the (emergency) exit system figure is
lower, the application of Alternative 1 increases the disparity
between what the terrace itself will contain safely, and the
allowable final terrace capacity.   Thus a terrace capacity of
3000 and an exit system capacity of 2000 would result in a final
terrace capacity of 2000 less 15% = 1700.   By contrast,
Alternative 2 would match more closely the fitness of the terrace
itself, since the comparison would be between 3000 less 15% -
2550 on the one hand, and 2000 on the other, giving a final
terrace capacity of 2000.


6.   On occasions when the initial terrace figure is lower, the
final terrace capacity will be the same under both Alternatives.


7.   Since the intention is to prevent excessive packing density,
clubs may feel themselves unfairly penalised if Alternative 1 is
insisted upon;   Alternative 2 would not compromise safety and
would result in less loss of revenue.


8.   I therefore favour the adoption of Alternative 2, as does Mr
Mould.   If you are content, I shall draft a letter accordingly.




                                              J SWEET
            1 ? ^                   Iti                  ’»



                    1   ('•<   h - 1      ^       ^           K _



 W     ^    3 0-                                          l f l ^




* w        J-* —           w    w             ^               ^

^ .•-v ?                 n. cuw.



                                                  1st—
                                              1




Ovvy
