                    —     -




                        HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




               WITNESS STATEMENT OF ROBERT ROBSON



I,    ROBERT ROBSON the England Football Manager of 16
Lancaster Gate London W2 WILL SAY as follows


1.     I travelled to Hillsborough by car on the morning of
the match and arrived at the ground at about 12.15.a.m. I
travelled with my brother Mr. Thomas Robson and sat in the
fourth row of the Director's box.


2.     I was not delayed in any way in my journey.      I gained
entrance through the ground by the main director's entrance.


3.     From my position in the director's box in the middle of
the main stand I was approximately 100 yards from the
incident.


4.     I was not aware of anything untoward prior to kick-off,
although just before^z^the match was stopped after five
minutes, I saw one or two Liverpool supporters at the
Liverpool end climbing the perimeter fence.


5.     I had a good view of the incident looking diagonally
across it.    I took up my position in the director's box at
about six minutes to three.         I was not aware of any crowd
surge and there was no hint of trouble that I spotted prior
to the game starting.         It started on time.


 6.    About 10 minutes into the match there was a
 considerable overflow of people onto the pitch.        I would say
there were about 60 or 70 people on the pitch at that stage.
After that a policeman ran onto the pitch and made the
referee stop the match.    I was aware that there was still a
lot of crushing at the Leppings Lane end but there was
slightly more room at either side of the two central pens.


7.    I did not realise that people were still coming in     from
the back.   People were still trying to get over the
perimeter fence and then it became evident that there was a
lot of pushing and crushing at the back of the terracing and
a lot of people were being hauled up to safety by people in
the stand above.     Well over a thousand people must have been
on the pitch at times.     I did see, at one stage, police
trying to prevent people from getting out of the enclosures
or over the fence.     Then a different procedure was adopted
by the police and they did everything possible to relieve
the situation and assist people to get out.


8.    As the minutes went by more and more people wanted to
get out from the terracing either by getting on to the pitch
or by going upwards to the stands in order to escape.        After
about 20 minutes, the pitch was flooded by people.     There
were obviously problems since there were policemen and
ambulance men on the pitch and people were being carried off
on stretchers.     A cordon of police officers stood across a
certain area of the pitch to contain supporters I presume.
A large number of police were assisting people in trouble.
It seemed to me that everybody who was able to do anything
seemed to be doing it. Members of the public and some young
apprentice footballers in Sheffield Wednesday track suits
were hurrying to and fro with advertising boards to carry
the injured and deceased on.


 9.    After about half an hour a chap I did not know came
 into the director's box and informed me that there had been
 10 fatalities and that the match was to be abandoned.
However, he said there would not be an announcement for
sometime as the injured would be dealt with first.     Shortly
after this a drunken Liverpool supporter accused me of
causing the situation so I went into the director's room
behind the scene.


10.   I should say that I was interviewed in the presence of
the F.A.'s solicitor by Chief Superintendent Baker and
Superintendent Fancott on the 9th May 1989 and asked
questions which are contained in a "selected persons
questionnaire."     I should deal with answers to those
questions that I gave in interview which are not dealt with
so far.   I did not witness any disorder around the ground.
However, as I was driving about a mile or two from the
ground I saw one or two pubs at between 12.00 and 12.15.
with lots of people outside drinking.


11.   I did not witness any crowd build up or crushing at the
Leppings Lane entrance nor did I see any of the turnstiles
in operation.     I did not witness any unauthorised entry to
any part of the ground.


12.   I did not witness alcohol being brought into the ground
or being consumed inside the ground.


13.   I did not witness any situation which I thought at the
time was of a disorderly nature, nor did I see any incident
in the standing area of the west stand which I believe could
have contributed to the disaster.


14.   I did not see anything which I believe was directly
concerned with the breaking of a barrier in Pen 3.        Nor did
I see any unusual crowd surge in either Pen 3 or Pen 4.           I
did not assist any of the deceased or the injured.        I did
not witness any act by supporters which obstructed the
police stewards or medical persons. I did not witness



                                 3
                          -   =—




anything that I consider to be a criminal act nor have I
ever been at or had direct experience of any other football
tragedy.    I should mention that I did see one single
solitary Liverpool supporter running onto the pitch to taunt
the Nottingham Forest supporters but he was quickly dealt
with.   I imagine this might be a criminal act.




  Robert Robson


(10196LL)




                                   -   4-
