                                  Ifftk |wvt     , jplt

         THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
         Queen Anne’s Chambers
         28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
         Telephones  Direct Line  01-210  3109
                     Switchboard 01-210 3000
         Telex 917564        GTN 210
         Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
         D X No. 2318 Victoria

R.M. Whalley Esq
                                                          Please quote     l   8 9 /2 1 1 7 /D B
Secretary to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough
   Stadium Disaster                                       Your reference
HOME OFFICE
50 Queen Anne's Gate                                      Date
                                                                                                   f <
London      SW1H 9AT                                                       7 November 1989




 Aw      th,
RE:   HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - REQUEST FOR COPIES OF WITNESS STATEMENTS
      BY REYNOLDS, PORTER, CHAMBERLAIN
As you probably know, Reynolds, Porter, Chamberlain are seeking copies of
certain of the witness statements which were submitted to the Inquiry. For the
time being, I have sent a list of Inquiry Documents to them, as it is not yet
clear how many witness statements they will require.

A considerable administrative inconvenience is of courseattached to dealing
with requests for documents by solicitors acting for the various parties in the
civil litigation. In the case of Reynolds, Porter, Chamberlain, their client
Dr. Eastwood, was of course a party to the Public Inquiry, although as far as I
can recall, he only acquired such status at a relatively late stage of the
proceedings. It is for that reason that I understand that Reynolds, Porter,
Chamberlain do not have a complete set of all the witness statements that were
produced to the Inquiry. I would therefore have some difficulty in declining
to accede to their request for copies of the witness statements now.

In view of the fact that, as I understand the position, a complete set of
inquiry documents is held by the Secretariat and a complete set of all witness
statements is held by the West Midlands Police, we took the view here that it
would not be necessary to retain a complete set of witness statements in the
Treasury Solicitor's office. If you agree that we ought to respond to^
Reynolds, Porter, Chamberlain's request sympathetically, do you think it would
make more sense if they were to approach the West Midlands Police for copies o
any witness statements which they may require?

 I should naturally be happy to have a quick word with you over the telephone.




         V,
 D. BRUMMELL
vB HOM®
