INQUIRY     INTO      THE         HILLSBOROUGH
                                                 m
       STADIUM               DISASTER




                     Bef ore


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                       and

               PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                       At

                The Town Hall,

                   Shef f ield,

                       on

            Friday, 9th June, 1989.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
               (Afternoon Session)



     From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                          (Afternoon Session)


                                                   Page

     M.V. RYAN Recalled

             Examined by Mr. Collins (Cont)         64
             Cross-Examined by Mr.   Maxwell        65
             Cross-Examined by Mr.   Glasgow        65
             Cross-Examined by Mr.   Kallipetis     67
             Cross-Examined by Mr.   Woodward       70

     M. GODDARD Called

             Examined by Mr    Phillips             71
             Cross-Examined   by M r . Hytner       90
             Cross-Examined   by M r . Muller       96
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Jackson        98
             Cross-Examined   by M r . Maxwell      99
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Gibson-Watt   100
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Kallipetis    102
             Cross-Examined   by M r . Glasgow     105


DISCUSSION                                         108
                             64




                    EIGHTEENTH D A Y ’S PROCEEDINGS

                        FRIDAY. 9TH JUNE. 1989

                          (AFTERNOON SESSION)


          MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, before we continue, I have just been
     talking to my learned friend, Mr. Collins.   We think we can
     help with the reference in the transcript that you might have
     been looking for this morning on the timing of the
     communication between Superintendent Marshall and P.C. Buxton
     as to the sending for the PA vehicle, simply if it is
     convenient to you to have it in your note today rather than
     fish for it later.  It is Day 10, page 99, and the time is
     correct.  It is some time just before 14.44, which I think
     is what you were probably searching for.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you.

           POLICE CONSTABLE MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN Recalled:

                   Examined bv MR. COLLINS (Cont):

Q. Mr. Ryan, coming up to the time when you became aware of
   problems in the terraces, people climbing over after the game
   had started, I think.  Is that right? - A. Yes, that is
   correct, s i r .

Q.   Now, I want to ask you again about Tannoy messages you were
     asked to broadcast after that had started to happen? - A. No,
     not immediately after that started to happen.   I don't recall
     any message that I was asked to pass.

Q. Can you recall at any stage a message you were asked to pass
   on the Tannoy? - A. Yes.

Q.   When was the first one you can recall? - A. When the
     supporters were on the pitch I was asked to pass a message to
     them to clear the pitch and to move on to the perimeter
     tracks.

Q.   What stage was this? - A. I passed that message several times
     during a period of a good few minutes.

Q.   But starting when? Can you remember? -A. When there was a
     congregation on the pitch, I remember I was asked to pass that
     message to get them to clear the pitch.

Q. How long after the incident had come to your attention was
   that, the fact of problems? - A. I am really guessing at this
   time, sir.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    How long after the match had
     stopped? - A. May be 5 minutes, sir, or thereabouts.

Q.       MR. COLLINS:    Who asked you to pass that message? - A. I
                            65
                                             M. RYAN


     believe that was Mr. Duckenfield.

Q. Any other message that you can recall after that? - A. I
   recall passing a message or being asked to pass a message
   when Officers were trying to get into the back of the
   central tunnel

Q. When was this? - A. That would certainly be after I started
   passing the messages for them to clear the pitch.  That was
   certainly the first message I recall passing.

Q.   What was the message you passed then? - A. If Irecall
     correctly it was, the Liverpool supporters in the central pens
     to move back to allow Officers to get in to assist injured
     people.

Q.   To get back to allow Officers.... - A. To clear a way toallow
     Officers to enter and assist injured people.

Q.   To get back would be a pointless message, would not it,
     because that would simply block the tunnel? - A. To clear the
     tunnel, perhaps.

Q. Anything could have been said. Can you remember what you did
   say? - A. No, I can't recall what I said in detail.

Q. Who asked you to pass that message?    Can you remember?   - A.
   No, I don't recall, sir.

Q. That is all I ask you, Mr. Ryan.

          MR. HYTNER:   I have a number of questions, sir, but I
     think they are probably directed at Sergeant Goddard, and
     rather than repeat them I will leave them.
                   Cross-Examined bv MR. MAXWELL:

Q. Mr. Ryan, selective use of the loudspeakers is possible so you
   can broadcast, as you said, either to Leppings Lane terrace or
   to the area outside Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it possible to limit the broadcast to the concourse behind
   the West Stand, in that area on the ground side of the
   turnstiles? - A. The only two facilities on the public address
   system are to inside, the pitch side of the stands and
   terracing or to the outside. As far as I know the public
   address would only speak to the outside of the ground.  That
   would be in total.

Q. You can't limit it in the way I am asking about to the
   concourse? - A. No, sir.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Q. One question, Mr. Ryan.  I think there is fairly regular
   contact between your control box and the club control box in
   ordinary circumstances during the build up to the match? - A.
                            66
                                             M. RYAN



     Yes, we keep in reasonable contact.

Q. One of the matters which is fairly often spoken about is the
   build up of the crowd figure which is being monitored on the
   computer in the club's room, in the ordinary course of events?
   - A. In the ordinary course of events, yes, sir.

Q. Is it your recollection that for some reason that was not done
   on this day? - A. I don't recall contacting the club regarding
   that matter, no.

Q. Let me put the small difference there is so you can deal with
   it. Those within the club believe that practice was followed
   this day as always, namely that there was a fairly regular
   flow of messages telling your control box if not you
   personally what the build up figures were? - A. The difficulty
   I am faced with there is that I could have spoken to a member
   of the club, certainly, and passed the message on if he asked
   to speak to someone else within the control box, inasmuch as I
   did not personally take a message regarding the build up of
   the crowd and figures. However, if somebody in the club
   control rang me and asked to speak to another Officer in the
   Police control then I would have put them on to that Officer
   and would obviously not know what the message was, but I
   personally did not check that message.

Q. The whole point I am putting to you is it would not be a very
   dramatic or unusual thing to happen, because it happens all
   the time on the build up to all matches, and I am slightly
   concerned as to why you may think that it didn't happen on
   this one occasion? - A. I am not saying it did not happen.  It
   just that I don't recall it happening.

Q. I see, but you do accept that the regular pattern is that
   there is contact about that specific matter between the two
   boxes, your box and the club box? - A. We would normally be in
   contact regarding that, yes.

Q.        LORI* JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Did it occur to you there was
     something missing on this day, that you were not hearing from
     the club like you usually did? - A. No, sir, that was not the
     case.   I was inundated with a continual barrage of calls that
     day.

Q. So you were not looking for any more? - A. I had sufficient to
   cope with what was coming in, basically, and the other
   instructions I had to deal with.

Q.       MR. GLASGOW:    Finally, Mr. Ryan, did anybody say to you
     at any time that they were having difficulty in getting
     through to the club? - A. I don't recall that, no.

Q. And without being rude, am I right in suggesting that if
   anybody had said to you, and all the other problems you had
   with the radio, "And now the club radio won't work", or "I
   can't get through to the club room", would you not have said
   simply, "Well, why don't you try picking up the telephone?"?
                               67

                                                M. RYAN


   - A. I would probably have tried to contact the club myself.

Q. It is the obvious way of doing it, is not it? - A. I would
   have tried to contact the club myself if i was in that
   position.

Q. I entirely accept, and indeed I would have put to you, that
   there came a stage at about shall we say quarter-to-3 in round
   figures, when there was so much radio traffic going on that
   the last thing you would have welcomed was volunteered
   interference from the club? - A. If we had had a call from
   the club with information, obviously we would have taken the
   information.

Q. But you were very busy? - A. Extremely.

Q. And in fact inundated with calls of one kind or another? - A.
   Yes.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Glasgow, can I understand.
   You are saying there were calls between the club and the
   control - in what way? Radio? What?

       MR. GLASGOW:   Radio and 'phone, sir, up until about
  quarter-to-3, as I believe.

                Cross-Examined bv MR. KALLIPETIS:

Q. Mr. Ryan, can you help me please with something on the Snig
   Hill log.  I have a transcript of the recordings made of
   various 'phone calls and radio messages.  Do you recall
   speaking to somebody called Alf? Would that be Mr. Rooke from
   Snig Hill?

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        This witness was not radio.   He is
   telephone and Tannoy.

        MR. KALLIPETIS:   I appreciate that, sir, yes, but it
   appears there is a 'phone call.

        THE WITNESS:   I don't recall that name, no.

        MR. KALLIPETIS:   Might he be shown, sir, a copy of the
   Snig Hill log, if it is handy?  (Handed to witness):

Q. Your name is mentioned there, Mr. Ryan, in the right-hand
   column. Do you see it? - A . Yes.

Q. Is that in fact you speaking in response to a message asking
   whether you wanted ambulances? - A . Y e s .

Q. It is you? - A. I recall a message from someone in Operations
   Room, the name certainly I did not know, at some stage, yes.


Q. You do recall that the messages that are recorded there.... -
   A. I certainly do not remember using those words.
                                                    M. RYAN



Q. I can't vouch for the accuracy of the transcript because I
   have not heard this particular tape.  In fact, I did have it
   but I could not quite make out what he was saying.  Somebody
   else has transcribed it.  Is it right there was a
   request....

            MR. COLLINS:      It is page 8, the VHF Channel 1.

        THE WITNESS:          Excuse me, sir.    Is this the radio or
telephone?

Q.        MR. KALLIPETIS:   If you look at the message
     before it, the time is just after 14.59, "Telephone
     call to Ground Control, 'I don't know whether we need
     any yet.'  'No I'm ringing ground Control.” . Then your
     name appears in the right-hand column, "Ground control
     PC Ryan".  "Yes, its Alf, do you want any ambulances."
     "We're trying to monitor you but you know its." and you
     carry on:

            "It's chaos at the moment, we've got no reports of no
            reports of injuries but we, if you can monitor
            the situation if you can just keep standing by".

     Now,   do you recall that? - A.     Yes, I believe I do.

Q. And that is but seconds before 3 o'clock, Mr. Ryan, because
   you will see the time in the left-hand column after the reply
   to what you have just said, "Yes, okay ta", and then in
   brackets, "(1500)". - A. Yes.

Q. At that stage can you think of any reason why Snig Hill would
   be making a request to you in the Police control box at
   Hillsborough whether or not you wanted ambulances? - A. No,
   not really, sir.

Q. Did it strike you as odd at the time when you received the
   'phone call? - A. Obviously not, otherwise I would have
   probably said something at the time.

Q. Did you refer that request to your superior....

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am a bit concerned aboutthis
     document, actually.  We have had a time correction onit,   have
     not we?

            MR. KALLIPETIS:      We have, sir.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    And that seems to have made a bit
     more sense of some parts of it but does not seem to have made
     any more sense of this part.

          MR. KALLIPETIS:        Forgive me, sir, I think in fact it
     does.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Does it.   Very well.     There was a
                          69

                                              M. RYAN


   request for an ambulance before 3 o'clock?

        MR. KALLIPETIS:   Sir, that if I may say so is not
   putting it as it appears from the track, sir, and obviously we
   have not yet got a statement from the person who made this
   call, hence my request to this Officer who apparently received
   it, but it is a request from Snig Hill, it would appear,
   asking the ground whether they require any ambulances just
   before 3 o'clock.  Sir, I think it is correct,s because if you
   turn to page 9 you will see at 15.04:  "Hillsborough ground
   control request dog handlers to attend the stadium
   immediately", and then between 15.04 and 15.06 that message is
   transmitted to various people, and then you will see on page
   10 just after 15.06 they call Operations Support.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes, I see that.

        MR. KALLIPETIS:   And it is then after that that there is
   message for a fleet of ambulances at the bottom of page 11. So
   so far as timing is concerned it would appear to be accurate,
   and I understand it has been checked:

Q. Mr. Ryan, did you refer it to a superior Officer? - A. I
   have no recollection of that at all, sir.

Q. You were asked about the Tannoys, Mr. Ryan, and you said you
   had checked them before the match started, and in particular
   the one that was being worked upon you checked at the request
   of the ground engineer? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. Did you check the Tannoys to make sure each Tannoy in each
   area of the ground was working? - A. All the sections were
   checked, ye s .

Q. May I just ask how you did it? - A. Yes, there were Officers
   around the ground.  We simply tested the public address that
   way.

Q. So you would have checked the Tannoy, would you, at the corner
   of the North Stand, between the North Stand and the Kop in the
   area where the ambulance is parked? - A. As far as I recall,
   yes.




                               /Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD
                                              M.   RYAN


            Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Mr. Ryan, you were in the control box and we can see in
West Midlands bundle, the thick bundle, views in the
control box.  Would you have a look, please, at photo­
graphs 50, 51 and 52, the last three in the bundle?
Where is your position in the control box? Do we see
that in any of those photographs? -A. Yes, from photograph
50.

Yes. - A. If you look facing the playing area, the far
right, directly in front of there.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     MR. WOODWARD:   You are right in the far corner?
- A. Yes.

So the view that you have across towards the Leppings
Lane terraces is at more of an angle than that which
we see in photograph 51.  You are further to the right
of the camera position.  Is that correct? - A. Yes, that
is correct.

Now, as the time for the kick-off approached would it
be right that ordinarily events would reach a crescendo?
- A. Oh, yes.

With increasing traffic, increasing matters to concern
you, but during the time of the build-up to the kick-
off on this day in 1989 were you from time to time
looking out on to the terraces? - A. The last time I
remember consciously looking out on to the terraces
was round about 2 o'clock/2.15 time.  The only other
matter I probably recall was directly below the Police
control which is slightly elevated where supporters at
some stage were climbing over the fencing from the
terracing towards the seated area which is more or less
to my right.

Yes.  If we look at photograph 48 that would be a view
looking out, as it were, over your shoulder to the seating
on the right.  You say you saw some people climb up, did
you? Do we see the point where they climbed up there?
- A. No, you won't see the point there because it is
below that level.  If I recall there is a fence directly
below the ....

So your last recollection now of looking at the Leppings
Lane terraces is some time before 2.30, is it? - A. Yes,
earlier than that.  Before 2.15.

There came a time on the day when you saw the people
climbing over from the Leppings Lane terraces.  You saw
Ml,

                               71

                                                          M.   RYAN


         that something had happened down there? - A. Over on to
         the pitch area, yes.

      Q. Yes.  Up to that time had anything struck you, although
         your only conscious recollection of looking at the
         terraces is at about 2.15, between that time and the
         occasion when you saw the people coming over the
         perimeter fence had anything struck you about the
         state of the terraces? - A. No.

      Q. Nothing happening in the control box had drawn your
         attention to anything abnormal down there? - A. No.

      Q. You have been asked about communications with the club.
         - A. Yes.

      Q. There is the club's radio and there is also the telephone
         link? - A. Yes.

      Q. Ordinarily is the communication a two-way thing, inform­
         ation being passed each way? - A. Yes, that is correct.

      Q. Now, is this the situation?  You have no recollection of
         any particular information coming to you or being passed
         by you down to the control room, to the club's control?
         - A. No, I have no personal recollection.

      Q. If there had not been any would that have been something
         unusual? If it had been totally silent and there had been
         no communication would that not have struck you? -A. If
         my job had been totally silent?   If the ....

      Q. Well, if there to all intents and purposes had been
         nothing - the control room had been dead? - A. Yes,
         it probably would.

      Q. Does it follow from what you are saying that there may
         have been communications passing between the two of you
         but there was nothing unusual or abnormal about any of
         it? Could that be an explanation? - A. I cannot say
         that I did not get any calls from the club but I cannot
         honestly recollect.

              MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.

              MR. PHILLIPS:   Sergeant Goddard, please.

                 POLICE SERGEANT MICHAEL GODDARD Called

                        Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

      Q. You are Sergeant Michael Goddard.   Is that so? - A. I am,
         sir.
                                                     M.   GODDARD


Q. And you were in the control box on the day of this
   match? - A. I was, sir.

Q. As you had been on many previous occasions? - A. Yes,
   s ir.

Q.   How long had you had experience of   being in control?
     - A. Inthe control since January,    1986, was the first
     time I did it.

Q. You had been in control therefore in the match in 1987
   and 1988?- A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. Your particular duties were concerned with radio messages?
   - A. That is correct, sir.

Q.   Is that so? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   You had to transmit messages to those who were engaged
     in the operation at the ground itself.  Is that right?
     - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

Q. For that purpose would you use channel 25? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you also have to transmit messages from ground control
   to other places, to the Force control, for example, at
   Snig Hill? - A. Yes, but that would not be on channel 25.

Q. No.  What channel would you use for that? - A. That would
   be on V H F .

Q.   On VHF? - A. Yes.

Q.    Did you have a contact with the Divisional Operations Room
     at Hammerton Road? - A. Yes.

Q. And what channel would you use for that? - A. That is
   channel 35.

Q.Channel? - A. Channel 35.

Q.    Channel 35? - A. Yes. You would use that   by using aradio.
     You would not use the normal system.

Q.   You have a hand held radio .... - A. Yes,    sir.

Q ..... to keep you in touch with Hammerton Road which is the
    Divisional Headquarters? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. And in order to get in touch with the Force control at
   Snig Hill what would you use for that? - A. That would
   be a VHF set, hand held VHF, pack set, small one.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That i:? two separate hand sets
                                                M.   GODDARD


for VHF and channel 35 and the main set channel 25?
- A. That is correct, sir, yes.

     MR. PHILLIPS:   And the main set ___ - A. Can I -
the small one which we use on 35 is there basically just
as a standby thing rather than specifically for 35.

Some of the Officers who attended would have radios
capable of picking up channel 35, would not they? - A.
If they were switched on that channel, yes, sir.

Yes.  And, indeed, I think it is true that some of them
had VHF radios as well and could get directly in touch
with Force control? - A. Only the mobile vehicles would .

The mobile vehicles? - A ..... have VHF, yes, sir.




                                    / Q. When you started
                                 M. GODDARD


When you started this operation was it your intention to
have the radios on talk-through or not talk-through?
- A. On talk-through sir. Talk-through is the norm.   I
have never known not using the radio without talk-through
and that is general throughout the country.

You probably know better than most what happens when we
are using talk-through and not talk-through.  Can you tell
us please what in fact happens when you use talk-through?
- a . Yes sir. When we use talk-through the signal* my
transmission is heard by everyone and the reply from the
person I speak to is again heard by everyone.

What happens if two people, two Officers want to talk at
the same time when you are on talk-through? - A. We get
a garbled message and you can normally realise that two
people are transmitting simultaneously.

So both messages will come through but of course scramble
each other up in the process? - A. It will be scrambled,
yes.
If you are on non-talk-through, what happens then? - A. You
would hear, anyone on the ground would hear my transmission
but they would not hear the reply from the transmission.

You alone would hear the reply? - A. Me alone, yes.

And if two people separately wanted to come to you when
you are on non-talk-through, what would happen then? -
A. Again you would get a totally garbled message.

One would not have the effect of cutting the other off
then? - A. Yes.
I am sorry, that is really not the same thing? - A. To an
extent it would cut if off, yes. You would get a garbled
message with two coming through at the same time. You
realise that there are two people transmitting.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Is it the same whether you
are on talk-through or non-talk-through if two people try
to get through at the same time? - A. Yes, it is identical
sir, yes.
So the only difference is that only you hear the reply
when you are not on talk-through? - A. Yes, my Lord.

      MR. PHILLIPS: Now are there any circumstances in
which a message can be cut off by you or by other Officers
on the ground? - A. On which system? On talk-through or
non-talk-through?

On either system? - A. No, on talk-through, yes, because
what happens is that although you have got talk-through
it requires a base station which is situated in the Box,
                                  M. GODDARD


but you transmit on a frequency and you receive on a different
frequency and all the radios we have are on those frequencies.
Tell me the question again, sir?

Are there any circumstances in which a transmission can
be cut off? - A. Yes, by interference with someone else
coming in on radio and cutting it off that way.

So when you are trying to talk to somebody on the ground,
can you be cut off by somebody else coming in at the same
time? - A. Yes, I can, on talk-through, yes sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR; Are you actually cut off
or are you garbled? - A. I would assume that I am cut off
sir.

      MR. PHILLIPS: As far as you are concerned when you
are talking into the radio itself would you know whether
you had been cut off or not? - A. No, not at all sir.

When messages are passed between you and a man on the ground
is it your practice to have a system so that each message
is acknowledged? - A. Yes, well if I make a transmission
I put my transmisison to a specific person and at the end
of the transmission I would say, ask him his name or number:
"Did you receive?" and I would expect a reply from that
sir.

And if you don't get a reply what do you do? - A. I try
again.

You were on duty on the 15th of April, weren't you? - A.
I was, sir.

I think the day before you had heard from Superintendent
Murray that the Chief Superintendent wanted a log to be
kept at the Control Room? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

I think it is true to say you started keeping it and it
was taken over by Superintendent Murray? ~ A. That is
correct sir, yes.

Can we go through the early stages of the match day in
this way: that you had of course messages going forward,
out and in of the sort you would normally expect on a
match day? - A. Yes sir.

There was a time, I think, when Chief Inspector Creaser
came into the Control Box and had a conversation with
Superintendent Murry. They have both told us about it.
It was about the packing of the terraces? - A. That is
correct sir, yes.

You recall that, do you? - A. I do sir.
                            76

                                          M. GODDARD


Q. And the instruction that they should find their own levels?
   - A. That is correct sir.

Q. Did you stay in the Control Box throughout the period
   from about midday onwards? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Were you able to observe from your position how things
   were developing inside the ground particularly at the
   terraces? - A. I was sir, yes.

Q. Your position in the Control Box is towards the front,
   isn't it? - A. I am in the centre of the three people at
   the front.

Q. There is Mr. Bichard I think behind you controlling the
   screens of the video cameras? - A. That is correct, yes
   sir.

Q. You are at the front at the table where the microphone
   is, the tulip microphone? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. Do you sit down there?        Do you have a seat? - A. Yes, a
   stool, yes sir.

Q.   Whereis Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray? - A. Mr.      Murray
     is to my left, P.C. Ryan to my right and when Mr.     Duckenfield
     was in he was behind me somewhere.

Q. By about 2.15 or so how did the terraces seem to you? -
   A. The Spion Kop, all the areas in relation to the Notts.
   Forest end were filling quite well and the Liverpool areas
   were comparatively empty in relation to the Forest areas.
   There was still a lot of room within all the ground but
   certainly the Forest areas were more populated than the
   Liverpool areas.

Q.    Did you think there was anything strange about the
     situation at that time? - A. Not particularly, no sir.

Q. Were you able to look at the video cameras at the monitors
   above you? - A. Yes, from time to time.

Q. Did you see anything that gave you cause for        concern? - A.
   At that early stage, no sir.

Q.    Do you remember a request coming in for Leppings Lane to
     be closed? - A. I do sir, yes.

Q. That, we understand, was at 17-minutes-past-2? - A. I
   understand that is the case sir.  I must admit I thought
   it was later than that.

Q. Did you look at the monitors when you had that request?
   - a . Yes.
                                   M. GODDARD


Were you the person who tried to put that request into
effect? - A. Yes, I asked that Leppings Lane be closed to
traffic and on top of that obviously we then talk about
re-routing buses and I sent messages via Chief Inspector
Sumner for the bus people to be informed.

In the first place did you send a message out to the Serials
at each end of Leppings Lane? — A. I can't specifically
remember doing that but my assumption is that I would
have done.
It would be you who did that? — A. It would be me that did
that.
You can't therefore say whether you had any reply from
the Serial at the Catchbar Lane end? - A. I can't sir.

How were you going to get the buses re-routed? - A. That
is why I contacted Mr. Sumner to see the people at Herries.

Where was Chief Inspector Sumner? - A. He was in that area.
He was around Herries Road itself.
Did you get any acknowledgment from him? - A. I did sir,
yes.
And left it to him to see to that, did you? - A. He went
to see to that, yes.
At that time did you look at the monitors? - A. Yes sir,
about 2.30ish, certainly.
Well at the time you got the request to c l o s e Leppings Lane?
- A. As I have said my thoughts, you tell me it is 2.17
which I will accept, I believe it was a bit later than that.

That is the time given in the log that was kept in the
Ground Control Room? - A. Yes, I accept that sir. As I
say I still believe that it was later than 2.17.

You saw I think at any rate the monitors at 2.30, didn't
you? - A. Yes sir.
Because your attention was drawn to them, wasn't it, by
Constable Bichard? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

And what did you see? - A. Masses of people around the
Leppings Lane turnstiles and going back from the turnstiles
just about into the roadway.
 Did you have any idea of numbers? Could you hazard a guess?
 - A. I initially said 3,000-4,000 and I think I would
 stick to that.
 It is quite a lot of people, isn't it? - A. A lot of
 people sir.
                                       M. GODDARD



Q. To get into the ground by 3 o'clock? - A. Yes sir.

Q. At this time did you look at the terraces? - A. I did sir,
   yes.
0. Did you see what condition they were in? - A. Yes, the
   central pens were filling quite well. The West Stand was
   filling but there was loads of room in it as was the North
   Stand. The outer pens were, in comparison with the centre
   pen* were relatively uninhabited.

Q. Did you receive messages from various sources at this time
   on a sort of continuous basis? - A. Yes sir.

0. It is probably difficult, isn't it, to isolate one message
   out from any other message? - A. Very. T h e r e are certain
   things that stand out in your mind but it is difficult, yes
   sir.
Q. Can you help us about this: there was a time when the
   radio began to break up?  - A. There was sir, yes.

Q.    Can you say when that was, to your recollection? - A. I
     would have thought it was about 2.25/2.30ish.

Q.   We know that Mr. Sanderson came over to the Control Box
     very rapidly? - A. Yes.
Q.   How long was he in there trying to remedy things? - A.
     Five minutes sir, thereabout, yes about five minutes.

Q.    You could not use the radio on Channel 2 5 as you had been
     doing up till then? - A. No.
Q. Had you had any trouble at all before that period, 2.25/
   2.30? - A. Before that, no sir.
Q.    We know, and It is right is it not, that the radio engineer
     was unable to mend the set that you wereusing? - A. That
     is correct, sir.
 Q. What did he do? - A. I think his initial reaction was that
    the tulip mike was wrong so he replaced that with a tele­
    phone depression handset. Again it was still found to
    be inoperative so we then went on to the spare base station
    which was under the bench.
 Q. That is the blue thing. Yes, carry on? - A. The lead was
    reinserted into that and again it was found that it was
    inoperative.
 Q. The blue base station was found to be inoperative? - A.
    The transmission was inoperative.

 Q. Why was that, do you know? - A. I don't sir. Probably at
    this stage in time I was trying to make transmissions too
                                  M. GODDARD


quickly because that thing has got to be warmed up for
probably 30 seconds and I was trying to transmit prior
to the 30 seconds and so I have since realised that. When
that did not come into effect I then used the normal hand­
held Motorola radio which again was on talk-through so it
wouldn't do the same job.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is that the one you would have
on Channel 35 for Hanunerton Road as a standby? - A. That is
a standby set, yes sir.

So you then switched it to 25? - A. Put it on to 25.

      MR. PHILLIPS: And the base station for that remained
at Hanunerton Road, did it? - A. No, the base station is
underneath me.

Can you just help us about this: there was a time, I under­
stand, when you threw down the telephone handset that you
had been given in disgust on the table? - A. Frustration
probably sir.
Yes, all right. What was the problem with that? Why couldn’
you use that? - A. As I have outlined, I was probably trying
to use it before the set itself, whichwas the spare set,
had warmed up and it takes a period of time, probably 30
seconds for it to warm up.

Well did you have any problems about access to that base
station? - A. Yes.

You know it is on the floor? - A. Yes.

We see it, I think, if you look in West Midlands Bundle 2
at Photograph 50. Do you see it directly in front of the
chair there on the floor?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   We do, I think.   We have seen
it at the Control Box.
      MR. PHILLIPS:   What was your problem over access?
- A. Sorry?

What was the problem you had over getting access to that
machine? - A. The machine on to the handset?

Yes? - A. The handset although it shows there it is on
the desk, to lift it up you could not lift it up, you
were bent down.

Did you need to get close to the base station to hear the
loud speaker? - A. Well you would need to get .... On
that base station you have got the loud speakers from
the base station, the substitute base station, they are
on the floor.
                                     M. GODDARD


You could not hear anything out of the ear piece of the
telephone handset then? - A. No because it comes from the
loud speaker, which is a smaller loud speaker than the
normal set and that is on the floor.

What stopped you from putting a base station on to the table
top? - A. Because it is a fixed lead, sir. To plug in the
lead is not long enough.

It is as simple as that? - A. Yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: The thing that looks like a
telephone is for speaking but not for listening? - A. That
is correct sir, yes.

      MR. PHILLIPS: So you then ended up using a hand-held
radio? - A. Yes sir.

Were you able to do that satisfactorily? - A. Yes sir.

I think it was Mr. Murray who said that you had communications
restored within a minute of Mr. Sanderson attending.  Is that
right? - A. I would not put it to a minute sir, no, I would
say a bit longer than that.

Did you get a request from Mr. Buxton out in the Land Rover
to delay the kick-off? - A. I did sir, yes.

I think in the first place you had sent out a message asking
for the attendance of a PA vehicle, hadn't you? - A. That
is correct, sir, yes, and in fact a traffic car was sent as
well.

We know Mr. Buxton attended, of course. Can you give us
any idea when it was you got the request from him to delay
the kick-off? - A. It was directly at the time that one
of the teams came on the field, and when I say "came on to
the field" I mean not for the warm up but for the start
of the match proper.

We know Liverpool came on to the field at 14.54 and Nottingham
Forest at 14.55? - A. Well it would be 14.54 then sir.

At that time Gate C had already been opened for a second
time? - A. I can't say.  In relation to the times I don't
know but I believe that will be the case, yes sir.

So you are saying the request for the delay of kick-off
came after the business about the opening of Gate C? - A.
As I have said I am not quite sure on my times in relation
to       The call from P.C. Buxton and the calls for C Gate
to be open, in which order I don't know.

You don't know the order?   A. No. Not that I don't know,
I cannot remember in which order of sequence they went.
                                 M. GODDARD


      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Can you just remind me.   I
think Mr. Duckenfield said that he had seen some photographers
round the tunnel which he took to mean that the team was
about to come out but in fact that turned out not to be
the case?
      MR. PHILLIPS: Sir, I think that is right.   I think
in fact the teams came out a little later than that.

Were you going by the presence of photographers round the
tunnel or were you going by what you saw coming out on to
the field? - A. I saw a team in red were going out on to
the field which was Liverpool, because my reply to P.C. Buxton
"It is too late, one team is already on the field" and I
know that I did not mention which team.




                      /Q.   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You ....
                                       M.   GODDARD




      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You answered that off your
own bat, did you? - A. Yes, sir.

      MR. PHILLIPS:   That is just the point I am coming
to, Sergeant.   Did you pass that message over to either
Superintendent Murray or to Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield? - A. It came out quite clear on the radio,
sir.   My assumption was that Mr. Murray or Mr.
Duckenfield had heard it.

Could you be sure of that, there was an awful lot of
things going on in that room? - A. There were many things
going on, sir.

Did you not think you ought to pass that message on to
one of your superiors? - A. No, sir.   My assumption was
that with Mr. Murray being at the side of me and Mr.
Duckenfield being somewhere behind me, that they would
have heard that.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   They may have heard it, but
whose decision was it, whether you stopped the kick-off
or you didn't?   Was it yours or the Chief Superintendent
who was standing beside you? - A. I would suggest, my
Lord, it was the Chief Superintendent.

      MR. PHILLIPS:   Did you not ask him? - A. No, sir,
I did not.

Why? - A. Because I automatically assumed he had heard
the message and he would act accordingly upon it.

You did not really give him much chance did you?    You
replied straight away, "No, it is too late” ? - A. Yes,
because as the request came through the team ran out.

Why is it too late when the team runs out on to the
field?   Why cannot they run back again?  Or walk back
again? - A. I do not know, sir.   My assumption is if a
game is going to be - and it is something I have never
had any experience of - if a game is going to be delayed
it will be delayed before the teams come out.

Was not there a kick-off delayed in 1987 at a match
involving Coventry City?   Were you not there when that
happened? - A. Coventry and Leeds, sir?

Yes. - A. I do not know if it was delayed.   If you tell
me it was delayed I will accept that, but certainly as
far as I am aware there were no teams on the field at
that stage.
                                           M.   GODDARD


Certainly the match was delayed?   The kick-off was
delayed? - A. I cannot tell you that, sir.   I cannot
remember that.

You decided because the team had come out on the field
that you could give that message back to Constable Buxton
without asking Chief Superintendent Duckenfield? - A.
Yes, sir, with the belief that he and Mr. Murray had
heard the message come through.

And heard your reply? - A. And heard my reply.

What were they actually doing at this time, those two
men? - A. Mr. Duckenfield was behind me so I cannot
really say.

You cannot say whether he was talking on the telephone or
anything else? - A. Certainly if he was on the telephone
he would be at the side of me.

Or using a radio? - A. Well, the only radio he would use
then is the VHF.

He is in control? - A. He is, yes, that is right.

Now can we just look at the request to open the gates.
You received those requests? - A. I did, sir.

You received the requests from Superintendent Marshall? -
A. That is correct, sir.

Did you communicate those requests to Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield? - A. I do not know about the
first two, but the third - well, it wasn't a request, it
was a demand - he was quite aware of that demand.   I did
not have to communicate anything to him at that stage.
It was Mr. Murray who said to him, "Mr. Duckenfield, do
we open the gates?"   He was totally aware without my
having to pass on to him any radio transmission that came
into the box.

We know the gates did open coincidentally at about this
time?   Gate C opened for the first time at 2.48? - A.
Yes, sir.

Did you see that on the monitor? - A. I did not see it
open, no, sir.   I saw people starting to come through.
A comment was made in the box, "They have broken
through".   That was the comment that was made.    It was
very quickly retrieved by one of the mounted Officers and
the gates were closed.

That was after you   had had the message   to open the    gates?
- A. I believe so,   yes.
                              84




                                             M.   GODDARD


Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Who said they had broken
     through? - A. It was someone in the box.   I cannot
     remember who said that, but I have got a feeling, because
     there were quite a few people in the box, I have got a
     feeling it was Mr. McRobie.   However, I cannot be
     certain of that.

Q.         MR.PHILLIPS:   Mr. McRobie?   He was in plain
     clothes? - A. He was in plain clothes.

Q. How long had he been in the box? - A. From ten past two,
   quarter past two - that's approximate.   They all seemed
   to come together.

Q. It would be getting a bit over-crowded with so many
   people in? - A. We had got quite a few in, sir, yes.

Q. When the gates opened as you saw it, or heard this
   expression "They have broken through", was that before or
   after Mr. Duckenfield had decided to open them? - A. That
   was way before, sir.

Q. Before he decided to give the order to open them? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Were you able to see the gates being closed again with
   the use of a mounted Officer? - A. Yes.   Well, you do
   not physically see the gates close from there, but what
   you do see is that the flow stops.

Q. You then got another request for the gates to be opened?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you pass this on? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Did you get a decision then? - A. No decision    was made
     because there was certain discussion going on    within the
     box as to whether or   not to open the gates.

Q. How long did it take   to get a decision? - A.     It wasnot a
   long time at all because as I say, the third          - well,not
   request, the demand,   order, call it what you        will -came
   through.

Q.   From Superintendent Marshall? - A. From Mr. Marshall.

Q.    Did you pass that over as well? - A. No, sir.    That was
     heard quite clearly within the box.    I did not have to
     relay that at all.

Q. We know there was about four minutes between      the first
   and second opening of gate C.   Was that the      time it
   took, basically, to come to a conclusion, or      was it some
   shorter time than that? - A. No, it was some      shorter time
                               85




                                               M.   GODDARD


     than that.   When the third request - or the demand -
     came in, as Mr. Murray had said, "Mr. Duckenfield, do we
     open the gate", I turned round and obviously Mr.
     Duckenfield had been considering that for some time.
     That is the way I looked at it.    He had been considering
     that.    He then said, "Open thegates".

Q.   So you passed a message on,    did you? - A. Yes,   sir.

Q.   On the radio? - A. Yes.

Q.   Using channel 25? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Which should have     been heard by any Officer with aradio?
     - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Was it directed at any particular Officer, your message?
   - A. My message was directed to Mr. Marshall.

Q. Did you know Mr. Marshall was outside in Leppings Lane on
   the parapet of the bridge and not in a position to open
   the gates? - A. No.   I did not know where Mr. Marshall
   was.   My assumption was that Mr.Marshall   was by those
   gates, or by C gate, certainly.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    He could not be atall        of
     them, cou|d he? - A. No, sir, but by C gate.

Q.         MR.   PHILLIPS:   What was the message you gave?      - A.
     "Open the   gates".

Q. Did you address it particularly to Mr. Marshall? - A. I
   believe so, yes, sir.

Q. You said, "Superintendent Marshall, open the gate"? - A.
   No, the message came in from Superintendent Marshall,
   "Open the gates", and then there was a very brief
   conversation between Mr. Murray and Mr. Duckenfield.
   The reply was "Open the gates" and I replied "Open the
   gates".

Q. Not using any particular name or call sign in giving that
   message out? - A. No, sir.

Q. So anybody would have heard it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. It was "Open the gates"? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Gates at, of course, as you were concerned with, Leppings
   Lane? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. It would have been heard, of course, over at Penistone
   Road and on the perimeter track as well? - A. That is
   correct, sir.
                             86




                                            M. GODDARD


Q.   You saw gate C open, or at least the crowd coming through
     gate C, did you, on the monitor? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you then subsequently get a message from Sergeant
   Higgins who was in charge of serial 20? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was that? - A. He was requesting that A gate be
   opened or else someone would get killed.

Q.    How long after the opening of gate C was this, the second
     opening of gate C? - A. Probably three or four minutes I
     would suggest.    I would say three or four minutes,
     maybe.    It might be less than that.

Q. What did you do on receipt of that message from Sergeant
   Higgins? - A. After hearing what Mr. Duckenfield had
   said, I went straight through and said, "Open the gates".

Q. So you took it that the previous instruction applied to
   all the gates? - A. I took it that the first instruction
   in relation to gates was C gate.

Q. You took it that it was C gate? - A. I assumed it was C
   gate.

Q.    Why did you assume that? - A. Because the influx in C
     gate is the one that is off-front, so you can pull people
     out and put them through the gate and relieve your
     numbers, or relieve your crush, probably more easily that
     way than opening B gate.

Q. It was a message, and do correct me if I am wrong, "Open
   the gates" in the plural? - A. It was, sir.  That is what
   I said.

Q.   You did not specify C gate? - A. No, I did not.

Q.   If Sergeant Higgins had heard that message he would have
     known that that would have applied to gate A as well,
     would he not?   He would not have needed to ask? - A. I
     am aware that Sergeant Higgins was deployed from another
     area, to the back of A gate.   Whether he had heard the
     first message, "Open the gates", I do not know.
     However, bear in mind, A gates would have no influence on
     entrance into the west stand or the standing areas.

Q. You took it on yourself then to give the instruction to
   Sergeant Higgins to open A gate? - A. I did, sir.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   When you passed the order
     the first time and said "Open the gates", you did say it
     in the plural? - A. I did, my Lord.

Q. However, you took that only to mean C? - A. Yes, sir.
                              87




                                             M. GODDARD


Q. Why in the plural? - A. Well, it is gate, when we say
   "gates", we call C gate, C gate, but when we say "Open
   the gates", it still refers to one to me.   That was the
   thing in my mind when we were talking about gates, I was
   believing it was in fact C gate.

Q.         MR. PHILLIPS:   Why did you not check with Chief
     Superintendent Duckenfield who had given the order, what
     he meant? - A. Because we assumed as C gate had already
     been opened, that that was what was required again.

Q. Did you not think to say, "Do you mean A, B and C, sir?"?
   - A. No, sir.   I believed and I am sure Mr. Duckenfield
   believed, that it it was C gate that was required to be
   opened.

Q. At all events, you did not go back to him before telling
   Sergeant Higgins to open A gate? - A. That is correct.

Q. You say in your statement:

           "By the time A gate was opened the gates at C had
           been closed."

     Is that right? - A. That was my belief at that time.

Q. Is it right? - A. I do not believe so, not now.        Not now
   I have seen the video, no.

Q. When you made this statement, was it made shortly after
   the event? - A. It was made on the 16th.

Q. The following day? - A. Yes.

Q. It was your recollection of what had happened? - A. Yes.

Q. You do not now think that gate C was closed when A was
   opened? - A. After seeing the video earlier this week,
   no.

Q. Then you go on to talk about the delay of the kick-off,
   which we have already dealt with.   You cannot be sure at
   all at what point this comes? - A. I cannot be sure
   whether it is before the gates or after the gates, no,
   sir.

Q.    What did you see inside the ground that put you on notice
     that something was wrong in pens 3 and 4? - A. People
     were climbing over the fences.

Q.   When did   you see that? - A. About three o'clock time.

Q.   What did   you do about it? - A. My first thought was, "We
     have got   a pitch invasion", and it was a matter of
                                        M. GODDARD


deploying as many men as possible down to the Leppings
Lane end of the perimeter track.

You would have probably one of the best views in the
Control Box, because you are sitting right at the front?
- A . I am sitting right at the front, yes, sir.

Did you say to the other Supervisory Officers in the
Control Box, "Look what is happening over there"? - A. I
do not recall saying that, no, sir.

Were they in fact in the Control Box to have it said to
them? - A. Yes, sir.

What did you do when you thought you had got a pitch
invasion? - A. I deployed as much available manpower as I
could down to the Leppings Lane end.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Who is taking the decisions
in this Control Box? - A. Mr. Murray.

Was anybody telling you to deploy them, or was that off
your own bat? - A. It came through, "We have got
 so-and-so and so-and-so" and Mr. Murray said,
"Deploy..."

Right.   I thought you acted off your own bat. - A. No.

      MR. PHILLIPS:   He was seeing the same thing as
you, is that what you are telling us? - A. Yes.

And giving you the instructions which you carried into
effect? - A. Yes.

Then you saw Superintendent Greenwood going through and
signalling first of all for the match to be stopped and
running on the pitch? - A. Frantically signalling, yes.
It was fairly obvious he could not get through on radio
and then he came through very, very clearly, "Stop the
game.   Stop the game".   It was obvious to all at that
stage that the game was required to be stopped.

Now did you get in touch with any of the outside
emergency services at this stage? - A. Personally, no,
sir.

Did you get in touch with either Hammerton Road or Snigg
Hill to request emergency services? - A. I did not, no,
but I know that it was done.

I am asking you whether you did it personally? - A. No.

Because you were in fact on the radio? - A. Yes, I was on
the normal radio, not the VHF radio.
                              89




                                             M. GODDARD


Q. Who did actually get in touch with Snigg Hill or
   Hammerton Road? - A. PC Bichard.

Q. We will ask him about it.   Did you then concentrate on
   dealing with the ground radio? - A. Did you get a request
   for bolt croppers? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. From whom? - A. At the time I did not know.   I now
   understand it was Sergeant Wright from, I believe,
   Attercliffe, or he is a Delta Sergeant.

Q.   What time was this? - A. I do not know - ten past    three?

Q.    What did you do about it? - A. I went through to
     Claywheels Lane and made a request for bolt croppers.
     There was nothing.

Q. Claywheels Lane is, of course, the... - A. Our Traffic
   Division.

Q. It is a garage and it is not very far away from the
   ground? - A. Very close, sir.

Q. Did you not think it might be better to go straight for
   the Fire Brigade? - A. At that stage, no.

Q.    Why? - A. Because it is probably quicker from Claywheels
     Lane than it is from any fire station.

Q. Did you get through by radio to Claywheels Lane? - A. No,
   by telephone.

Q. Was it answered fairly promptly? - A. Straight away, yes,
   sir.

Q. You were told there were no bolt croppers in the Road
   Traffic Division? - A. I was, sir.

Q. Did that surprise you? - A. Yes, very much.

Q.    What did you do then? - A. I said, "They have got no
     cutters" and PC Bichard was behind me at his video and
     said, "Do you want the fire brigade?"     I did not reply
     to him, I just put my hand up in the air, which he
     acknowledged as an acknowledgment - "Yes, get the fire
     brigade".

Q. Did he make the call? - A. Yes.

Q. To Force Control or somewhere? - A. That is correct.

Q.   For the fire brigade? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you hear him call? - A. I did not, no, sir.
                                        M. GODDARD


Did he make the call that requested a fleet of
ambulances? - A. He did.

Again, did you hear that call? - A. No, sir.

You were busy talking on the radio with your people at
the ground? - A. Yes.

I think you saw what went on on the pitch? - A. Yes, sir.

And the efforts that were made to rescue people from the
terraces? - A. Yes.

If anyone wants to ask you about that I have no doubt
they will, but I do not intend to take you through that
myself.  At any stage did you get any idea that doctors
and nurses and so on were required? - A. It became fairly
obvious that doctors and nurses were going to be required
there and then, yes.

It seems a request was put out fairly early on via the
media - I am not sure if it isn't Radio Hallam or some
local radio station - for nurses and doctors at the
ground.   Did you have anything to do with that? - A. No,
sir.

Did you make any effort to get nurses and doctors in the
ground who were already in the ground to go to the
Leppings Lane end? - A. I believe that a tannoy message
was passed on for that, "Would any doctors within the
ground go to Leppings Lane".   That is the belief I have.

You of course would not be using the tannoy anyway? - A.
No, sir.

      MR. PHILLIPS:   Yes, thank you.

            Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:

Sergeant Goddard, at 2.15 Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray
returned to the Control Box? - A. Yes, sir.

At some stage the Assistant Chief Constable was there? -
A. Yes, sir.

Do you remember when he left? - A. I do not, no.  I
believe it was during the period the communications
m a n ...

From 2.14 onwards we have in the Control Box Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield and Chief Superintendent
Murray? - A. Yes.
f
V
 )

                                   91
                                                  M. GODDARD


     Q. From then on.   They were there until after three
        o'clock? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. Mr. Duckenfield was actually standing behind you? - A. He
        was behind me somewhere, yes.

     Q.   He would be in an even better position to see the
          monitors than you were? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q.   Because you would have to crane your neck up to have   a
          special look? - A. That is correct, sir.

     Q.   At 2.15 it was plain to anybody looking at the monitors,
          or looking out of the window to the ground itself, that
          the Liverpool portion of the ground was comparatively
          empty? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. At that time did you yourself draw any particular
        conclusion as to what might happen in the future from
        your observation? - A. No, sir.   From where we are in
        the Control Box you only get a certain view of the
        ground, but you do not see what is in the concourse.

     Q.    Yes, that is what I am going to come to.   You have a
          very good view of the ground.    Now let us suppose, which
          is unlikely because you would not have been in the
          Control Box, but let's just suppose that the match was a
          pre-season warm-up between Sheffield Wednesday Second and
          Accrington Stanley.    Would it be a fair conclusion, if
          you saw an empty ground at 2.15, that there were not
          going to be very many people turning up to watch the
          match? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. If you are dealing with a semi-final, all-ticket match,
        between Liverpool and Notts Forest, and very few people
        are in the ground at 2.15, what conclusion would you
        normally draw as to what is going to happen in the next
        three-quarters if an hour? - A. In that period of time we
        are going to have quite a few people coming through the
        turnstiles in a bit of a rush.

     Q. Since the majority of those who were not in the ground at
        2.15 were Liverpool supporters, would not it have been a
        perfectly reasonable forecast at 2.15 that at some stage
        in the next three-quarters of an hour therre was going to
        be a very great rush of people arriving at the turnstiles
        in Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. Therefore, it can have been of no surprise whatever to
        any Police Officer in the Control Room that at 2.30 there
        was a milling throng in the concourse outside Leppings
        Lane? - A. At 2.30, sir, in relation to a milling throng,
        you expect lots of crowds there but not the way they
        came.  It would appear that from 2.15 to 2.30 we got
                                       M. GODDARD


no-one in the ground and from 2.30 onwards everyone
arrived.   When you are talking about a period of fifteen
minutes, you are talking of getting a lot of people
through the turnstiles in fifteen minutes.

Sergeant Goddard, this is what I am putting to you.    It
may be that it was not your responsibility.   There were
very senior Officers there, but you are giving the
evidence and I have to ask you the questions.   It was
obvious, as plain as a pikestaff, that 24,000 people,
minus those few already in the ground at 2.15, would be
arriving at the ground sometime between 2.15 and three
o'clock? - A. That is correct, sir, but by the same token
I know it was said earlier that we had not made checks.
I had checked with PC Guest as to how many were in the
ground, how many Liverpool people were in the ground.
He said there were a few thousand in.

What we have been told, and it may be that your memory
does not go to this, but we have been told that at two
o'clock the club thought there were 8,000 fewer in the
ground than they would have expected and that the bulk of
those 8,000 were Liverpool supporters.   Do you remember
that figure ever being transmitted to you? - A. No, not
at all, sir.

Maybe it never was.      I am not suggesting it was.   We
just do not know.       However, whether the figures were
coming through from the club or not, those figures would
have reflected in numbers what your observations told
you, that there were an awful lot of people still to
arrive at the Leppings Lane end between 2.15 and three
o'clock? - A. Yes, sir.

Because there were more than would normally be expected,
at some time in that three-quarter of an hour period
there was bound to be a crush of people in Leppings Lane
and at the turnstiles at the end of the Lane? - A. I do
not know, sir.   We are talking about a three-quarters of
an hour period.   In that three-quarters of an hour
period I would hope,   I would expect, that those
turnstiles would accommodate them without a massive rush
or crush.   A big rush but not a crush.




        Q. Was it in fact
fl                             93

                                                      M. GODDARD


     Q. Was it in fact - I have got to be fair to you;  nobody wants
        to be unfair - was it in fact your responsibility as the
        Sergeant in the control box to be anticipating crowd movements
        in Leppings Lane from your observations, or was that somebody
        else’s responsibility? - A. It was mine, sir, as much as
        anyone else’s.

     Q. That is a very frank and honest answer, so I have got to
        pursue it. The Police Officers in Leppings Lane controlling
        the crowds would not have a clue as to how many people were in
        the ground and therefore how many were still to come? - A.
        That is correct.

     Q. Mr. Marshall, who was in charge outside, would need to have
        information in order to deploy his forces.  Is that right? -
        A. I think Mr. Marshall was aware that, obviously he had been
        policing that area for a while, and he must have been aware
        himself that there were not as many as he would probably have
        foreseen. How would he know outside in Leppings Lane that at
        2.15 very few Liverpool supporters were at the Leppings Lane
        end and in the North Stand if he was not told? - A. He would
        not, sir.

     Q. If he would not know it, it was something that it was vital to
        tell him.  Is that right? - A. Yes, I will accept that.

     Q. Had you ever been told either on this briefing or on any
        briefing at any other match that it was part of your duties to
        convey to Police Officers outside in Leppings Lane the state
        of the stands and terraces within the ground? - A. No, sir,
        but can I go back to radio procedure at this stage.  When we
        talk about radio we talk about going on to talk-through, and
        hopefully everyone hears what is going on. So the assumption
        is hopefully everyone can pick up what up what is going on
        within the ground.  So many times requests don't have to be
        made.  The man can judge for himself.

     Q. It may be.  It is a wholly different question as to whether
        Mr. Marshall should have requested the information, but
        there was no way he would have picked this information up,
        and are you tell us, having considered it, that it had never
        been part of your briefings at any match that it was one of
        your duties to keep the Officers outside the ground informed
        as to the state of the crowd inside the ground? - A. I can
        never recall any explicit direction on those lines, sir.

     Q. Do you understand the thrust of the questions I am putting to
        you, Sergeant, because otherwise it is unfair to you? You
        understand what I am saying, that it was obvious to those
        inside the ground at 2.15 that in the next three-quarters-of-
        an-hour at some stage, unknown when, there would be a sudden
        massive influx of supporters down Leppings Lane, and that that
        information needed to be given to the Officers organising
        crowd control in Leppings Lane.  Do you follow? - A. I follow,
        yes, sir.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I d o n ’t know that the word
?
                                 94


                                                         M. GODDARD


         "sudden” is fair, is it?     Intense, anyway.

              MR. HYTNER:   Intense, yes:

    Q.    It might have been   sudden.   It might havebeen     a gradual
         intensity.  Do you follow? - A. I follow,   yes, sir.

    Q.    Was there no comment made at any stage between 2.15 and 2.45
         that, "Well, somebody is going to be coming late. There is
         going to be a late onrush”? - A. No particular comment, sir,
         no, because at that stage it was believed that the turnstiles
         would adequate cope even though there were people coming late
         and they were all going to come together.

    Q. Again, had you ever been any briefing as to the rate at which
       people could go through the turnstiles? - A. I understand it
       is about one every 10 seconds.

    Q. Had you any idea as to how many - never mind one every 10
       seconds per turnstile - did you have any idea as to the
       overall numbers that could come through the Leppings Lane
       turnstiles every 15 minutes or so? - A. No, but it runs at
       thousands, a few thousands.

    Q. The next question is this.  It is obviously part of your
       duties to monitor the crowd - I suppose that is why you are
       there - to monitor the crowd to ensure that if trouble breaks
       out here or there or if hooligans start up some nonsense in a
       particular part, you can see that immediately and let people
       on the ground know where the trouble is so they can deploy
       their forces? - A. That is correct, sir.

    Q. And also not just that, you are there to monitor overcrowding?
       - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Were you aware that there was a greater need for you to
       monitor overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 than anywhere else in the
       ground? I am sorry, I should add to that, of course,
       theoretically, the two wing pens as well.   But it was more
       important for you to monitor the individual pens at Leppings
       Lane end than anywhere else in the ground? - A. It was a part
       to monitor them, but when you know that you have a 10,000
       capacity on that end, that the 10,000 are going to go in
       whether it is the centre pens or the end pens.

    Q.   This is what I am going to ask you. Were you aware that there
         was a special problem on the Leppings Lane terraces or not? -
         A. No, sir, I was not.

    Q. Were you aware there was an overall capacity for the Kop which
       unless there was a terrible error could not be exceeded
       because the computer would tell the club when the capacity
       had been reached? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

    Q.   You knew, because you have just said so, that you knew that
         the overall capacity of the Leppings Lane terraces could not
         be exceeded beyond 10,000 for the same reason? - A. Yes, sir.
3
                              95A

                                                   M. GODDARD



    Q. Did you know that the individual pen capacity could be
       exceeded if sharp eyes were not kept open for the problem? -
       A. No, I believe the capacity, if we talk about the central
       pens, would be such that at some stage you would probably be
       able to say, "That is full” , and put them to the wings.

    Q. Yes. So you knew that the control of the centre pens or the
       wing pens was visual? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. That crowd safety depended on Police Officers and/or stewards
       keeping an eye on the pens to ensure that so far as was
       possible the capacities were not exceeded? - A. That is
       correct, sir.




                                       /Q. Did you know
Did you know in fact what the capacity     of the centre
pens was? - A. I think it is two, one.

That is the total? - A. I believe so.

You are quite right.  It is a thousand in one and twelve
hundred in the other.  Sorry.  Two, two.  Did you at any
stage before you saw people climbing over the pens notice
any overcrowding in pens 3 and 4? - A. No, sir.

Apart from noticing that there was crowd trouble in that
people were climbing over did you ever say to yourself
pens 3 and 4 are beginning to look overcrowded.  They
have reached capacity? - A. No, sir.  3 and 4 were
getting full, were full.  From my vantage point they
were not overcrowded.

N o w , it may not be in any way your fault because you
may not have been given any sort of briefing or training
for this observation but I must ask you.     At 3 o'clock
WQuldvtyou have said that there was a thousand in one pen
and twelve hundred in the other? - A. Around those
figures, yes.

That is what you would have said? - A. I would, yes, sir.

Did no Officer in the control box, anybody, comment at
any stage that pens 3 and 4 looked full? - A. No, sir.
They did look full but not overfull.

Now, the next thing is this.   I am not sure at all that
your evidence suggests that it was difficult at any stage
to communicate by radio with Officers in Leppings Lane
but had there been any difficulty at all you had enough
spare people and in particular Chief Inspector McRobie
who could have run with a message down to the turnstiles
at Leppings Lane.   That would not have been a difficulty,
would it? - A. It- would not had it been on the inside of
the turnstiles, sir, no.   If the message was going to be
passed to the inside of the turnstiles that would be O.K.

Ten seconds? - A. Around that time, yes.     A bit more
probably.

And to get to the outside of the turnstiles, you may not
know this, it would have taken another two or three
seconds to get through Gate C or Gate A.  Do you follow?
- A. Through Gate C two or three seconds more.  Gate A
much more.

Much more? - A. Yes.

It does not matter.  No problem about sending messages
by runner if the radios were not operative.  Is that
                              96




   right? - A. Yes, I would agree with that but it is then a
   matter of passing a message on.

        MR. HYTNER:    Yes.        Thank you.

        MR. JACKSON:    I have no questions.

                Cross-examined by MR. MULLER:

Q. Sergeant, you were doing your monitoring of the terraces,
   do I understand, visually by looking and looking through
   the window and also looking at the videos? - A. Both, sir.

Q. Both? - A. Mainly through the window.        Looking through
   the window.

Q. Mainly through the window? - A. Yes.

Q. When you are observing the terrace have you found from
   experience there is a blind spot? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Where is the blind spot? - A. Down at the front.        With
   the - the fencing.

Q. The top of the fencing goes back, does not it, at an
   angle? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. And the result of that is - correct me if I am wrong -
   that you cannot actually see anybody from your box who
   is certainly in the front row and probably in the second
   row of the terrace? - A. In pen 1 you can but it goes at
   an angle. If you get to pen 7 you cannot - you know,
   probably, 4, 5, 6, 7 steps up.  You cannot see.

Q. So certainly if we are talking about pens 3 and pen 4
   which I think we are principally concerned with as
   far as they are concerned your view of the front of
   the pen is certainly obstructed, would you agree, first
   two rows, something like that? - A. At least, yes, sir.
   Yes.

Q. Did you regard that as satisfactory? - A. Not particularly.
   It was something that I must admit I had never even con­
   sidered before because you could - you could see people.
   Even though your view is obstructed basically you see
   figures although you cannot see - you would not be able
   to pick them out individually.  You could see figures.

Q. Would you agree the position is basically this, that if
   you want to have a view of people who are at the front
   of 3 and 4 you have got to ask the colour television,
   the one in the middle, to zoom in on the front of the
   terraces? - A. You would have to do that, yes, sir.

Q. You would have to make a specific request to do that
                          97




   presumably if you want to look at that? - A. Yes, sir, yes.

Q. Your view of the terraces generally would not alarm you
   because you would not be able to see the first two? - A.
   No, sir.

Q. I see.  Was it your understanding that you were principally,
   those of you in the control box, principally responsible
   for controlling the crowds and the quantity of people going
   into those two pens? - A. No, sir, no.

Q. Well, who did you think had the principal responsibility?
   -A. It is an overall responsibility of control as is the
   whole of the ground and no doubt the overall control was
   filling of any pens or any pen would be down to control
   but then we come down to individual  Officers deputed on
   those  serials.

Q. Where? - A. Whether it be on track - well, basically track -
   who would get a better view of things than we could see
   ourselves.

Q. Yes.  One other thing I would like to ask you about.
   You say - I do not hold you to exact time but I want
   to explore it with you - at 3.10 there was a request
   for bolt croppers.  I think you subsequently say you
   discovered was Sergeant Wright? - A. That is correct,
   sir, yes.

Q. Assuming that time to be right and assuming the sequence
   of events which you have told us about, namely, an
   immediate telephone call to Claywheels Lane which was
   immediately responded to. Right? ~ A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. And was immediately followed by a signal by you to Mr.
   Bichard who then made the telephone call to the Head­
   quarters, Snig Hill? - A. Made the radio call, yes.

Q. How long would it be before he made that radio call?
   - A. Seconds.

Q. Seconds? - A. Yes.

Q. So if we assume it was 3.10 when there is the call for
   the bolt croppers what time would you suggest the Fire
   Brigade was being summoned? -A. By 3.11, 3.12.

Q. 3.11, 3.12.  Well, we do happen to know - at least there
   is evidence or will be evidence, I think - to the effect
   that the Fire Brigade were actually called a few seconds
   before 14-minutes-past-3. Bearing that in mind and if
   that is right would that tend to indicate to you that
   the call for bolt croppers came rather later than you
   suggest? - A. That could be correct, sir, yes.
And just one other matter in relation to that in relation
to a witness who we have not actually heard from, a Police
Constable Savioury whose statement we have been provided
with, what he says is, and these times may not be entirely
accurate, he says that at six-minutes-past-three bolt
croppers were requested and the request was acknowledged.
It goes on to say ambulance requested and acknowledged.
He was a man who was down, one of the Officers, who was
down on the ground and he then goes on to say four
minutes later at 15.10 further request for bolt croppers,
none forthcoming and fence torn down by hand by Police
and spectators.  Presumably the only way he would be
able to communicate with you would be by radio? -A.
That is correct,sir.

And you were on the radio? - A. I was, sir.

If he is right there were two requests for bolt croppers?
- A. No, I only recall one request for bolt croppers being
made and it was acted upon immediately.

If he is right in saying there was a request at one time
if he says 15.06 and that was acknowledged you would have
been the one who acknowledged it? - A. I would have been
the one who would have acknowledged him, yes.

So the situation could be, could it, that he makes a call
at 15.06 or whatever time for bolt croppers - you
certainly did get a request for bolt croppers? - A. We
certainly did get a request for bolt croppers, yes.

You think it was from somebody else though? - A. Yes.
I thought it was from Sergeant Wright.

Yes.    Whatever. That is acknowledged? - A. Yes.

Right. You do not recall any subsequent request? - A.
No, sir.

       MR. MULLER:   Yes.   Thank you.

     MR. JACKSON:   Sir, there is one short matter.
It is page 6 of the statement, sir.

              Cross-examined by     MR. JACKSON:

Sergeant, may I just ask you      about the events after
the two openings of Gate C?       We understand and My Lord
asked you about your request      as expressed, open the
gates, referred to Gate C? -      A. Yes, sir.

Have you heard by now that it was the Chief Superintendent's
intention to make the observation apply to all three gates?
- A. No, sir, not at all.
                          99




Q. At 2.52 or thereabouts Sergeant Higgins came through and
   said words to the effect the gates at A have got to be
   opened as if not somebody will be killed? - A. That is
   correct, yes, sir.

Q. When that message came through was there an explosion,
   as it were, from the Chief Superintendent to the effect
   I have already ordered those to be opened? - A. Not as
   far as I am aware, sir, no.

Q. In fact quite the reverse.  You in fact took a decision,
   did you not? - A. When he said someone will get killed
   I took the decision open the gates, yes, open Gate A,
   to Sergeant Higgins, yes.

Q. It arises out of My Lord's question to you earlier.
   I do not want to be rude.  Who on earth was making
   the decisions in that control box? - A. Mr. Murray
   was in charge.

Q. But in fact you made the decision, a quite proper one -
   it is not a criticism - but you made it off your own bat
   to open Gate A? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And you were never in receipt of any question about why
   had it not been opened in response to the Chief
   Superintendent's request minutes before? - A. That is
   correct sir.  I opened that gate - I ordered that gate
   to be opened bearing in mind what Mr. Duckenfield had
   said in relation to earlier on, if people were going
   to get killed open the gates.  The same thing applied
   so I ....

Q. Sergeant, forgive me.  Do not misunderstand me.  I am
   not criticising at all your decision to open  the gate.
   I am merely confirming it was Sergeant Goddard of his
   own initiative who opened Gate A? - A. I gave instruction
   for that, yes, sir.

       MR. MULLER:    Thank you.

               Cross-examined by MR. MAXW EL L :

Q. Sergeant, when you passed the message on, open the gates,
   did you think you were then addressing a Superior Officer
   in passing that particular message on? - A. I thought I
   was speaking to Mr. Marshall, yes,,sir.

Q. Did you then say open the gates, sir? -A. No, sir, I did
   not.

Q. You did not add sir at the end? - A. I did not, no, no.

Q. It could lead to confusion, could not it, between the
   singular and the plural? - A. It could, sir, but if I
   can add that in relation to football when a Senior
   Officer comes through there are two ways we normally
do it.  One is to address them by their Divisonal radio
number ....

That is very .... - A. Which would be Foxtrot x^hatever.

Forgive me.  I thought I might have solved part of the
riddle but I fear I have not.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Did not it strike you as
being rather strange that Chief Superintendent there
able to see what the situation is should require you
to tell him that he could open the gates? - A. No, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Does not.   Yes, I see.

          Cross-examined by    MR. GIBSON-WATT:

Sergeant, going back a bit, we know that you were in
the control room for the semi-finals in 87, 88 and
89? -A. That is correct, sir.

And we know that Superintendent Murray was your control
room Officer in 88 and 89? - A. That is correct, sir.

Who was the control room Officer in 87, please? -A. Mr.
Freeman, Superintendent Freeman.

Superintendent Freeman.  And is this right - we have
heard some evidence about it - that Superintendent
Freeman liked to fill the pens, the Leppings Lane pens,
one by one and then close them off when they were full?
- A. Is this for a semi-final, sir?

Yes.  For the semi-final in 87. - A. No,    that is not
the case, sir.

Your recollection is that that was not done in 87?
- A. My recollection is that certainly was not done
in 87, no.

I see. - A. It was people finding their own level.

Your recollection then is that people found their own
level in both 87 and 88? - A. That is correct, sir.




                              / Q. There has been
frv                               101


                                             M. GODDARD


      Q. There has been some evidence that both in 1987 and 1988
         the gates, or let me put it this way, the back of the Leppings
         Lane tunnel, the tunnel leading to the central terraces
         was closed off when it was thought that the central pens
         were full. Are you aware of that? - A. No sir, I was not
         aware.  It was probably off an Officer's own volition
         that that was the case rather than from Control.

      Q.   You say "an Officer's own volition".  How is an Officer
           of his own volition to find out that the pens are full.
           Where would he have to be? - A. Two places. One is on
           the track and one is at the West Stand.

      Q.   And in either position, either on the track or on the
           West Stand it is quicker for him to radio through to
           Control than to send a runner, isn't it? - A. Very much
           so, yes sir.

      Q. Are you quite certain that no message was passed to Control
         about this from Officers on the track or in the West Stand
         in 1987 or 1988? - A. I certainly don't remember that at
         all sir, no.

      Q. A different topic, Sergeant. You have told us how you
         replied to Constable Buxton's suggestion that the kick-off
         should be postponed when he made the suggestion on the
         radio at a very late stage? - A. That is correct, sir.

      Q. Do you remember a conversation a bit earlier about half-past-2
         between Superintendent Murray and Chief Superintendent
         Duckenfield in the Control Room about the agreement or the
         basis that they had agreed as to the circumstances in which
         the kick-off should be delayed? - A. No sir, I was totally
         unaware of that.

      Q. I tell you why I put it to     you and I will put it more
         broadly. You have told us      you replied very quickly to
         Mr. Buxton saying:  "It is     no good, it is too late" or
         words to that effect.  You     have told us that? - A. Yes sir.

      Q. And it has been suggested to you that you should have
          passed the message on to Mr. Duckenfield instead of
         answering off your own bat. You remember that suggestion
         being made? - A. I do sir.

      Q. What I wanted to ask you was this: were you under the
         impression by the time that Mr. Buxton's message came
         through, that in some way Mr. Duckenfield had already
         decided not to postpone the kick-off in his own mind? - A.
         That was my impression.

      Q. I was wondering whether, and this is why I have put the
         previous conversation to you, I was wondering whether
         that impression came from something that had been said
         between your two Senior Officers in the Control Box? -
         A. No, not at all sir. Basically my impression is that
"V




/                                102

                                          M. GODDARD


       at 2.50 whatever it is, if he is going to delay the game
       he would have been out of the Box and down the tunnel to
       the Directors' place and seen the F.A. people.

     Q. That seems entirely logical. Were you aware of a policy
        about delaying kick-offs to this effect, that if there
        was a particular reason such as a motorway blockage or
        fog for people to be late    it would be delayed, but
        if they just turned up late it wouldn't? - A. Yes, I am
        aware of that, yes.

     Q. Now where are you aware of that from please? - A. Generally.
        It was not from hearing anything in the box.  It was just
        something I have known for some while but if there are
        specific reasons, for example fog, road accidents on motor­
        ways yes, you will delay it. When the spectator is
        unavoidably detained you would then delay it, yes.

        But if he is just late you don't? - A. That is correct
        sir.
     Q. You are aware of that as a general policy, you say? - A.
        Yes sir.

     Q. Again a different matter.  Do you recall after the match
        had been stopped that Mr. Kelly, who is the Chief Executive
        of the Football Association, came into the Police Control
        Box with another man? - A. I know someone came in.   Two
        people came in. I don't know Mr. Kelly or the other chap
        obviously.  I know two people came in.

     Q. And they had a conversation with Mr. Duckenfield? - A. Well
        I would assume so sir, yes.

     Q. Well you were there? -   A. I was there, yes.

     Q. Were they asking what had happened? - A. I don't know.
        At this particular time obviously we were very very busy
        so though I am aware that people are coming in and going
        from the box I am not aware of who they are talking to
        unless it is me personally or what they are saying.

     Q. If you are saying that you don't remember anything that
        was said between the two men and the Police Commander
        then I won't ask you further.  Is that the situation?
        - A. That is correct.

              MR. GIBSON-WATT:   Very well.   Thank you.


                      Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS:

     Q. Sergeant Goddard, do you remember in 1986 attending a meeting
        at the Hillsborough Ground with some Ambulance Officers,
        Mr. Wilkinson, Mr. Higgins and Mr. Keyworth? - A. I believe
        so, yes sir.
                                    M. GODDARD


Q. That was as a result of a request from the Ambulance Service
   to meet at the ground following the Bradford Disaster to
   sort out between you the emergency plans? - A. That is right
   sir.
Q. And it was agreed among you that the emergency area rend­
   ezvous for the ambulances would be the gymnasium? - A. Yes
   sir.
Q. That would be the casualty clearing centre, a mortuary if
   such were needed and isn't it right, Mr. Goddard, you knew
   that the Ambulance Service were preparing their own plan
   for Hillsborough Football Ground itself and subsequently
   a copy of that was given to you by M r . Keyworth or
   Mr. Wilkinson? - A. I did not know, sir, and I certainly
   am not aware of any copy being given to me personally.

Q. Very well.  If you did not receive a copy of the plan
   there was no doubt in your mind as to where the Ambulance
   Service would be located in the event of a major incident?
   - A. The logical place would be there sir, yes.

Q.Not only the logical place but the place that had been agreed
   at the meeting at which you attended? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And it did not change from that, did it? - A. Not as far
   as I am aware.
Q. And subsequently, and I ask you this because you have   had
   such a long experience with this particular ground in   the
   Police Control Box, it was always known that that was   the
   station for the Ambulance Service at Cup semi-finals?   -
   A. I believe that is correct, yes sir.

Q. It would apply, to make it absolutely accurate, not to
   1987 but to 1988 and 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you hear any request at all for an Ambulance Officer
   to attend the Police Control Box? - A. I don't know about
   a request.  I know a Fire Officer was there asking for
   an Ambulanceman with Senior Ambulance personnel.

Q. Whom did the Fire Officer ask? - A. I don't know sir.
   I honestly don't know. My assumption is that it would
   be Mr. Murray.
Q. Did you hear anybody say:  "Well they are over by the
   gymnasium because that is the agreed point where the
   Ambulance Officers will be"? - A. No sir, but bearing
   in mind sir I don't know if things have changed, I know
   I said "No" but the Ambulance Officers also have a place
   in the South Stand.

Q. Did anybody say that to the Fire Officer? - A. I don't
   believe so, no.
                             104

                                          M. GODDARD


Q.    You have said in answer to my Lord's question earlier that
     the hand-held set, the spare set that you were using you
     could not receive messages on the hand-set.   Is that
     absolutely right, Mr. Goddard, or did I take my note down
     wrongly? - A. That is correct, the substitute set with
     the telephone mike?

Q. Yes? - A. Yes, we received nothing from that at all.

Q.    Can't you hear any messages on that? - A. Yes, you can hear
     messages if it is working, but as I explained (a) I had
     probably been trying to transmit before it had got warmed
     up.

Q. It takes three minutes to get wanned up, as I understand
   it? - A. Hopefully 30 seconds sir.

Q. Well after 30 seconds could you hear things through it?
   - A. I don't know. Within that time I had thrown it down
   and used the hand-held radio, but it is 30 seconds and
   in that period of time it is an eternity.

Q. I want to understand your evidence, Mr. Goddard, so I don't
   ask questions of you unnecessarily. Are you then saying
   that because you could not use it you did not use it at
   all that afternoon? - A. That is correct, sir, I did not
   use it at all.  It was tried, found not to be working or
   I believed it was not working so I never used it that
   afternoon, that is correct.

Q. So the only radio contact was the hand-held radio? - A. That
   is correct sir.

Q. Apart of course from the contact with Snig Hill which was
   the VHF radio which you did not operate, as I understand
   it? - A. That is correct sir.

           MR. KALLIPETIS:   Thank you.




                    /Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW
                           105

                                                 M. GODDARD


                  Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Q. Sergeant Goddard, are you the Officer in the control box
   through whom anybody makes contact with the outside world? -
   A. Myself and P.C. Ryan, yes.

Q. Is there a segregation between you? Does Sergeant Ryan
   ordinarily hold one piece of equipment and you another, or do
   you share the telephones and the radios between you? - A. We
   try and keep it separate, but that does not work.  It is
   interchangeable.

Q. You have told us that you checked the figures for spectators
   with P.C. Guest.  When you say that do you mean you spoke to
   him specifically or just to the club control room? - A. To Mr.
   Guest.

Q. To Mr. Guest personally? - A. Yes.

Q. And can you remember how many times approximately you did
   that? - A. I can't, but it would be certainly three or four
   times.

Q. As the figures built up? - A. As the figures built up.

Q. Did you ever have any difficulty contacting him? - A. Mr.
   Guest, no, sir.

Q. Can you now remember, and d o n ’t guess, please, because it may
   not matter, but can you remember whether you did that by the
   radio or by the telephone? - A. By telephone, sir.

Q. Did anybody ever tell you they were having difficult in
   getting through to the club either on the radio or through the
   telephone? -A. No, sir.

Q. If you were the man principally responsible for and handling
   the communications would you think it surprising if one of the
   other people in that room was unable to make contact with the
   club that they should not have told you that they were having
   a difficulty? - A. I would have thought so, but it would all
   depend on how they were trying to make contact.

Q. Precisely.  Let me put the alternatives to you.   if somebody
   had said to you, ’’Sergeant, I can’t get through on the club’s
   radio to the club control room, what would you have said? - A.
   "Well, ring them".

Q. "Well, ring them”? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember - I am sure you won’t be able to remember the
   actual figures - can you remember roughly when it was you
   last spoke to P.C. Guest to get the figures for ground
   attendance? - A. It would certainly be well after 2
   o ’clock, but what time I would not guess at all.

Q. <Jan I see if we can get there in another way.   Even on the
                             106

                                                 M. GODDARB


     last occasion when you spoke to him were you personally
     alarmed by the figures that he gave you? - A. No, sir.

Q. And is the best you can do to say that the figures he gave you
   sounded approximately what you would have expected? - A. I saw
   nothing untoward in them at all, sir, no.

Q. Did you keep the information to yourself or did you pass it
   on? - A. it was passed round.  I said, "There's so many in
   now” .

Q. Finally on this point. Can you remember whether this was just
   you being methodical and acting as you normally do in checking
   on the figures, or did somebody say, "Sergeant Goddard, find
   out how many we have got in the ground”? - A. It was a bit of
   both, sir, because different people, and certainly Mr.
   Duckenfield had said to me, "Would you find out what is in
   here” , and you do it for yourself anyway.

Q.    Is the answer that on some of the occasions you spoke it may
     be of your own initiative and as a matter of routine, but on
     others it may have been in response to an Officer's request? -
     A. That is correct, sir.

Q. You told us that Mr. Murray was the Officer who was actually
   taking the decisions in the control box? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you mean that? - A. Yes.

Q.   You have also told us of one particular decision which was
     taken by his superior Officer, Mr. Duckenfield? - A. Yes.

Q. Do we understand from that that only one of the decisions that
   was taken that afternoon was actually taken by Mr.
   Duckenfield, and the others were taken by Mr. Murray? - A. I
   would say yes, that as far as I was aware my ground Commander
   was Mr. Murray.

Q. And the one decision which Mr. Duckenfield did take took so
   long for him to announce that a number of people were
   either asking him what that decision was or as in your case
   physically turning round in order to see what his response
   was going to be? - A. I am not saying it took him a long
   time to make the decision.  No, he was asked a question and
   he responded to it.

Q. Well, the first question he was asked was asked before gate C
   opened for the first time, was not it? - A. Yes.

Q. And we know that gate was opened at 14.48 to be precise, and
   it seems we are all in agreement that the request was made at
   some time at or about 14.47.  Does that accord with your
   recollection? -A. Yes.

Q. The gate then opened, but those of you who saw it open from
   the control box believed that it had at that stage burst open?
   - A. That is correct.
                             107

                                                 M. GODDARD



Q. So you did not understand that it had been opened in response
   to an order from Mr. Duckenfield? - A. No, sir.

Q. The gate opened for a second time as we can see on the video
   at 14.52? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And on that occasion you understood that   it was in response to
   the order which Mr. Duckenfield had just   given? - A. That is
   correct.

Q.   And you mean that? - A. Yes.

Q.   I don't want to lead you unfairly. He had just given the
     order? - A. As I believe it that is correct, yes, sir. As I
     saw i t , yes.

Q. You personally passed that order on and within a few moments
   of you giving the order, "Open the gates", you saw gate C
   open? - A. Gate C opened, yes, sir.

Q. So we have the delay between 14.47 about and 14.52 before the
   positive order was given in response to a request which had
   originally been made by a Superintendent in difficulties at
   14.47? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Again, do you mean to say, and do n ’t answer if you think it is
   unfair, that you were not at the time surprised by the delay
   between 14.47 and 14.52 for the man in command of that ground
   to respond to an urgent request from a Superintendent in
   difficulties? - A. But bear in mind the gate had already been
   opened or was opened shortly after that at 14.48, albeit a
   short period of time.

Q. But Sergeant, I think you have already told us that you
   believed....

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am not sure, Mr. Glasgow, this
     is really going to be helpful to ask this Officer about that.

Q.        MR. GLASGOW:   The next matter, Sergeant Goddard, I would
     like your help with, is the vision that you have of the ground
     from your elevated position.  Would you like to look at the
     bundle which is West Midlands 2, the fat one, photograph 51.
     Is the blind spot you were referring to the front row or rows
     that are tucked under the cranked back section? - A, Yes, sir.

Q. As you are sitting in your seat looking along that line? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. And if you need to know what is going on particularly in that
   section of the ground you have two choices.  Either to ask
   Sergeant Bichard to direct the television camera to that
   section? That would be one? - A. That is one, yes.

Q. Or alternatively, for somebody to step outside on to the
   platform and physically look straight down? - A. That is
                           108

                                                  M. GODDARD


   another alternative, yes.

Q. Did anybody go outside to look directly into the pen? - A. No,
   sir.

Q. With the photograph still in front of you do you remember the
   time at which Chief Inspector McRobie said that he would go
   down and sort things out? - A. No, I d o n ’t remember the time.
   I know the occurrence.

Q. You remember the event? - A. I remember the event, but what
   time it was I can’t say.

Q. I think in your statement I think that he volunteered, saying,
   ’’I ’ll go and sort it out”? - A. Yes.

Q. Was it that way round, or did somebody order him or ask him to
   go down? - A. I think it might have been a bit of both.  I
   know he said, "I’ll go and sort it out".  It could well have
   been Mr. Murray or Mr. Duckenfield had said something to him.

Q. When he said that and left the control room, did you see him
   physically standing in the photograph where we would see him?
   On the video it would appear he was standing almost directly
   in line with where the tulip microphone is on the photograph?
   - A. I saw him down on the ground for just a matter of
   seconds, but by then we got so many people coming on to the
   ground you were just lost, because basically you are looking
   at uniforms and the people coming across, and as I understand
   it Mr. McRobie was not inuniform.

Q. Well, you know that he was    not? - A. I know that he was not.

Q. Did you see him standing by that corner of the ground    and then
   did you notice him go behind the goalposts? -   A. No,   I
   initially saw him by gate 1, that area, which   is the   nearest
   gate to the control box. After that I lost him and I     don't
   know where he went.

Q. The last matter if you can help us on timing, Sergeant, can
   you remember how long it was before he came back to the
   control room after going down to try and sort   it out? - A. I
   don't remember him coming back, sir.

Q. Thank you very much.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Have you much to ask?

        MR. WOODWARD:   I will be some little time, sir.    I can't
   finish by quarter-past-3.   I am prepared to start, sir.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Not much point in doing that. We
   will break off then.  How many more Police witnesses have you,
   Mr. Collins?

        MR. COLLINS:  Sir, Police Constable Bichard, who is not
   going to take that long because most of what he deals with is
                                             M. GODDARD


already covered.   There is Police Constable Guest, who will
be, I think, relatively short, and then two very short
Officers.  We might in the light of the evidence that has been
given have to call Chief Inspector McRobie, but we can't
anyway call him on Monday because he is not available.   We
will have to consider that.  That is the end of the Police.  I
would have hoped about an hour-and-a-half, possible 2 hours at
the outside.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    What are we then going on to?

     MR. COLLINS:     We are then going to have theSt.
Ambulance and the   Fire Brigade.  That is limited, as far as
the Fire Brigade is concerned, to those who arrived and what
happened on that afternoon, not the Fire Brigade in relation
to their input into the Safety Certificate side.    That I
anticipate and hope will complete Monday.   We will then on the
Tuesday deal with the club, but again stewarding, etc., purely
on the day. We are not going to deal with the history of the
club and the state of the premises.   Then I hope we will be
able to start with Mr. Eastwood on Wednesday.    That at the
moment is the way I see it, and we are I think just about on
target for that.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you very much. We will
break off now andsit at 10.30 on Monday.


        (The Inquiry was adjourned until 10.30 a.m
                on Monday. 12th June. 1989)
