                                                                                                                                  2 Park Lane
    H am m ond S ud da rds                                                                                                        Leeds
                    SOLICITORS                                                                                                    LS31ES
                                                                                                                                  Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                                                  DX No. 26441
                                                                                                                                  Fax (0113)284 7001

      ? e S ? ? Hon°urable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
      I he Hillsborough Scrutiny
      Room 1106
      50 Queen Anne’s Gate
      London
      SW1H 9AT


      Our Ref:
                                                                     Your Ref:
                                                                                                                                 Date:
      PCM.SB.MMI. 1-103
                                                                                                                                 11 November 1997

     Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




    Nbvamber 1997° ^                                         ” °***r '" 7                                          *         -      - t o reach me unti. 7



    ^ “ t;xr4TeSdte%srirf"’0?butthefactuai
           “                documents Z this d .^ o ”
                                                                                                                                                       ^ fr°*

   1. 1.



                 c o m m e m ^ d im p ^ o n ^                       0' 6 “ *                   ° ffiCerS                                     **«<            i-dude

  1.2 .
                t o sself
                      e 7 taken
                           S i l ! a^statements
                                         hen thC for those
                                                      ? * dlands  P° Hce asked for    to mefrom particular officers
                the                                          officers were  forwarded         TL   h       VTVu
                                      “ J r * conments by ft* to Chief Superintendent Denton. I did not am ^d anj
                   ~                    , ere my Mmmems suggested changes, these were principally removal of

                c o n ti^ ic ti^ s o ra m ^ iid e s, t o ' c M s i d e T o f   about evantsaftCTthe^ffi^^
                had gone off duty and, on occasions, to reconsider intemperate law                      ”
 1.3.
               b i eth tt w e tSn r ? o i& r def “ bC USedfor *he purp0se 0f Lord Jus,i“                                                                * enquiry
               ThereTs T t a t e rdated
                                  d £ d 77 £May
                                             j , T 1989  T ' ZMervyn*°,Jones
                                                    9! £ from            f0n" toCriminal         ** s,atCT1CTt*
                                                                                         ,US,ice which
                                                                                  Peter Wright         refers to
Office* alio at:
             at<



7 Devonshire Square
                                    Trinity Court                Pennine House
London                                                                                      Suile 688 Lloyd's
                                    16 John Dalton Street        39-45 Well Street                                                 Avenue Louise 250
EC2M 4YH                                                                                    One Lime Street
                                    M anchester                  Bradford                                                          1050 Brussels
Telephone (0171) 6$$ 1000           M 608HS                                                 London
Fax (0171)6$$ 1001                                               BDI 5NU                    EC3M 7HA
                                    Telephone (0161) 830 $000    Telephone (01274) 734700                                          Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
                                    Fax (0161)830 $001                                      Telephone (0171) 327 3388/3399
                                                                 Fax (01274)307239                                                 Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
                                                                                            Fax (0171)621 1217
A lin o f P g m iat o n b« viewed >1 (he .b m v id d n a .
                                                                                          2
                                                                        11 November 1997
                                             The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                 The Hillsborough Scrutiny


officers providing ‘recollections in writing’ and ‘written submissions’. I would have
expected this letter to refer explicitly to CJA statements if that was the intention.

With the passage of time it is difficult to say precisely why this approach was adopted. Re­
reading the file I think that it followed on from the procedure adopted 'with the senior
officers and in particular the officers who had borne the brunt of the press criticism following
the disaster. At an early stage these officers were asked by the West Midlands Police to
provide self taken statements. I attach a copy of my attendance note of discussions on 29/30
April 1989 at which the provision of these statements was discussed between myself and
Peter Hayes, the then Deputy Chief Constable. This states - at the top of page 2:-

          “It was agreed, however, that it would be sensible fo r me to see these
         statements before they went to the West Midlands Enquiry and to have
         some time to go through them with the men involved".

Again I cannot really say whether this was my idea or Peter Hayes’ idea but it does seem,
now as then, entirely appropriate. Although there was no suggestion of criminal proceedings
at that time, these men had been the subject of severe criticism and might well expect to be
further criticised at the enquiry. I attach a copy of my attendance note dated 2 May which
details the meeting with the senior officers on that day. The note indicates that changes were
suggested but the comment in relation to A C C Jackson does tend to indicate that these
changes were not major.

When the letter of 7 May, referred to in 1.3. above, was received by the South Yorkshire
Police, Chief Superintendent Denton spoke to me on 9 May and a copy of my attendance
note of that conversation is enclosed. You will note the final paragraph which effectively
records the decision to scrutinise these statements without stating whether this was my idea
or Chief Superintendent Denton’s. It does however record that the intention was to remove
"comment or matters o f speculation

As indicated at item 1.1. above I am not aware that anyone specifically asked for officers’
comments and impressions. The only record of the request will be in Chief Inspector
Bettison’s note of the meeting of 17 April which I have not seen. There is no doubt that the
self taken statements did include comment and impression.

Without wishing in any way to be flippant about such an awful tragedy I am afraid that the
reference to "usual procedure" would not have found an echo in the meetings which we had
at that time. Ninety five people had died. Officers who had given a lifetime of public service
suddenly found themselves objects of public vilification and accused of negligence leading to
mass slaughter. I do not think that anybody really knew what would be usual procedure in
those circumstances. I would say however that by then the enquiry into the events - whether
it was eventually to turn into a criminal enquiry or not - was firmly in the hands of the West
Midlands Police who had the authority to impose whatever procedure they thought
appropriate.
                                                                                                    3
                                                                                  11
                                                       The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                           The Hillsborough Scrutiny


                        a<Jd‘tl0nal personal comment, it seems to me that the West Midlands Police
        IiT t . P™C                 because of the constraint imposed by the political requirement that
        the raylor Enquiry should produce an interim report before the commencement of the next
        football season. To conduct the enquiry on the basis of West Midlands officers taking CJA
        statements from individual South Yorkshire Police officers would probably have rendered
        that goal impossible to achieve.

5.      I do not know precisely what procedure was adopted after I had provided faxed comment on
       statements presented to me. I am not in a position to say whether any officer refused to sign
       an amended statement and indeed I am not aware as to whether officers were presented with
       amended statements as opposed to reviewing their own statements in the light of the
       comments I had made. It may be that the former was the practice adopted because of the
       time pressure. Whether or not that was the case I cannot recall any instance when the matter
       was referred back to me and I must assume either that the officers signed amended
       statements, or that if they did not, the statements went to West Midlands in their original
       form.

I hope this is helpful. Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.

Yours sincerely



P C METCALF




                                                                                    mmi.001-0103.lell.1011.pcm.doc
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:     29th/30th April, 1989


RE:       HILLSBOROUGH




(1)     Attending Terry Wain on telephone 29/4.

        He read to me the contents of a letter received
        from the West Midlands Force, asking for Senior
        Officers to prepare what would effectively be
        self-taken statements to present to the West
        Midlands inquiry.  This had given rise to some
        concern.  He and Belinda had drafted a form of
        holding response to be sent by-.the Deputy, but
        the latter had amended this to tone it down
        somewhat.  I approved it in its amended form,
        which effectively said that the Police would be
        doing everything they could to co-operate but
        asked what was the specific purpose of these
        statements and whether they would be the only
        statements likely to be required.

        He told me that the Deputy would be seeing the
        Officers concerned on Sunday and would like to
        speak to me afterwards.  I said that I would be
        available.


(2)   I spoke to Peter Hayes at Sunday lunchtime.   The
      Officers had now all seen the videos and were
      fairly relaxed about giving factual statements.
      They were not particularly concerned that these
      would be self-taken rather than CJA.  I raised
      with him the points which had concerned me,
      namely, that the inquiry was supposed to be
      fulfilling some statutory functions in terms of
      disciplinary proceedings and in terms of
      supporting H.M. Coroner.  I said that it might
      not be fair on the Officers if these self-taken
      statements were to be used for those purposes,
      as opposed to the purposes of the inquiry.  He
      discussed this with the Chief Constable, who was
      ?lso present and said that the Chief Constable
      was satisfied that the West Midlands inquiry had
      a duty to report only to the Judge.  Moreover,
      it seemed that there was no practical difficulty
      because there was not going to be anything in the
      self-taken statements which would not have been
      in CJA statements if taken.


                                             /... contd.
                            - 2 -



      It was agreed, however, that it would be sensible
      for me to see these statements before they went
      out to the West Midlands inquiry and to have some
      time to go through them with the men involved.
      I said that I would make myself available on the
      Bank holiday, if need be, but otherwise could be
      in Sheffield on Tuesday.  He said that he would
      be considering the position and would contact me
      again later in the day.


(3)   Later on, he telephoned back and said that the
      sensible course would be for me to come down to
      Sheffield on Tuesday to discuss progress with
      Stuart Anderson and then to see the Officers in
      the afternoon.

      I said that it might also be helpful at that
      stage to have a meeting with Terry Wain to
      discuss format and presentation of the report
      with reference to indexing and perhaps cutting
      down the appendix.

      I also asked   if I could take away   with me   a copy
      of the video   or videos which were   relevant to the
      case and indeed any relevant still    photographs.
      He said that   he would arrange for   this.

      He said that   he would be going away for a  few
      days break, but could be contacted if need be.




                      P. C. Metcalf




                 v.
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:     2nd May, 1989


RE:       HILLSBOROUGH




Attending at Sheffield Police Headquarters.

(1)     I had a meeting with the Chief Constable at which
        he asked how things were going and I reviewed
        progress.

        He raised the point that Mr. Hayes appeared to
        have left instructions for the self-taken
        statements to deal only with the events of the
        match:  he felt that they should go rather wider
        and deal with the planning and history.   I said
        that this depended very much on what had actually
        been asked for, but if the request for statements
        was general, then the statements themselves should
        be'general.

        He indicated that he would make himself available
        for consultations or meetings at any time in
        connection with this matter.


(2)     I then spoke with Stuart Anderson and we discussed
        what needed doing in the afternoon.   Essentially,
        this was to go through the self-taken statements
        which had been prepared and I asked then to have a
        discussion with Terry Wain about the format of the
        report.   At this stage, I was able to have   alook
        at the letter which had been received from    theWest
        Midlands Force and I noted that it was somewhat
        ambiguous.   The request was.for a recollection of
        events prior to, during and after the match.   My
        reading of this would have limited it to the day
        in question but, on the whole, I felt it
        preferable to deal with the case as fully as
        possible.


(3) . During the course of the afternoon, I went through
      statements with A.C.C. Jackson (Operations),
      Superintendent Roger Greenwood (Ground Commander),
      Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield (Overall
      Commander), Superintendent Roger Marshall
      (Liverpool Sector Commander), Superintendent
      Bernard Murray (Operations, Second in Command),


                                             /... contd.
                         - 2 -



      Superintendent David Chapman (Nottingham Forest
      Sector Commander) and Chief Inspector Bob Creaser
      who was effectively a Sector Commander under
      Superintendent Marshall.

      I made various suggestions for alterations to
      their statements, the principal change being that
      in respect of A.C.C. Jackson, who had not included
      any of the details of the planning of the match.
      It was agreed that he would be dealing with this
      overnight and that I would attend at Sheffield
      again on Wednesday to go through this.


(4)   I looked through the statement of Inspector Hans
      Davis, in charge of mounted Officers.  Although
      there were one or two minor changes which I would
      have suggested, he was away on leave and it was
      felt appropriate that his statement should be
      handed over.


(5)   I then had further discussions with Terry Wain
      and with Stuart Anderson.   The team have assembled
      two sets of photographs dealing, respectively,
      with the situation on both sides of the Leppings
      Lane turnstiles and inside the Leppings Lane
      terracing.   The latter photographs were
      particularly instructive because, in a time
      sequence, they appeared to show various people
      standing at or around the mouth of the tunnel
      during the whole period from 2.45 p.m. to 3.05 p.m.,
      which would cast serious doubt on the suggestions
      that there was some sort of a surge through the
      tunnel as the result of a gate or gates being
      opened.   I was not able to take away copies of
      these photographs but I was supplied with a set
      of copies of Police videos.   Later that evening,
      I watched video number 14 which, interalia, shows
      the situation inside and outside the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles.   The film goes into what is referred
      to as elapsed time mode during the critical
      period, so that there are effectively a series of
      single shots with a gap of one to five seconds
      between them.   This is not particularly helpful
      but, insofar as anything can be made out, there
      again does not appear to be a surge towards the
      outside entrance of the tunnel, which has been
      implicated in the disaster.


(6)   I asked various of the Officers about leave
      commitments.   Superintendent Murray indicated
      that he had leave booked from 11th to 26th June
      and Superintendent Greenwood from 19th May to
      2nd June.   I promised to bring these matters to
      the attention of the Treasury Solicitor, although


                                           /. .. contd.
I could give no promise that they might not be
called during indicated periods.




               P. C. Metcalf
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:     9th May, 1989


RE:       HILLSBOROUGH




Attending (1)      K. S. Anderson on telephone.

             (2)   K. G. Holmes on telephone.

             (3)   Don Denton on telephone.


(1)     He telephoned in response to mysfax and said that
        they understood there may be a need for editing.
        He was concerned as to whether he would actually
        be called into the meeting this afternoon and I
        said that he should proceed with his existing
        arrangements and that we would fit in if we
        needed to consult him.  He said that he would be
        providing some sandwiches at 5.00 p.m.

        So far as the report/proof is concerned, the
        basic version is about 2" thick, but there are
        a very large amount of appendices.  I said that
        this was not too bad and that if we could cut it
        down to 1" thick, with just a few crucial
        documents included as appendices to the report
        itself, then I would be really quite satisfied.

        He was a little concerned as to whether the work
        would be done by ourselves or by the Police and
        I said that we would wait and see the size of the
        task before going any further.


(2)     He telephoned to mention his concern about the
        overall financial cost of the operation.  He was
        referring to the MMI involvement on behalf of all
        parties and wanted to send out a letter suggesting
        that it should not be necessary for Leading and
        Junior Counsel, a Partner and Assistant Solicitor
        to be present all the way through the hearing.
        I reassured him that I already had this point on
        board and, whilst it may be difficult to cut down



                   s.
                                                /—   contd.
                          - 2 -



       on the representation as regards Counsel, our
       intention was that there should only be one
       representative from Hammonds at any given time,
       which might be myself, Belinda or Kate.  I said
       that, nevertheless, there would be no harm in
       putting the position on record.

       I mentioned that we had a conference this
       afternoon and also there was the conference on
       Friday, which he knew about.  He said that he did
       not require to attend either of these conferences.

       We discussed the question of Counsel's fees.  It
       was agreed that I would try and do some research,
       by way of telephoning up people who had been
       concerned in the Cleveland inquiry, with a view
       to discovering what Brief fees had been paid.   In
       this particular instance, we both agreed that he
       ought to specifically approve the Brief fee before
       it was agreed and that this, in turn, might need
       the approval of Steve Walker.


(3)-   He told me that they had now received the formal

                                       ,
       request from the West Midlands for self-taken
       statements for some 120 Officers of whom they
       already had Minutes or accounts of events in
       respect of 100.

       Obviously, no problem was presented in relation
       to those who had not provided an account of events,
       because they could be asked to do one specifically
       for the West Midlands request.   As for the others,
       there would need to be some scrutiny of the
       existing documents.  Many of them might be suitable
       to be handed on without further ado, but those
       which included comment or matters of speculation
       would probably have to be redone.   I said that we
       might be able to deal with something of this this
       afternoon, depending on the extent to which time
       was taken up with other matters.




                      P. C. Metcalf




                 s.
