INQUIRY     INTO        THE         HILLSBOROUGH

       S T A D I U M            D I S A S T E R




                       Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                          and

               PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                          At

                 The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

            Monday, 5th June, 1989.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
               (Morning        Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                  INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                      (Morning Session)

                                              Page


R.W. CREASER Called

    Examined by Mr. Collins                    1
    Cross-Examined by Mr.       Hyter         16
    Cross-Examined by Mr.       Jackson       33
    Cross-Examined by Mr.       Maxwell       33
    Cross-Examined by Mr.       Gibson-Watt   36
    Cross-Examined by Mr.       Kallipetis    38
    Cross-Examined by Mr.       Glasgow       40
    Cross-Examined by Mr.       Woodward      44
H   i




                                         1




                               F OURTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                                    MONDAY,   5th JUNE,     1989

                                       (HORNING SESSION)

                   CHIEF   INSPECTOR    ROBERT WALLACE       CREASER,   called

                                   Examined by HR.    COLLINS;

        Q.   Chief Inspector    Creaser?      A.     Yes,    sir.

                  HR. COLLINS:    Sir, as you appreciate, we have completed
             now, effectively, the Officers in charge of the operation
             and those r esponsible for the planning.    We now propose
             to call a number of Officers starting with Chief Inspector
             Creaser who were at the ground, some at the turnstiles,
             some inside the ground, in order to give   - again, it
             will only be a cross-section;   we do not propose to call
             every single Officer who was at the ground - and what I
             propose to do from now on is to concentrate with each
             Officer upon that part of his evidence which we think can
             add something to the story that is already given.      Of
             course, everyone has the full statement and anything else
             can be brought out if thought relevant, but for my part,
             as I say, I will seek to limit the evidence to relevant
             parts, as we see them.

                  LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:    Thank you.

        Q.        HR.   COLLINS:      Hr. Creaser, you are Robert         Wallace
             Creaser;    is that    right?   A.   Yes, sir.

        Q. And as we can see, you are Chief Inspector, I think in
           the Communi ca ti on s and Computer Development Department.
           You are quite familiar, I believe, with Hillsborough
           Ground;  is that right?        A.   Yes, sir, I worked there
           at the rank of Inspector between 1971 -- I am sorry, 1981
           and 1987, and regularly performed duty at football itiatches,
           League, Cup and Sem-Finals.

        Q.   Were you there last year?   A.           I was there perfo rm in g
             an identical role as this year,         sir.

        Q. What was  your role both this year and last year?
           A.   I had r es po ns ib il it ie s directly to the Serial Inspectors
           in charge of the North Stand, the West Stand, the Leppings
           Lane terraces, the rear enclosure and the Leppings Lane
           turnstiles.

        Q.   Effectively, you were, under Superintendent Greenwood,
             r esponsibl e for the Liverpool side of the ground and the
             turnstiles both inside and outside?     A.   Yes.   All
             the areas were just confined to Liverpool supporters.

        Q.   Can I ask you to deal with one matter last year about
             which there has been some conflict in evidence?   We have
                                2


                                             R. W. C R E A S E R


       heard that at some stage last year Police and stewards
       at the concourse end of the tunnel were directing
     r or were stopping people coming in to Pens 3 and 4 and
       were directing them round to the side.   Can you recall
       anything of that?   A.    Yes, I believe that action
       was taken last year, sir.

Q-     Can you help us as to what led to that action being taken?
       Can you now remember?   A.   I think it was a much quieter
       day altogether and there was not such a la:cp influx at
     ; that particular time when those pens were full and there
       were Officers who probably had more time to see to those
       sort of duties.

Q.jBut you say, "when those pens were full"     That pre-
  i supposes that someone must have appreciated that the pens
    had got full.   A.   I would imagine a message would have
    been passed by the Police Control Room who have a direct
    line of sight to all the Leppings Lane terraces.

Q. Hr. Mole, as I recall, could not recall that happening and
   had heard nothing of it.    Were you yourself directly
   involved in that or was it left to the individual Inspector
   in charge of the individual serial?   A.   From my experience
   at policing that end of the ground, the Officers at that
   location get a feel for it.    There might be, for example,
   a fan who leaves the terrace from the tunnel and said, "Look,
   it is packed out in there, you want to stop any more going
   in."   That sort of thing.

Q. Because there were no Police actually on the terraces,
   c ertainly this year and I gather also last year;  is that
   right?    A.   That's right, sir, the Officers are not
   c onsidered necessary actually on the terraces.

Q. And there were no Officers who were specifically given
   the task of m onitoring the state of Pens 3 and 4; is that
   c orrect?  A.    No, sir, that's not correct.

Q.    That is not correct?       A.    Well, all the Officers there
      would be monit or in g it.    The Police Control would be
      monitoring it.     I would be m onitoring it as best I could.

Qi       Did you consider it part of your function to keep an eye
  i      on Pens 3 and 4 so that if they got full and the sides
        did not,  some action could be taken to ensure that no more
        came in to 3 and 4 but went round the side?     A.   Well,
     i what I am trying to say is that Officers would obviously
        see that if the pen was full and they are in a position
      I to do so, they would take some action.

Q.     Which Officers are you referring to? A.  Any Officer
      who could observe that situation.    It is a prime r es ponsibility
      of the Officers present to see to the safety of people at
      the ground.

Q.    Indeed.     You see,   we have h e a r d - I do not know whether
      you were   here last   week at all, Hr. Creaser, but we have
                              3


                                              R. W. C R E A S E R

     heard evidence from those in charge that their view was
     that the fans on the terraces would simply find their own
     levels, that is to say that there was not anyone there
     specifically m onitoring the build-up in 3 and 4;  it was
     simply left to the fans to fill up the terraces and I
     suppose it was hoped not to go into 3 and 4 if they got
     full.   A.   I think you are confusing two issues.   The
     decision was that the fans would find their own level
     but certainly that position would be monitored.   What
     you are suggesting is that we would let them fill and
     not monitor them.

Q.   I am not suggesting anything ---   A.   I am sorry, the
     position is that the decision was that the fans would
     find their own level within the pens but obviously that
     position would be monitored.

Q .( C e r t a i n l y , I think everyone would agree that it ought
   j to have been.           The difficulty has been to find someone
   j whose respons ib il it y it was to do so.        Chn you help us
   ; as to whose responsibility, as you understand it, it was
     to take that action and to do something if they did
     begin to get full?            A.   Well, no, I can only say that
     we have got r e s p o n s i b l e  Police Officers present who,
     if they saw a situation where a pen was full, they would
     either take some action themselves or advise the Control
  j Room.

q\  Certainly one would hope so but we have not been able to
 I locate anything in any of the operational orders and I
 I think you would agree there is nothing    in the operational
    order which lays that duty upon anyone   in particular;
    is that correct?    A.The operation order will      say
    that it is the intention of the Police to ensure that
    the match takes place with the minimum of public
    disorder   and the safety of the public, and so we cannot
    specifically -- the list would be horrendous of specific
  . instructions so it is a general cover-all for the safety
    of the fans.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:   Can I ask you this:   take
     your own personal    position.    You say it is the duty of
     anyone to monitor    the pens to see that they do not get
     over-full.   A.     Yes, my Lord.

Q. At what stage would you think it was necessary for you
   to do something about it?      When we talk about it being
   full, does it have to be full so that you thought you
   could not get another person into it;       do people have to
   be compla in in g of discomfort;   is it sufficient if you
   see that    it is pretty full and the wing pens are pretty
   empty?      What would prompt you, as a matter of monitoring,
   to do something about it?      A.    If I can explain not
   what happened on the day but what the position is, my Lord,
   with, say, a Football League match.       The away supporters
   would be held in Leppings Lane and the usual tactic would
   be to, depending on the numbers coming, to fill first one
/- I   > ^   *



                                                4


                                                                      R. W. C R E A S E R

                      of the central   pens   until   it was   full and then ---

                 Q.    "Full" meaning? A. Full meaning comfortably    full,
                      it is difficult to sort of say - you just get a feel for
                      it, a feel for the crowd and your experience that, yes,
                      there is enough in that pen, we ought to open another one.
                      If the pen is over-full what will happen is that people
                      will spill out of that pen into the pen you have just
                      opened.

                 Q.        HR. COLLINS:   If they can.   Basically that is if they
                      find that gate at the back because that is the only way of
                      spilling out, is it not?   A.    That's right, yes, sir.

                 Q.   Or, I suppose, climb over the side, but that is not very
                      desirable, is it?    A.    I have seen people do that but it
                      c ertainly is not necessary.

                 Q.    The Police   are not keen on people climbing over fences,
                      are they?      A.   That's right.




                                                          /But   on this occasion
                                       R. W. CREASER



On this occasion, of course, those gates were open
because it was anticipated, known, indeed, that the whole
of the terraces would be in use? - A. Those gates were
locked open.

Anyway, did you, as part of your briefing to your
Inspectors at any stage refer to this question of keeping
an eye on the fulness of pens 3 and 4? - A. No, sir.

You, I think, were present when Inspector White in
particular briefed his serials? - A. I was present when
he briefed the club stewards, or I should say I entered
the stand when he was part way through a briefing to the
Sheffield Wednesday Club stewards.

Did Mr. White in your presence say anything about
monitoring or the possibility of monitoring the state of
the pens? - A. No, sir, but if I can say, Inspector White
is a very experienced Inspector who has considerable
experience of policing at Hillsborough, particularly,
again, at the Leppings Lane end, the West Stand end, and
I did not have to say it to an Officer of that calibre.

Does he have a beard? - A. Yes, sir, he does.

You presumably knew there were going to be no stewards
and, indeed, there were no stewards actually on the
terraces? - A. Yes, sir.

No doubt that did not surprise you in the least? - A.
Yes, sir.

I think you remained in the stadium and were walking
around and keeping an eye on your part of it, as the
afternoon began, as spectators began to come in? - A.
Yes, sir.

I want to pick it up at about quarter past two when you
paid a visit to the Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, sir.

Did that involve your going outside? - A. Yes, sir.

At this stage which is roundabout 2.15, what was the
state of play, if I can put it that way, outside the
gates? - A. At 2.15 there would be a small gathering
outside the gates, what I would call nothing untoward,
just a normal build-up of supporters.   The mood was that
special magic there is in the air at a football semi­
final.   It was a jovial crowd with no problems.

You had just come from inside and no doubt were therefore
aware that the vast majority of the Liverpool supporters
had yet to arrive, had yet to come into the ground? - A.
                                       R. W. CREASER


Yes.   I did not particularly notice at that stage it was
not filling at the normal rate*

Did you remain outside Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, sir.

So you were able to see the build-up? - A. Yes, sir.

What, as far as you could see, were the factors that
contributed to the build-up so that eventually one got
effectively after 2.30 a mass of people outside the
turnstiles? - A. I think the factor, or the different
factor from previous matches, and in particular the match
last year, was that the large build-up of fans came so
much later from 2.30/2.35 onwards.   I would have said it
was almost like watching a leaving crowd arrive.

Effectively what you are saying was that it was caused by
really large numbers all coming at once? - A. That's
right, sir.

Was there any change that you could notice in the
condition of the people who arrived? - A. Yes, sir, in
relation to the amount of alcohol consumed.   I would
certainly not suggest that a large proportion of fans had
been drinking.   As I stood there my attention was drawn
to people who - well, not drunk in the sense that would
secure a conviction for drunk and incapable - but they
had, if you like, what you might call Dutch courage, or
fighting drunk, three or four pints, typically 17 to 22
year olds who were shouting and fist waving.   By and
large, if an Officer approached them and said, "Look,
cool it, quieten down, you are here to enjoy yourselves",
they would.

I cannot put a precise time on it but that mood gradually
changed and the proportion of people who were in that
state increased towards perhaps those who were arriving
at quarter to and ten to, there was a much higher
proportion of those who had been drinking.   I got the
impression they had been drinking more and they were more
unruly and perhaps what the tabloid press would call
"Yobs , "Lager louts", that sort of people were arriving
at that time.   However, I would stress there were also
at the same time what you would call the decent, honest,
family man arriving.

So all, as it were, got trapped together in that mass of
people outside, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

We have heard many descriptions of it and we know that it
led to Mr. Marshall giving the order to open the gates? -
A. Yes.
                             7


                                            R. W. CREASER


Q. Really the crush outside got intolerable, is that a way
   of describing it? - A. It got to the stage where there
   was a good likelihood of serious injury being caused
   unless something was done to alleviate that situation.

Q. Incidentally, were you aware of a lot of supporters being
   confused about which turnstile they should go to? - A.
   Yes, I was continually asked for instructions by fans who
   would approach me quite often without their ticket and
   say things like, "Where is turnstile Z?"    I would say
   there isn't a turnstile Z, let me see your ticket."     The
   tickets were printed - I am doing this from memory - it
   would say "Gangway Z".   The gangways to the West Stand
   are U, V, W, X, Y, Z, in groups of 3 and the gangway was
   printed above the turnstile.   These people were
   confused.   They thought there would be a turnstile Z.

Q. In your view, were the arrangements at the turnstiles,
   the labelling and the ticketing, adequately clear? - A.
   It is difficult for me to say that because I am familiar
  jWith it and I know where people should go.

Q.jTry and put yourself in the position of someone who is
   not familiar. - A. I think it would have been of some
  jassistance if the signs had been larger.   The were not
  iparticularly clear.

Q. Whis confusion can't have helped in the build-up of the
   mass outside the turnstiles?

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You say it would have been
     helpful if the signs had been bigger.   You are talking
     about the signs at the ground, not on the ticket? - A.
     Well, I think I would say both.   The confusion on the
     tickets did not help because people were asking for
     turnstiles that did not exist.   The signs above the
     turnstiles, if they had been larger, it might have meant
     that police officers were not - I will not say
     "troubled", that is what they are there for, to help the
     public - but when we were trying to organise a difficult
     crowd the interruptions, if you like, of fans who did not
     know where to go, got in the way of the job of
     controlling the crowd.

Q.         MR. COLLINS:   Presumably from time to time they
     went to the wrong turnstile and so had to move to another
     and helped to cause congestion? - A. That's right.   I
     was approached by some people who had tickets for other
     parts of the ground allocated to Nottingham Forest.
     They would say, "Can I get in at this end?  I have come
     with my friend but I have got a ticket here for the Spion
     Kop."   Of course, we would say, "No, of course you can't
     because the allocation has been sold."   That happened,
     it was not just a sole example, it happened quite a lot,
                                       R. W. CREASER


that Liverpool fan had secured a Nottingham Forest
ticket.

Also we know that instead of A, B, C, they went A, C, B
on the outside, that is, reading from left to right of
the turnstiles, you had A, then C, then B? - A. Yes, sir.

Did that add to the confusion at at all? - A. I am sure
that anything that could assist with the clarity would be
beneficial, so obviously that did not help, no, sir.

Were you aware of fans at Leppings Lane without tickets?
- A. Yes, sir.

How were you aware of that? - A. It is difficult to
estimate the numbers.    I would not say it was a very
large number but there were people - I sort of sent away
the same individual more than once and told them to go
away if they did not have a ticket because they would not
be allowed access.    I am obviously aware there were
people without tickets.    there was a ticket tout
arrested in possession of 11 tickets and several hundred
pounds, so there were people selling tickets.




       Q. LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Your impression
C$>t
                                     9

                                                          R.W. CREASER


       Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    But your impression was it was not
            a very large number.  Is that right? - A. My Lord, if I was
            pushed to put a number on it I would say it was not in excess
            of 200.

       Q-          MR. COLLINS:   Altogether? - A. Without tickets?
       Q . Yes. - A . Yes .

       Q. Now, as time went on and as the crush progressed, I imagine
         I kick-off getting closer people were getting more and more
         ; worried as to whether they would get in on time? - A. That is
           right.  There was concern amongst the crowd, obviously, and
           particularly those that arrived late, and I am talking now
           perhaps 20-to, quarter-to-3, the ones that had been drinking
         \ there was some aggression amongst them, and the determination
           to get towards the turnstiles.

       Q.   Was that limited to that group or did it extend to everyone
            out there, or can't you really tell? - A. I think as time
            progressed people were obviously looking at their watches and
            thinking, "Well, it is about time we were getting in".

       Q.    Can    I ask you to look at your statement? I have it at page5,
            the original statement, where you deal with the build up. The
            paragraph begins:   "The situation outside the turnstiles".
            Have you got that? - A. yes, sir.

       Q. The way you put it is thus, starting the second sentence:

               J "The mood of this crowd was changing from a good natured
               i crowd to a frustrated crowd who could perhaps see that
                 they had little chance of gaining access prior to the
                 start of the match.  The proportion of spectators who had
                 been drinking increased as time progressed but they were
                 outnumbered by people who did not exhibit any signs of
               'jdrink".

            Then you deal with the attempts by the Police horses. - A.
            Yes, sir.

       Q. So the picture that you   paint there is one of a frustrated
          crowd worried about not   being able to get in ontime,
          exacerbated no doubt by   those arriving late who had been
          drinking, but by no means the majority being in that
          condition.  Is that the correct picture? - A. That is right,
          yes, sir.

       Q.    I think you attempted to help with the endeavours that the
            Police horses were taking to block off the perimeter gates?   -
            A. Yes, sir.

       Q.   That is to isolate the crowd within the turnstiles and trying
            to stop other people joining in? - A. That is right, sir.

       Q.i Were the perimeter gates themselves shut? -A. They were closed
          Iat some time.
                          10

                                               R.W. CREASER



Q. Were you involved in that exercise? - A. I asked Officers to
   close them.  I can’t put a time on that, but perhaps 2.30,
   that sort of time.

Q. I think perhaps a little later? - A. Possibly, yes.

Q. You say about 2.45 in your statement.  Be that as it may,
   was that a successful manoeuvre? - A. It was for the time
   being. Eventually the pressure of the crowd forced that gate
   open again.

Q.j The pressure from outside in Leppings Lane? - A. That is
    right, sir.

Q. You were not directly concerned with the policing of bring the
   people to Leppings Lane, were you? That was the
   responsibility of a different Chief Inspector? - A. That is
   right, yes, sir.

Q. But as far as you were aware were there any positive steps
   being taken to try to control the crowd of people coming down
   still wanting to get to the ground, because you were making an
   effort at the perimeter gates.  Did you see or were you aware
   of any effort being made further up Leppings Lane? - A. The
   efforts that were made is that I was involved in trying to
   form a line, a cordon of Police horses and Police Officers
   from what you might describe as the bridge parapet at the
   corner towards the small shop situated at the extreme of the
   area there.  I was trying to form a line of horses and Police
   Officers there to do what you are suggesting, to control the
   crowd in Leppings Lane. The traffic had been stopped in
  jLeppings Lane.  I have read the press reports that say that
  |was at 2.17.

Q. The request was made at 2.17 but it was not actually stopped
   until later. - A. It was considerably later than that, yes.

Q. Can you recall when? -A. I would say 2.30, 2.35, and that was
   to do what you are suggesting, to stop more people, if you
   like, entering the funnel to the turnstiles, to control the
   crowd in Leppings Lane rather than at the turnstiles.

Q. It does not seem to have unfortunately succeeded altogether,
   because people were obviously continuing to come down and add
   to the crush? - A. It slowed the rate down, and by the time
   that cordon was fully in line the gates had been opened.  When
   I say "the gates", I mean the concertina gates, A, B and C,
   and I saw the need to hold the fans in Leppings Lane had in
   fact ceased because the crush had dispersed.

Q. Sadly it seems that those endeavours came too late, because
   the problems had developed and existed before those measures
   were taken.  Is that right? - A. Well, those measures would
   not have been sufficient if the people that were at the
   turnstiles were behind that cordon, if that is what you are
   trying to say. We could not have held, I estimate the crowd
                            11

                                                 R.W. CREASER


     at the turnstiles must have been round about 4,500 to 5,000.

Q. You mean actually in the area within the perimeter gates, or
   are you including those spilling out into Leppings Lane? - A.
   Those spilling out from Leppings Lane towards the turnstiles,
   I would estimate 4,500 to 5,000 people were there.  I don't
   think they could have been held by Police Officers in
   Leppings Lane.  They were held at the turnstiles by the
   physical bricks and mortar of the turnstiles.

Q. Indeed.   So what you are saying is in effect that because
   everyone - because a lot of people came at the same time
   rather later than expected, there was nothing the Police could
   have done to avoid the situation that built up.   Is that what
   you say? - A. Yes, it was a completely unprecedented situation
   of such a large number arriving and a fair proportion of them
   in drink.   The experience at Hillsborough has been that the
   legislation, the Sporting Events Control of Alcohol, has had a
   good effect, and the incidence of drunkenness has decreased.
   I have never seen as many drunks at a football match before.

Q. Let me now come on.  I think there came a stage when you
   thought the kick-off ought to be deferred which might
   alleviate the situation.  Is that right? - A. That was
   certainly one of the options that should be open.

Q. Did you take some steps to see whether you could have a word
   with control about that? - A. Yes.  I had a particular problem
   with my radio at that time. Police Constable Buxton was
   present in a Police Land Rover at that time. He was in fact
   using a public address system and talking to the crowd, and I
   knew that he would have a radio that worked. He in fact
   relayed that message to ground control for me.

Q. Was it that your radio in fact was out of order or was there
   something else wrong with the communications? - A. I believe I
   had a fault that was peculiar.

Q.   You just had a fault radio? - A. Yes.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do you know if his message was
     acknowledged? - A. Yes.   I can't specifically remember the
     words, my Lord, but I got the impression....

Q. That it had got through? - A ..... that the message had been
   received.  I have since heard that that message was received
   round about the time that the teams were due to come on to the
   field, which would put it at 10-to-3, that sort of time.
   I can't say that.  I have been told that since.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:   Indeed. Was it before the concertina gates
     were opened that you caused that message to be sent? - A.
     Certainly, yes, sir.

Q. You were not directly concerned or involved in the opening of
   the gates, I think.  Indeed, did you know they were going to
   be opened before they were opened? - A. I heard the radio
                          12

                                                R.W. CREASER


   messages and thought, "Well, yes, that is a sensible thing to
   do " . I was not at the front of the crowd but I could see a
   young child being passed over the crowd who had apparently
   fainted.   I think some Officers thought he was dead.  It was
   obvious that with pushing that was coming from the back that
   people would be injured, perhaps even killed.

Q. You knew the layout of the ground obviously as well as anyone?
   - A . Yes.

Q. And you knew if gate C for example were opened people would
   naturally go towards that central tunnel, or did not you think
   of that? - A. I knew that there was a large rear enclosure and
   that if the gates were opened then that would absorb the
   pressure from the crowd.

Q. I follow all that, but you have obviously some responsibility
   for the terraces? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I just wondered whether you thought at any stage what might be
   the effect of letting a lot of people in through the gates
   upon the terraces inside? - A. If I had thought there would
   have been an adverse effect then I would have action.  I
   thought that we had got a tightly packed crowd, and I thought
   the tightness and the compactness would be relieved when those
   people entered into the rear enclosure.

Q. In fairness to you, you had been outside since about quarter-
   past-2? - A. That is right.

Q. So you had no direct knowledge of the build up, if any, on
   the terraces? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The concertina gates, which ones were opened or which ones
   did you see open at any stage, Mr. Creaser? - A. At one
   stage I saw all three open.

Q. That is A, B and C? - A. Yes.

Q. We know that C was opened initially at 2.48 for a very short
   period and then at 2.52 effectively until virtually kick-off?
   - Yes, sir.

Q. And gate A did not open until about 2 minutes before kick-
    off, 2.58, and stayed open again until shortly after kick-
    off. We have seen film of that and we have independent
    evidence of that. Gate B is a little more problematical
   Ibecause there seems to be some confusion as to precisely
    when it was opened, if it was opened and for how long it
    was opened.  So can I ask you to concentrate your mind on
    gate B for the moment. You say you were aware of it being
   Iopened at some stage? - A. It was certainly open, yes,
  / sir.

Q. Were you aware of people going through it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In large numbers? -A. Yes, sir.   I have a particular memory of
                            13

                                                 R.W. CREASER


     seeing somebody struggling to close it, trying to push it
     obviously sideways because it is a concertina type gate, after
     the main crush of the spectators had gone through. Inother
     words, the problem of the crushing had passed, and I can
     vividly recall seeing people, I think stewards and Police
     Officers, trying to shut that gate again.

Q.   Did they succeed in shutting it? -A. Yes, sir.

Q.   You did not see it being opened? - A. No, sir.

Q.   So effectively when you saw it did you look at it for any
     length of time or was it a case of when you saw it it was
     being shut, effectively? - A. No, the position I was in was
     not of a casual observer.  I was trying to organise the line
     of Police....

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Where were you? -A. I was trying
     to organise this line of Police horses from the parapet
     towards the sweet shop.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:   Were you on a high level or standing on
     ground level? - A. I think it is slightly raised from - there
     is a very gradual incline, I think.

Q. You were down to Leppings Lane, were you? - A. Yes, on the
   ground side of this line of Police horses.

Q. So at about the perimeter gate, that sort of area? -A. Yes, a
   shade further back.

Q. Which side of the dividing fence which runs between turnstiles
   1 to 16 and A-G? You know the one I am referring to? - A.
   Yes, sir.   I would have been further back than that.

Q. So able to see all three gates? -A. I could see gates A and B.
   I could see people walking through gate C but I could not
   actually see the gate.  It was sort of square on to me, if
   you like, or head on to me, but I could see people walking
   through that gate.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     To see gate B you would have to be
     over.... - A . near to the river side.

Q . Nearer to the bridge than the sweet shop? - A . Yes, my Lord.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:   From there one can see, if you were far
     enough out, you would be able to see both A and B without too
     much difficulty, subject to people being in the way, but not
     actually to see C but be aware of people going through it? -
     A. Yes. My observation was not a static observation.   I was
     walking up and down or rushing up and down trying to plug
     gaps between the Police horses with Police Officers saying,
     "Don’t let any more people through".

Q. If I correctly understand your evidence, you never saw B open
   without A being open. That is to say A and B when you looked
                           14

                                                R.W. CREASER


   were both open at the same time.    Is that right?   - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. So certainly when you were aware of gate Bbeing open it must
   have been after 2.58, because we know that is when A was
   opened? -A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was it closed shortly after you first saw open? - A. Yes, I
   got the impression that B was opened probably for theshorter
   period or the shortest period of the three gates.

Q. We may have some evidence later from an Officer who talks
   about it being open for about half-a-minute. Would that fit
   in with your perception - I would use that word - with your
   awareness of the situation? - A. Yes, my recollection of the
   event was that gate B was opened for the shortest time.   I can
   recall people struggling to close it, thinking - I assumed
   they were thinking - "Enough people have got in now. We have
   alleviated the problem outside".

Q. I think shortly after you were aware of the call for Officers
   to go into the ground, and I don't ask you any details of the
   situation thereafter because we have had plenty of other
   evidence about it, and it is on the videos. - A. Thank you,
   sir.

Q. One matter which I am reminded of. At an earlier stage of the
   afternoon did you go into the control box shortly before 2
   o'clock.  Do y o u remember that? -A. I did call in earlier, but
   considerably earlier than that time, sir.

Q. May be even earlier than that, yes. At some very early stage
   do you recall going into the control box and speaking to
   Superintendent Murray? - A. I do, yes, sir. That would be
   about noon.

Q. Did you say anything about the Leppings Lane terraces at that
   stage? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was it you said? - A. We had a conversation as to what if
   any strategy should be adopted in relation to the filling of
   the pens. As I have explained certainly for league matches
   where some degree of control is exercised over where the fans
   go, which pens they fill, then there would be considerable
   Police control. We discussed the matter, only for a short
   time, and I was told that the system had worked perfectly well
   the previous year and there was no disagreement, and that was
   the way we would let the pens fill.

Q. I am sorry, "the system"?   What system are we talking about?
   - A. The system in the past as I thought I had explained is
   that at league matches ....

Q. I follow.  This was not one of those because the terraces were
   going to be filled. - A. A system could have been adopted
   identical to league matches in that we could have or the
   stewards could or whatever, arrangements could have been made,
7.
                               15

                                                     R.W. CREASER


        and I am hypothesising now, but we could have made
        arrangements to fill one pen at a time.

     Q. You mean so that once the middle ones had filled up you would
        have closed off that central tunnel and left the later fans to
        go round the sides? - A. I am not saying we would have done
        that.  I am saying that that would be a possible. One of the
        problems with that is that as you will appreciate those that
        arrive early want to get the best view. A lot of fans
        consider the best view is directly behind the goals. So if
        you had restricted access just to the centre pens I imagine
        they would have been full perhaps by 1.30, and then if we
        closed it off we would have the problems of fans who would
        say, "I want to go and use the toilet.  I want to go and buy a
        hot dog" or "I want to go and see if my friends have arrived",
        or "It is too crowded in there". So we would have to be


 •
        letting people in and out, almost losing control.




                                    /Q. It would not have worked.
                                           R. W. C R E A S E R


It would not have wor«ed effectively, that sort of penning
would not have worked for a situation where the whole of
the terrace was a sell-out?    A.   Not in my opinion, sir.
The tactic adopted was exactly what had been done the
previous year when there had been no problems.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   How do you deal with that
problem at a League match?    You fill a pen and then you
move on to the next one - why does not the same point
about people wanting to come in and out of the one you
have filled apply;   because they do not come as early or
what?    A.   Well, it does, my Lord, but if we have two
pens open, for example, or if we have filled one pen and
we then start to fill a second pen, for example, at a
typical League match it obviously depends on the number
of visiting fans that are coming but the first option would
probably be to fill the centre South Pen, which can be
done by using the gates, control of the gates.    If that
became full, what I have previously described as "comfortably
full" we would then open the centre North Pen and if then
that became full, we would then open the South Pen, and we
would not be concerned if somebody said, "Well, I want to
come out of the, for example, centre South Pen, and go
into the South Pen" as long as we had covered them not
going into the North Pen.

     MR. COLLINS:   And you would have, presumably, Officers
on those gates to stop people going where they were not
meant to go, would you?   A.   If that was the strategy
to be adopted, yes, sir.

At League matches was it normal  to have Officers at the
back of the terraces?   A.   It is not uncommon, yes, sir.

But we know that there were no such Officers on this
occasion, anywhere on the terraces.   A.    I think that
is a deliberate strategy because at a League match,
unless it is an all-ticket sell-out, the terraces do
not fill.   This, we knew that the terraces would be
full because it was all-ticket and presumably it was a
capacity sell-out so for the Officers own safety we would
not leave them in a crowd of people who have - certain
elements  of them - a tendency for aggression against
Police Officers.

Did Inspector White in particular say anything to you
about the p ossibility of Officers on the terracing?
A.   No, sir, not that I recall.

              C ro ss -e xa mi ne d   by HR.   HYTNER:

Mr. Creaser, could I just get one thing out of the way
first.   You at the end of the tragedy were the Officer
who actually had specific duties in relation to the dead
bodies.   A.   I was one of those Officers, yes, sir.
                                      R. W. C R E A S E R


Can you give firm reassurance from your own e xperience in
the mortuary to the relatives of the bereaved that no
person was regarded as dead and not treated as dead until
they had been certified dead by a doctor?   A.    I certainly
can give you that assurance.   I can elaborate on the details
if you want, but ---

I do not think there is any need.   A.   Certainly if there
has been a suggestion that living people were c onsidered dead
then that can be absolutely eliminated.

You can discount   that completely?    A.     Absolutely    categorically
yes.

Just to explain the possible misunderstanding, do you know,
as an experienced Police Officer, that the wearing of clothing
and the temperature in a room, the ambient temperature,
can maintain the heat of a body - the t emperature of a body?
A.    I can say that.   In addition, in this case there were
some body bags provided by the Ambulance Service which were
of a plastic PVC material which had a zip on them - I think
a zip   fastening - and so each body was, in fact, enclosed
in an insulating bag, if you like.

That again would tend to maintain the temperature of the
body?   A.   Yes.   It was very warm in the mortuary, you
see.

I am grateful to you.       I think also you arranged for an
individual Officer to be assigned to each body after the
certi fi ca ti on of death?   A.   As the bodies arrived, I
assisted in allocating an individual Officer to that body
and I am sure some of the Officers could perhaps testify
that I kept pestering them, "Are you sure we have got the
name of the doctor who certified death?" which I kept
going round to ensure the very p o i n t that you make, that
we did not have a body that had not been certified.

Thank you very  much, Mr. Creaser.   Can I now turn back.
I want to deal with two separate matters.   One is the
build-up of the crowd outside the ground and the second
is the build-up of the crowd inside the ground.   You
have attended Sheffield Wednesday for a number of very big
matches in the past.   A.   Yes, the first Semi-Final I
attended was in 1977.

Were you aware that the capacity at the Leppings Lane end,
because that is where you were stationed for all your
attendances, was it not?   A.   Perhaps 80%, 90% of the time
I was concerned at that end.   I have been allocated other
duties previously.

Were you aware that the capacity of the North West Stands
and the West Terraces was 24,000?   A.   The North Stand,
the West Stand and the Leppings Lane terraces and elevated
section?

Yes.   A.   Yes,   in the region of ---      I think the split
                                18


                                                   R. W. C R E A S E R

     was 24/27   - something   like that.

Q.   If the turnstiles were open at 12 o'clock --- ?            A.        I
     think some were opened prior to that.

Q.    But that was the normal time of opening,     was   it not?          12 o'clock.
     A.    The normal time of opening for ---

Q.    A Semi-Final.     A.     — a Semi-Final.    Yes,   I would         think so.

Q.   I am just pitting some hypotheses to you and see where we
     go, you see.    Let us suppose there were three hours to fill
     up the terraces.   The best possible scenario, which is
     highly unlikely, is that everyone would arrive at an even
     spread which would produce 2,000 every 15 minutes.
     A.   8,000 an hour, yes, sir.

Q.   That is possible   t he oretically but   I think you would agree
     highly unlikely.      A.    Yes, sir.

Q.   The worst thing that could happen -      again, highly u n l i ^ ely -
     is that all 24,000 would turn up in      the same 15 minutes.
     A.   It almost seemed that that was      happening, actually,
     but, yes.   That would be the worst      scenario, yes, sir.

Q.   What I would like to ask is this, had any thought been given
     at any time to your knowledge in the briefings you received
       at any of the Semi-Finals as to the sort of numbers, the
     sort of build-up that could actually be safely contained
     at the Lepping Lane end?      A.   If you say did somebody
     use a slide rule or a calculator and make mathematical
     c a lc ulations - is that what you are asking me?

Q.   Well,    it does not have to be done with a slide rule.
     A.    It is done on experience.     I mean, the best example
     I can give you is that in 1988, I think mathema ti ca ll y
     the same numbers arrived and were accommodated quite
     comfortably, so it is done on experience rather than       on
     mathematical formulae.

Q.   Never mind m at he matical formulae.   Taking it stage by
     stage, do you accept that there is a limit to the numbers
     of people who can be safely contained within the turnstile
     area,    that is the area between the turnstiles and  the public
     road? A.   There has      got to be a finite number,  yes , sir.

Q.   There are t V»o considerations, are there not?      The first
     c onsi de ra ti on is what numbers can be sensibly contained within
     the immediate turnstile area, that is the area between the
     turnstiles and the perimeter gates, convenient for entry
     through the turnstiles into the ground?        Not safety but
     simply efficiency.        A.   I am sorry, you are saying there
     are two considerations, one of them is the number of ---

Q.   One is efficiency and the other is safety and I want to
     deal witf*efficiency, first.  Dealing with efficiency,
     there is an optimum number which should be within the
     area between the turnstiles and the perimeter gate.    To
                               19


                                                R. W. C R E A S E R

     help you, so that there is no mass jostling each other
     p reventing efficient use of the turnstiles.  A.   Are
     you asking me ---

Q.   Yes, I am.   I am asking you whether that is not so?
     A.   What I can say in response to that is that I have
     never sat down with a pencil and paper and calculated
     the size of that crowd.

Q.   I am not dealing with the numbers first, I am dealing with
     the principle.    Is it right that there will be an optimum
     number which can be contained within the immediate turnstile
     area for the purposes of efficiency?       A.   There are so
     many variables that you are saying there, sir.       There
     would be an optimum number but that could change.       If
     a high p roportion of tJrose were drunk, then it would change.
     There are so many different parameters.

Q.   C3n we just deal for the moment - we will come to drink
     later.      For the purposes of my present questions, please
     assume a sober, docile , family crowd going to a
     football match.      Would you still, looking at that enclosed
     area between the turnstiles and the fence, say, "Well,
     there is a limit to the number of people who can be in
     that area if the turnstiles are going to be used efficiently
     without jostling and so forth and     so that queues can
     f o r m ."?

          LORD^llSTICE TAYLOR:        You are talking about           a maximum
     number for that purpose,       not an optimum number.

          MR.   HYTNER:   I am sorry,      a maximum,    yes.         I am
     obliged,   sir.

          THE WITNESS:    Then,     yes,   there will,    sir,   be a
     maximum number, yes.

Q.        MR. HYTNER:  Will there be a quite different maximum
     number which can be a cc om modated within that area, again
     the confined area in between the turnstiles and the perimeter
     fence, for the purposes of safety?      A.   We have still got
     this docile, family crowd?

Q.   Still docile, f a m i l y ' c r o w d , yes. A. You see, it is beyond
     my e xperience to have that many people at a football crowd
     who are friendly, docile people, and there are so many
     parameters involved that if you say, yes, there was a crowd
     of docile, friendly people there, we would not need any
     Police Officers there.

Q.   Well, ordinary football supporters, the foreseeable mood
     of a football crowd in 1989.     Would there be a maximum
     number who could be a cc ommodated with safety within that
     area?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. And the two numbers     that we have been discussing,              of course,
   are quite different     numbers.   A.   Yes, sir.
                                   20


                                                        R. W. C R E A S E R


Q.         LORD JUSTICE        TAYLOR:     Are they necessarily?

          MR. H Y T N E R ;:   Well,    I would have   thought so.            I will
     ask the witness.

          THE WITNESS:   I am sorry, I thought you were saying ---
     You are talking about two different locations, are you?

Q.         MR. HYTNER: No, first of  all my first postulate
     was to facilitate ease and efficient queueing and access
     to the turnstiles and the second postulate was safety.
     Lord Justice Taylor's suggestion that it may be the same
     m aximum number.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am just wondering.                     A ut omatically
     one assumes they are different.

Q.        MR. HYTNER:    Would itbe the same number or a different
     number?    A.    I thought the two things were synonymous,
     the optimum number and the safe number.

Q. Alright.   You add on to that number the area between the
   perimeter fence and Leppings Lane which is another sort of
   concourse.   A.     Yes, it has got obviously specific
   boundaries of the perimeter fence, the river, the housing
   and the sweet-shop.    Wiich is your sort of Leppings Lane
   boundary?   The c arriageway    of the road?

Q.   Yes.    If you look where the Usher is pointing, it is the
     grey part rather than the black part;   do you follow?
     A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   What I am wondering is this, Mr. Creaser.   It must have
     been obvious to anybody just looking at the config ur at io n
     of the road and the turnstiles that there must be a
     number contained within that area beyond which it was
     simply unsafe for people within the area to be.    A.     Yes.
     I can only go from my experience, and I have never known
     such a large crowd be in that area but you are quite right,
     there must be a number which exceeds -- which can be
     safely accommodated.

Q.   Specifically so if the numbers approaching down Leppings
     Lane are, minute by minute, increasing the crowd at the
     back, because you are going to get forward pressure.
     A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   You see, what I have dealt with at the beginning are
     m at he ma ti ca ll y the numbers which you could expect on
     the o retically the best day and theoretically; on the
     worst day, but somewhere between those extremes, which we
     all agree are unfore se ea bl e and unlikely, there will be
     c o nt in ge nc ie s which should be provided for - crowds turning
     up at twice the best rate or three times the best rate.
     Do you follow?          A.   Yes, sir.

Q. At any time during          the period    when you were policing            the
                              21

                                              R. W. C R E A S E R

     Semi-Finals, had any briefing been given to you, had any
     discussion taken place as to the possib il it ie s of crowds
     turning up at more than an average rate, whether at 2 o'clock
     or 2.30 or 2.45?   A.   Not in relation to your very
     confined and specific question, no, sir.

Q.   You see, is this fair:   once a situation had been allowed or
     had occurred where there were 4,000 to 4,500 people within
     the area between the turnstiles and Leppings Lane, with more
     coming down the road in hundreds or thousands, is it fair
     to say that your view is that by that time it was beyond the
     control of the Police on the ground, the s i tu at io n?
     A.   It was a s ituation that was certainly s tretching us.
     It depends what you mean by "in control".     We took certain
     actions to try and control it.

Q.   O bviously one method of controlling was the wholly undesirable
     one of opening the gate.    I am talking about control so that
     no emergency occurred.    That is what I am talking about.
     A.    I cannot suggest it was undesirable to open gates if
     there was a risk of people being killed.

Q.   Mr. Creaser, please understand me, certainly I have not
     s uggested - I don't think anybody at this Inquiry has yet
     s uggested - that it was the wrong decision to open the
     gates.    A.   I am sorry, you called it undesirable.

Q.   It was clearly u nd es irable as a method of crowd control
     in the ordinary way, was it not?       You do not want to get
     to the situation where you have got to open a gate to
     allow people in without being checked in order to relieve
     the danger of death.       A.   Alright, sir.

Q.   You agree.      So apart from opening gates, are you suggesting
     from your o b s er va ti on s that there came a time when the
     situation was beyond the Police ability to control it?
     A.   In those terms, it is fair to say that, yes, sir.

Q. Did that time arrive when 4,000- 4* 50 0 people were congregated
   in the area between the turnstiles and Leppings Lane?
   A.    What you have described is an u np recedented and
   p reviously unknown situation that arose and you are quite
   right, yes, sir.

Q. Apart from your    preamble,    your   answer to my question     is
   "Yes".

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Just to make sure, counsel is
     putting the situation where you accept that other than
     opening the gates it was beyond Police control was when
     there was something like 4 ,000-4,500 between the turnstiles
     and Leppings Lane;  is that right?    A.   Yes, my Lord.   I
     think the line of horses ---    If we are talking in terms
     of quarter to, ten to three when the crowd was at that size
     then the control exercised on that crowd - we had got an
     undesirable, to use your words, build-up at the turnstiles;
     we put on a filter, a line of horses to stop that crowd
     growing any bigger and pressure was taken off the crowd at
                             22


                                             R. W. CREASER


     the front.   Now, you know, if you- want to say that that
     was beyond control or out of control or whatever, that
     is what the situation was.

Q.         MR. HYTNER:     If you had been asked in advance by
     one of your Inspectors or one of your Sergeants at a
     briefing, "What do we do if there is a build-up of the
     crowd of 4 ,0 00 -4,500 between the turnstiles and Leppings
     Lane?" your answer would have been this, would it not:
     "We must not let it get to that stage because if it ever
     gets to that stage, we have got a serious problem on
     our h a n d s ."?
\
                               23


                                              R. W. CREASER



    Q. No, sir.    My answer would have been that in my
       experience and in the experience of fellow officers, such
       a situation has never arisen before the there are no
       indications that that will arise today.    It is a carbon
       copy of the semi-final of the previous year, it involves
       the same teams, travelling, as far as we knew, by the
       same means.    There was no intelligence to suggest there
       would be late arrivals or anything different from the
       previous year.    So my answer would be, that situation
       does not arise at this particular football ground, based
       on the experience of the Officers who police it
       regularly.

    Q. If that postulate had been put you would have said,
       "Don't worry your head.   It has never happened before.
       It will not happen in the future".   Is that a fair
       summary? - A. I would have said in our experience that
       would not happen.

    Q. As far as you know that was the approach to this sort of
       crowd situation, of all the Senior Officers in the years
       that you have policed Hillsborough?   That sort of thing
       has not happened before, therefore it will not happen in
       the future? - A. You have put it in those terms, it
       sounds as though there is almost a negligent wanton
       disregard and that is not the case, no.

    Q. Whether it is a wanton negligent disregard is a matter
       for others. - A. Well, in the tone that you expressed it
       it sounds like that.    You make it sound as if, "Oh,
       there has never been a problem at Leppings Lane, so
       ignore it".   The situation was not that at all.

    Q. Can you say what is different?   Why is it not right to
       put it in the way that I have? - A. Because you are
       suggesting that there was disregard for the policing at
       Leppings Lane.   If I can say that of any area of the
       stadium, more attention is given to the Leppings Lane end
       than any other end, for a variety of reasons.   Perhaps
       the principal one is that that is the experience, the end
       where we have experience of trouble.   As a general rule
       it is the travelling fans, the away fans, that cause
       trouble and that trouble will occur at the Leppings Lane
       end.

    Q. One can understand that. - A. Therefore, that is where
       Senior Officers over the years will - I cannot say this -
       but will have concentrated their minds because that is
       where the greatest attention to policing takes place.

    Q. That I can understand.  "This is where the away fans are,
       we have got to watch it."   However, generally, putting
       it broadly in the years you have policed the Leppings
                                        R. W. CREASER


Lane end, has there not been any sort of approach of this
sort:  "Well, this is a funnel, it is bottle neck.   If
there is too big a crowd coming into that area we could
be in trouble"? - A. That is the whole philosophy of
policing a football match, that we have got this area...
If you go to the stadium now there would be half a dozen
people there, but the whole philosophy is that 54,000
people will come to watch a game of football on a
Saturday afternoon.   There has got to be a bottle neck.
All the people are converging on that one place.

You have got to deal with this specific ground and it is
pretty obvious that too many people coming down that
road, across the bridge and down from the roundabout at
any given time, there could be a dangerous build-up of
crowd in the bottle neck? - A. Yes, sir.

As far as you know no thought was given to the danger
that so many would come in a given short period that the
whole of the turnstile area would fill up and cause very
grave policing problems? - A. If I can put it this way,
sir.   The South Yorkshire Police is fortunate, or
unfortunate, in that over the last 10 or 15 years it has
had considerable experience in policing large crowds,
from the miners' strikes in the seventies, to the steel
strikes in the early eighties, to the miners' strike
1984/85, to semi-finals.    They are very experienced,
probably more experienced than other Police Forces in
dealing with public disorder.    Particular attention is
given by those same Officers to the Leppings Lane end of
Hillsborough Stadium.    There are very rarely any
problems in the Penistone Road end.    Therefore, people's
minds would have been concentrating on policing Leppings
Lane.   To suggest anything other than the correct amount
of attention and detail and planning and foresight given
to the policing of Leppings Lane, is incorrect, sir.

I am only dealing with one particular matter which I am
suggesting was not the subject of any consideration or
thought before this tragedy, namely, what sort of numbers
could be accommodated with safety at the end of Leppings
Lane and what would happen if more than that number
arrived within the same fifteen minute period.   That
apparently was never considered, was it? - A. Not as a
specific in those specific terms, no, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can we look at it this way
for a moment?   You say - obviously it is only an
estimate - something like four and half to five thousand
between turnstiles and Leppings Lane when this crush was
on? - A. Yes, my Lord.

The sort of number that could comfortably be accommodated
would be what?   You put your figure on it.   I do not
                                       R. W. CREASER


want to put a figure in your mind.   Two and a half,
three thousand, what would you say? - A. Yes.   It is
very difficult to put labels and numbers on.

You have seen it operating before. - A. For example, at
that same football ground the Mormon Church, the Church
of Latter Day Saints, they have crowds there and they
would be the docile ones, so the docile crowd, any number
because they stand and no not push.   The typical
football crowd, I would say it was full to capacity.    At
the time we had got the line of police horses at the rear
of that crowd, there was some free ground between the
horses and the rear of the crowd.   Is that clear?    The
line of horses - the crowd was building up in Leppings
Lane against the horses, some were filtering through,
going under the horses and round the horses.   Then there
was some free ground between those horses and the rear of
the crowd.   There was still some room, if you like, in
the area you can see on the board, between the black and
the grey, if you like.   There was some free ground
between the line of horses and the rear of the crowd.

I was just trying to... - A. So what I am saying is more
people could have got in there, could have been
accommodated in there.

But the ones at the front were being rather severely
crushed? - A. They certainly were, yes.

Maybe you cannot say, but at its busiest the previous
year, at the busiest time, how many would there have been
in that same area where you say there were four and a
half to five thousand this time? - A. Considerably less.
I cannot recall the crowd extending much further than the
perimeter gates.

You are not able to give me any estimate?   I mean, you
have already made an estimate of the other one? - A. It
is difficult.   If I had taken out a block of one
thousand, if I could have physically removed one thousand
from the four and a half to five thousand, I cannot say
that there would not still have been problems*

Two thousand would have made it all right? - A. Yes, I
think so.

We have quite easily accommodated trains when there has
been three or four trains arrive which hold at a maximum
500 each.   I would think, and again I would not like to
be specific to the figures, but perhaps three or four
thousand of people who are being orderly could be
accommodated quite comfortably.
                                              R. W. CREASER


Q. The problem may confine itself to this.   Is it really
   beyond expectation that you might just get at couple of
   thousand more?   We are not talking about vast numbers,
   are we?   A couple of thousand more than you would
   normally expect to handle can put the whole thing beyond
   control, is that the position? - A. Yes, I think so.    It
   must be that because crowds of a couple of thousand have
   been accommodated there and have safely got into the
   ground and the numbers that were there last were perhaps
   some two thousand less and they were quite safely
   accommodated, my Lord.   It is very difficult to be
   precise as to numbers.   I could be out by a factor of
   100%.   There could have been three thousand.

Q.        MR. HYTNER:    Yes, we all understand this,
     Mr. Creaser:

           MR. HYTNER:    In fairness to Mr. Creaser, sir, you
     inadvertently added 500 on to his estimate which he
     immediately adopted.    I do not think he originally said
     four and a half to five thousand, I think his original
     estimate was four to four and a half thousand.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Four to four and a half, was
     it?

         MY HYTNER:     Again, of course,   these are only
estimates:

Q. Is this fair again, Mr. Creaser, that the basic problem
   were the numbers which built up between 2.30 and 2.45?
   The unpleasant complicating factor was the number of
   those who had been drinking heavily who arrived at about
   2.45 and after? - A. Well, yes.   You could not put a
   time on it and say, "The drunks are now arriving*.    If I
   was plotting it on a graph, it was a gradual increase in
   the number who had been drinking which rose sharply at
   2.45, 2.40 onwards.

Q. That complicated the problem because they were a bit more
   aggressive? - A. I am sure it did, yes, sir.

Q. Can I turn now to the problem inside the ground and I can
   deal with this fairly quickly.   One understands the
   difference between a League match and a semi-final.   It
   is not only reasonably foreseeable, but virtually certain
   at a semi-final, that pens 3 and 4 will be the first to
   fill up? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. There will therefore come a time, probably long before
   kick-off, when pens 3 and 4 are full to capacity.  Is
   that correct? - A. No, I could not agree with that, sir.
   What tends to happen with the pens is a time will arrive
   at a match like a semi-final at quarter to three, ten to
                                        R. W. CREASER


three, where you think "it's full now", and you will see
people outside and think, "How will they get in?", and
they are quite easily absorbed.   It is very difficult to
say when a pen is full, but there would be people at the
average semi-final still entering, squeezing their way
into the centre pens, right up to kick-off time.

That may well be, but you knew, did you not, that each of
those pens has a capacity which is specific as the safe
maximum capacity for the individual pens? - A. I am aware
that each pen has a maximum.    I cannot quote the precise
numbers for each pen.

I would not expect you to be able to - A. Again, it is a
matter of experience because there is no counting
mechanism for those pens   like there is on the turnstiles.

Exactly.   You know, for   example, that as the result of a
number of tragedies the capacity of almost every football
ground in the country, certainly the First Division
grounds, has been reduced.    That is, whereas before the
Ibrox tragedy a ground might take in 80,000 spectators,
thereafter the capacity was cut and only 50,000 or 60,000
were allowed into the ground.    You know that, do you
not? - A. I know that.     I cannot be specific as to
Hillsborough, but I am sure the evidence will be
forthcoming.   The capacity is, I believe, 54,000.
Roundabout the time you are talking about, capacities
were reduced.   There were extensions to Hillsborough, a
new Kop was built.

Yes, you can build a new stand, but you know the capacity
was reduced? - A. I do not know whether it was or not at
Hillsborough.

It follows that if the capacity of a terrace, the safe
capacity is regarded as, let's say, 5,000, you can always
pack 8,000 or 9,000 in to it if you are not concerned
with safety? - A. I could not go along with that, sir.
You would be saying that the capacity of Hillsborough,
instead of being 54,000, on that ration would be 80,000
or 90,000.

Not necessarily because there is a lot of seating which
cannot be increased.   I am talking about the terraces.
You know you could increase the capacity of any terrace
if you ignore the safety factor? - A. Yes, sir.

Therefore it follows that you cannot simply ignore the
fact that a pen looks full simply because past experience
shows that however full it looks more fans can squeeze
in? - A. I am sorry.   Are you saying that experience
cannot tell you how to gauge the size of the capacity of
a pen?
                              28


                                            R. W. CREASER


Q. Certainly I am saying that to you, Mr. Creaser.   If what
   you are saying is that you can cheerfully ignore your
   visual observation that the pen looks full simply because
   on past experience more people can get into the pen, that
   is a very dangerous approach is it not to crowd safety? -
   A. Well, the specific answer to your question is yes, but
   I am not aware of any Police Officers cheerfully ignoring
   the safety of fans.

Q. Let me now put it to you: when a pen - and it would be
   pens 3 and 4, which would initially be the pens concerned
   - appeared to be nearing the safety capacity, it is
   essential to do something to prevent more fans getting
   into those pens? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   The people who can perform that act are not the Policemen
     on the perimeter fence or in the West Stand, but the
     Policemen and the stewards in the concourse between the
     turnstiles and the stand wall? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    The Police and stewards between the stand wall and the
     turnstiles cannot see the pens, therefore they have to
     have the information conveyed to them? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. It would obviously be highly    dangerous and amateurish to
   rely on the information coming out from fans escaping
   from the pens and volunteering the information to the
   stewards? - A. If I was, for example, stood in the
   concourse and a fan approached me and said, ’’You are
   going to have to do something about it in there, it is
   chock-a-block, it is full, then if I could get there I
   would go and view the situation myself, or I would
   transmit a radio message to the Control Room who have got
   a view and ask what the situation was in there, "Do we
   need to take any action to prevent any more entry to
   those pens?"

Q. If you are making your forward planning, you do not say
   to people, "Well, it's all right, we don't need any plans
   for this because some fan or other will come out and let
   the Police or stewards know when it is full"? - A. No, I
   did not say that.

Q. That is what I was asking.   Therefore, you need some
   method thought out in advance of information being
   conveyed to the Police and stewards in that area to tell
   them that the pens are filling to capacity, nearing to
   capacity?




               A. Well, yes, you sort of make
ft   '


                                     29

                                                           R.W. CREASER


            - A. Well, yes. You    make it sound as if it is an information
            gathering exercise.    The people who were controlling the game,
            ground control, have   almost an aerial view of the pens, and
            they will be able to   observe when those pens are full.

         Q. The Police and stewards in the area that I have referred to
            would be relying on information from Police control? - A. No,
            they would be relying on all sorts of sources including the
            fans coming out saying "It's full", including a Police Officer
            who has walked down the tunnel and said, "It's full".

         Q. Mr. Creaser.... - A. I have walked down that   tunnel and
            thought, "This central pen is full", radioed   to Police control
            and said, "The pens are full", and they have   come back and
            said, "No, its not. There is plenty of room    at the front".

         Q. Mr. Creaser, please listen to my questions You may or may not
            wish to rely on all sorts of information, but you cannot be
            sure in advance of the game that spectators will come out and
            give this information to Police Officers, can you? - A. I will
            try and listen to your questions, sir.  Is your question, can
            I rely on fans in advance coming out and giving me information
            regarding the capacity of the pens?

         Q. Yes. - A. No, I can't, sir.

         Q. Good.  You have to rely on something more permanent, and
            whether you get any other information the one thing you are
            entitled to rely on is information coming from Police control
            and the club monitor? - A. Yes.

         Q. And that club monitor information will come to you presumably
            by the Police in the club monitor room? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. How did you expect that information to come and to whom?
            Would it have come to you or some other Officer, in 1989? - A.
            Well, if you can tell me at what point that arrived I can
            answer your question, because that information would have been
            transmitted.  Presumably what you are saying is at what time
            could some action be taken to prevent people entering the
            central tunnel?

         Q. All right, it is a very fair question to me, Mr. Creaser.  I
            will try and help you. - A. The control would     ask thePolice
            Officers who were present at that time.

         Q. There is some evidence that certainly by 2.45 at the latest
            pens 3 and 4 were uncomfortably full. Now, suppose that were
            true, if it were true, to whom should the information have
            been conveyed at that time, and how? - A. It is a very
            specific question, and again, I am not trying to be evasive,
            but the Police control room would   be in possession    ofthat
            information that the pen is full.    They would    then need to
            know from what their deployment situation is who to
            deploy.  If I had been in the concourse and they could see
            from the camera that I was in the concourse they might
            have addressed it to me. At that time I think they could
                          30


                                                R.W. CREASER


   probably see I had my hands full trying to control events
   in Leppings Lane so they might have asked, for example,
   Inspector White. But I can't be specific.    There was no
   person stood there ready to receive that particular
   message. There were Inspectors in charge of each section
   and it would go initially to that Inspector.

Q. I am terribly sorry to have to labour this, but I must. - A.
   Certainly, sir.

Q.j It is always foreseeable at a Semi-Final that pens 3 and 4
    will near capacity or reach capacity before the game starts,
    and by "capacity” I mean the safe capacity. - A. We have
    agreed that point, yes, sir.

Q. Should there not be somebody, therefore, either steward or
   Police Officer, appointed in advance lest to receive that
   information, lest that information be conveyed? - A. I
   think I said earlier in my evidence that the tactics of
   filling the terraces had been agreed that we would let the
   fans find their own level.

Q. Was it foreseeable in the light of the arrangements that were
   made to your knowledge, foreseeable that when the Leppings
   Lane pens 3 and 4 became full there would be nobody in
   authority between the turnstiles and the West Stand available
   to receive the information that the pens were full? - A. When
   you say "was it foreseeable", it was not ....

Q. Was it possible? - A. It was not foreseeable that there would
   be this crush outside that would divert the Police activity.
   So in terms of foreseeability, no, it was not foreseeable.

Q. In other words, there should have been somebody within that
   area to receive that information? - A. It was not devoid of
   Police Officers.  There would be Police Officers there, sir.

Q. So somebody was there to receive the information, if it had
   ever been sent, that the pens were full, or nearing capacity?
   - A. You are forcing me into a position to answer questions
   which perhaps I can't.  I was not there.   I was outside in
   Leppings Lane, but if we are talking about theory, yes, in
   theory, there were Police Officers present.

Q. That is really what I am asking.  We know what did happen. No
   such information was ever given.  I am asking you about the
   planning for this operation.  So far as the planning was
   concerned had there been information conveyed that the pens
   were filling or full, somebody should have been there to
   receive the information and act on it. The answer to that
   question is yes, in the plans there was somebody in charge
   of that sector ready to receive that information.

Q. And if that information had been conveyed was it the plan that
   Police Officers would themselves or by ordering stewards,
   divert fans from the Leppings Lane pens 3 and 4? - A. Yes.  If
   I can explain, I previously performed that job as an
                          31


                                                R.W. CREASER


   Inspector, and I have taken action when those pens have been
   full.   I have had the benefit of when I have been taking that
   action of there not being - I would not call it a riot - but a
   crush situation outside the ground, people climbing over the
   ground.   The Officers who were there ready to make that
   decision I think were faced with fans climbing over the
   ground, coming into the ground, gates being opened and fans
   coming in towards them. So it was not a sedate situation with
   somebody ready to receive a radio message to say that the pens
   were full.

Q. In the forward planning for this match was it envisaged that
   if the pens became full information to that effect would be
   conveyed to Police Officers behind the stand and the Police
   Officers would themselves or by the stewards organise the
   diversion of spectators from the tunnel to the wing pens? - A.
   It is a very long and precise question, and the answer has got
   to be yes, there were plans, because as I have said Inspector
   White was in charge of that particular area. He is a very
   experience Officer, and he has used the very plans you are
   talking about, and if the need had arisen and he was in a
   position to be able to do so, he would have taken that action.
   So we have got Police Officers who are used to policing a
   particular area, and if a situation arose which in their
   previous experience had arisen, i.e. the pens are full,
   comfortably full or full to capacity, whichever expression you
   want to use, then an Officer of the rank of Inspector is quite
   capable of taking a decision to stop further fans going down
   there, and he would inform control, "I am now going to stop
   any more fans going down the central tunnel".

Q. I am very grateful.  The answer to my precise question was
   "Yes” . I want to go on to something else. On this occasion
   we know that there was a request at 2.47 for the gates to be
   opened to relieve the pressure outside the ground, and again
   so you don't think criticism is coming, nobody has yet
   criticised that request. Had at 2.47 or 2.48 you been
   informed that there was a possibility of gate C being opened,
   how long would it have taken you to organise a cordon of
   stewards or Police to ensure no further fans went into the
   tunnel, through the tunnel and into pens 3 and 4? - A. Well,
   again I am not being evasive, but if you are asking for how
   long it would take, are you including the thinking time while
   I could sit down and study all this, or if I did it just like
   that?

Q. I am not talking about thinking time, because that is unfair.
   - A. We have all had time to sit andanalyse what could have
   been done.

Q. Mr. Creaser, I want to deal with it realistically. - A. Yes, I
   appreciate that, sir.

Q. Round about 2.47 you were outside the ground? - h.. Yes, sir.

Q. Under pressure? - A. To a certain extent, yes, sir.
ps:   ’

                                     32


                                                           R.W. CREASER


          Q. Were you the right person, first of all, for such a request to
             be made to, or would it have been Mr. White? - A. Well, at
             that time?

          Q. At that time? - A. I would have been the wrong person.

          Q. Who would have been the right person?    Do you know? - A. I was
             not there, sir.

          Q. Let us suppose you were the one that was asked, because
             everybody may say they were the wrong person. A message comes
             through on the radio, "We are going to open gate C. Get a
             cordon to stop people going into pens 3 and 4", and you are
             outside the ground. How long would it have taken you to think
             about who to detail and how long would it have taken Police
             Officers to get there.to block the tunnel? - A. Again, there
             are so many unknowns in your question, but I coula have done
             it in 30 seconds, less.  I would stand at the tunnel and I
             would summon Officers who were at the rear of the turnstiles,
             i.e. on the inside of the ground, and direct them them, but i
             am aware at that time they were dealing with people that were
             climbing over the fences, over the turnstiles.  But, yes, I
             could have diverted those people.  You are probably aware
             there are some wooden doors there.  I could have given
             consideration to closing those doors.  That was an option
             open.  If people had wanted to get out those pens backwards
             in an evacuation situation those doors would open the wrong
             wa y .

          Q. I don't think anyone is really serious suggesting the doors
             should have been closed.  I am certainly doing so. - A. It
             raises the question why the door is there.

          Q. That is another matter.  I don't want to pin you to an unfair
             period or to answer you give on the spur of the moment under
             pressure. - A. You are doing, because you say "to form a
             cordon".  To form a cordon, is that 10, 20?

          Q. No, Mr. Creaser, you are the Police Officer, and you are the
             operational Officer.  It would not take 20 Police Officers.     I
             am asking you how long it would take you to arrange for
             sufficient Police or stewards to divert fans from the tunnel
             to the wings. Now, you have given 30 seconds.      I don’t want
             to pin you to that if it was a rash estimate.     Certainly
             within a minute or two you could have made such an arrangement
             if you had been asked? - A. Again I d on ’t want to be evasive,
             if those Officers were not engaged on other matters I could
             have got them there within 30 seconds quite easily.

          Q. There are a large number of   Officers, we know, in the area
             behind the turnstiles going   into the North Stand. Do you
             remember that? - A. I think   from memory - I d o n’t remember
             their serial number - but a   crime and vandal unit was called
             to the rear of A gate. Are    those the ones you mean?

          Q. Yes. - A. Yes, sir.
                          33

                                                  R.W. CREASER


Q. It would take them about 10 seconds to get to the tunnel,
   would not it? - A. From gate A?

Q. Yes. - A. It is a shade longer than 10 seconds, but yes,      less
   than a minute.

Q. Half-a-minute? - A. Less than a minute, yes.

Q. So all that could have been organised.   In other words, in an
   emergency, had you been told, "We are going to open gate C to
   relieve the pressure of the crowd outside.   We don't want any
   more spectators in pens 3 and 4", you could quite easily
   within a minute or two have organised that operation? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Thank you.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

Q. One matter, Mr. Creaser.  Let me go back to your evidence when
   you were answering questions from Mr. Collins.  You told us
   that you accept in the Standing Orders there is no suggesting
   of monitoring pens by the Police? Would you confirm it is
   your view that such a task is so obviously one for the Police
   it is unnecessary to even put it into Standing Orders? - A.
   Could you repeat that? It is a subtle question.   In what way
   do you mean, sir?

Q. I don't want to put you to the task of answering the questions
   again that my learned friend, Mr. Hytner has asked you as to
   numbers and pens A , B ,C , 1, 2, and 3 and times and the like.
   It is a very simple matter.     You told us, did you not, that
   monitoring the numbers in each of the Leppings Lane pens was
   so obviously a matter of crowd control as part of the Police’s
   duty that you are not surprised it is not in theStanding
   Orders? - A.   Yes, sir, I would agree with that.

Q. It is so obvious? - A. Yes, sir.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL:

Q. Mr. Creaser, from 2.15 onwards you were outside the Leppings
   Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And from about 2.30 onwards were you in the region of the
   perimeter gates? - A. I was not static.  I was moving about
   and generally supervising other Police Officers.  So it could
   have been at that time at that place for a short period of
   time and then moved on.

Q. Between 2.30  and about 3 o ’clock, part of the time were you in
   the thick of the crowd? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And part of the time were you at the edge of the crowd? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. And part of the time were you between one crowd, that is the
                          34

                                                R.W. CREASER


   crowd on Leppings Lane, and the other crowd which was within
   the concourse and behind the gates which had been shut? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. And was it in that position you became aware as you told
   Lord Justice Taylor, of fans without tickets? Was it in
   those positions you became aware of fans without tickets?
   - A. I first became aware of fans without tickets quite
   early; on.  I heard radio messages tothe effect there
   were people present at the ground without tickets. I
   can't be precise as to the time or who transmitted that.
   I was made aware there was a small number of fans had
   arrived at the ground without tickets.

Q. You gave an estimate of about 200? - A. Yes, I would say at
   its height.

Q. Is that an estimate based on what you observed? - A. It was
   based on the observations of people. There must have been
   five or six I had personally spoken to, "Have you got a
   ticket?".  "No".   "Then let us have you away from the ground.
   There are no tickets on sale".   They would then leave and join
   another group.   They were going round in groups of half-a-
   dozen or so, obviously people without tickets.

Q. The estimate of 200 is not what you observed? - A. Yes, it is,
   but when I say a group of 200 I am estimating in total. There
   were probably about 200 people who did not have tickets.  If I
   gave the impression that there was a single crowd, that they
   were all stood together, then that is not the case.




                               /Q. The estimate then is
                                   35


                                                      R. W. C R E A S E R


Q.   The estimate, then, is based           upon what you observed of
     the parts of the crowd which           were within your vicinity and
     which you were able to see?             A.   Yes.   To clarify it,
     what I am saying is, my best           estimate is that there were
     in small pockets of three or           four groups of fans totalling
     200 who were at the Leppings           Lane end of the ground.

Q.   I have in mind what you said at page 5 of your statement.
     It is about half way down and it is in the paragraph
     beginning, "I have c on si derable experience of policing this
     particular area and I could see that the build-up of
     s upporters was later than is usually the case and there
     appeared to be larger numbers."      You go on, "The operation
     was frustrated, more so by the presence of a c on si derable
     number of fans who had arrived in the vicinity of the
     ground but were not in possession of tickets entitling them
     entry to what was an all-ticket match."      A.   That is
     correct, yes, sir.

Q.   It would be fair to say, would it not, that you were never
     in a position to be able to observe other than a small
     p roportion of the crowd.  A.   Small propo rt io n of the
     crowd of 54,000 or ---?

Q. Of the 4 ,5 00 -5,000       I think you said.

Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I think           it was my mistake;
     4 ,000-4,500 you said, did you?   A.             I thought I said
     4 ,5 00 -5,000 ---

            LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:   I     did, too.

            MR.    MAXWELL;    That is my    note as well, sir.

          THE WITNESS:   I mean, if there is any mistake                    about   it,
     my estimate of the crowd, my Lord, is 4,500-5,000.

          LORD JUSTICE        TAYLOR:   I will     restore my note to what
     I put down.

          MR. HYTNER:   May I apologise,            sir,   for casting       that
     aspersion on your note.

Q.       MR. MAXWELL:   Mr. Creaser, taking it at 4,500, it
     is right, is it not, that you were never in a position
     to observe other than a relatively small proportion  of
     the people in that crowd who were close enough to you
     to be seen?   A.   No, sir.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE  TAYLOR:   I suppose you were doing your
     own personal MORI Poll, were you?   You were, from your
     experience, juding from the numbers you saw how many you
     would estimate there were without tickets in the crowd?
     Is that it?   A.   We are talking about the 200?

Q.   Yes.     A.      Yes.     Is that what you are talking           about?
                                  36


                                                      R. W. C R E A S E R

                 C ro ss -e xa mi ne d   by MR.   GIBSON-WATT:

Q. Mr. Creaser, first of all, something that may be very
   obvious.        You had an exchange with mr. Hytner about
   opening a gate and the use of the word "undesirable".        Is
   it right to put it this way, that Police would never consider
     o p e ni ng a gate to let in a football crowd unless there
   was an emergency outside the ground?        A.   Yes, sir.
   I have heard it suggested that it is now a common strategy
   for football fans to arrive in the vicinity of a football
   ground not in p ossession of tickets with the event of
   c ausing so much d isruption that they will be let in, and
   I would like to say that I have never in my experience
   at Hillsborough known that situation arise.

Q.   So is the answer this, that you would never consider
     r equesting the opening of a gate to let in a football
     crowd or part of it unless there was an emergency outside
     the ground such as we had here?    A.   That is correct,
     yes, sir.

Q. And is it so obvious to you that you do not need to be told
   that specifically -the u nd esirability of opening a gate -
   in an operational order or in any other way?
   A.   That is correct, sir.      An operational order cannot
   deal with every concei va bl e contingency.

Q.   That is right and it is not in the operational                order    because
     it is so obvious.   A.   That is right, sir.

Q. And you, of course, are a very experienced Police Officer
   but it would be obvious^ would it not, to any Officer of any
   experience of contro ll in g a football crowd? A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   Thank you.   Now, one or two other matters.    First of all,
     am I right in this,  that you did the same duties   in 1988
     as you did in 1989?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. And Inspector White did the same duties;  is that right?
   A.   I am almost sure that Inspector White was on duty
   at the Leppings Lane end.   Now, whether or not he had
    the same specific identical duties, I cannot be sure,
   sir.

Q.   Putting it another way, you cannot remember who was the
     I nspector in 1988 who was in charge of the inside
     concourse and the Leppings Lane terraces, which is
     Inspector White's duty this year?    A.   Yes, sir,
     I think it is quite possible that it was Inspector White
     but I cannot be sure of that fact.

Q.   Very good.   You told us yourself that on previous occasions
     as an Inspector you had taken action when Pens 3 and 4 were
     full.   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   How did you find out on those occasions that Pens 3 and 4
     were full?   A.   From a variety of sources, some of which
     would include a football fan telling me, "You want to do
                               37


                                                  R.W.CREASER

     something about that, it is full in there", to the Control
     Room suggesting that the pens are full, to me going up in
     to the West Stand and looking down at the pens.        All sorts
     of different ways.   I mean, it is just c om mo ns en se ways,
     really, sir.

Q.   Well, a variety of ways.   Did they include sending a
     C onstable down the tunnel to check whether they were
     full or not?    A.   No, sir, that is a very unreliable
     way of estimating whether or not the central pens are
     full because the gradient on the terraces is a slight
     gradient and if you stand at the front of the pitch end
     of the tunnel, you cannot see the position of the fans at
     the perimeter fence.

Q.   I think you told us that there was a procedure or rather
     that the tunnel was blocked off in 1988.    You said that,
     I think, at the beginning of your evidence.    A.  I
     u nderstand it was, yes, sir.

Q.   Are you aware of how Police found out that the pens were
     full in 1988?   A.   I can guess it would be from one of
     the sources I have said but I am not spec if ic al ly aware,
     no, sir.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Were you personally involved in
     the decision to close them off that time or not?   A.    It
     is difficult to say, my Lord, because I have been involved
     in that situation several times when I have taken that
     action and I do not recall doing it at last year's Semi-
     Final, no, my Lord.

Q.   So you just know it was done but ---         A.   I believe   it
     was, yes, sir.

Q.           MR. GIBSON-WATT:          Can you help us about this:    about
     quarter of an hour before k ic k-off in 1988 were you inside
     or outside the t urnstiles?            A.    I would be with ---    I
     can't tell you where I was at any specific time during last
     y e a r ’s match.        At quarter to three, I would have -- because
     my r e s p o n si bi li ti es were for the North Stand, the West
     Stand and the terraces, but because the height of activity
     is at the turnstiles, I would no doubt have been in proximity
     of the turnstiles.

Q. One other matter.   You have told us that you went to Police
   Control Room and had a conv er sa ti on with S up erintendent
   Murray, that is this year?     A.      Yes, sir.

Q. And that was about what      the procedure should be for the
   filling of the Leppings      Lane terraces?    A.  Yes, sir.

Q. Why did you find it necessary in fact to go to the Control
   Box?   A.   To see S up erintendent Murray, just to confirm
   that everything was absolutely in a ccordance with the
   previous year.
                                    38

                                                         R. W. C R E A S E R

Q.    Was the question of how the terraces             should fill the
     specific reason why you went there?                A.   Yes, sir.

Q.    So before you went there you were uncertain what the
     p rocedure would be?   A.   I was, if you like, 33%
     certain.

Q.   But you wanted   to check?          A.   That's right,     sir.

Q.    Had you been to the Control Box for a similar reason the
     previous year?   A.    On a Semi-Final I try and avoid
     actually going into the Control Room.

Q.    Is this the position, this year - 1989 - in principle you
     try to avoid going to the Control Room because obviously
     they have enough to do?    A.  Yes, sir.

Q. And yet you found it necessary to go because of some
   un certainty about how the terraces should be managed?
   A.    Well, it was con fi rm at io n of the way in which I
   believed the arra ng em en ts were going to be made in relation
   to the fans.

Q. But, forgive me, why the need to confirm if you had not
   had a similar need the previous year?     A.   Because I
   take a p ro fessional attitude to policing and I wanted to be
   101^ certain that the duties that I was going to do and
   the people that I was going to supervise and instruct were
   absolutely sure of what they were going to do.

Q.   I respect that, Chief Inspector, but what I am querying is
     this:   was there not something specific, some incident,
     some word from some other Officer which raised the doubt
     in your mind or caused you to make that trip which you
     would not otherwise have made?    A.  No, sir.   It was
     s omething that I wanted, as Isay, to be, if you like,
     belt and braces.    I wanted to be absolutely certain
     that what I was going to tell other Officers   to do was in
     line with the policy.

Q. Was there anything in your management of other matches
   between the Semi-Final in 1988 and the Semi-Final in
   1989 which raised in your mind the idea that d eliberate filling
   of the terraces by the Police might be a better method on
   this occasion?   A.   No, sir.

Q.   It was simply, you are saying, that you wanted to be 100%
     certain and you were merely 9 9 %? That is all it was?
     A.   Yes, sir.

                      C ro s s- ex am in ed by MR.   KALLIPETIS:

Q.   Chief Inspector, can you help me, please, on one matter.
     Serials 14, 15, 16 and 17 had respons ib il it y for Leppings
     Lane terrace and the rear enclosure?     A.     I think it was
     19, 18, 17, 16, sir.
                             39


                                             R. W. C R E A S E R

Q.   I am looking at my copy of the order, perhaps I have got
     the wrong one.   It matters not for the purposes of my
     question.  At the bottom, Serial 15, Emergency Evacuation
     Procedure is the matter that I want to ask you about.
     I am looking for Serial 14 under Inspector White.
     A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   Leppings Lane terrace and rear enclosure south.    Serial
     15, Leppings Lane terrace and rear enclosure north.
     A.   Yes, sir.

Q. And then Serial 16 under Inspectors Sykes and Purdy,
   Leppings Lane turnstiles, and the same for Serial 17.
   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   The notes in the operational orders for the emergency
     ev acuation procedure simply seems to me, and if I have got
     it wrong please correct me, to direct Police Constables
     to take up positions at the exit gates and make sure
     they are open;   is that right?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. What procedures were there, if any, for the emergency
   evacuation of Pens 3 and 4?   A.   In relation to going
   out of the ground?

Q.    Emergency e vacuation of Pens 3 and 4.    A.   Well, the
     emergency evacu at io n procedure that you see on your order
     is a global emergency evacuation procedure.       It is not
     co nfined to the duties of Serials 14 and 15.      What that
     means is that if there is an emergency situation    perhaps
     a bomb scare or whatever, then Officers on 14 and 15 will
     open the exit gates - those are the Gates A, B and C,
     the c oncertina wide gates.

Q.    I think we are all familiar with those.   A.        That would
     be where fans from the central pens would make       their exit
     from the ground.

Q. But how would they get to Gates A, B and C?   A.   Well,
   the same way as they got in, out through the central tunnel,
   sir.

Q. So is the answer to my question this, that there were no
   p rocedures envisaged for the emergency evacuation of Pens
   3 and 4 themselves   but once fans had escaped from Pens
   3 and 4 then the procedures envisaged with the gates out
   of the grounds would be monitored so that they were kept open?
   A.    Yes, the emergency evacuation procedure that is down for
   Serials 14 and 15 applies to the whole ground.    Open the
   big gates, and the emptying of specific pens was not laid
   down in the evacuation procedure.

Q.   Not even c on si dered,I suspect, is that not right?
     A.   No, that is not right, sir.

Q.   If it was considered, can you please tell me by whom and
     what was the result of the conside ra ti on ?  A.   The
     consi de ra ti on given to the evacuation of the central pens
                                  40


                                                       R. W. C R E A S E R

     is the way they come in,          out through    the tunnel.

Q. Are you saying that was consciously decided upon?
   A.    Well, if there is only one entrance to a pen, sir,
   that has got to be used as exit.   There are some smaller
   gates at the front in the perimeter fencing and obviously
   gates at the top between the two outer pens.    It is very
   d ifficult - I mean, it depends what the emergency was.

Q.   Precisely, Chief Inspector, but is it right that nobody
     had really given any thought to there being an emergency
     which required the evacuation of Pens 3 and 4 and thus
     no-one had really c onsidered how they would get people
     out in such an emergency?    A.   You can ask me if I
     have c onsidered it.   I cannot sort of give evidence of
     what other people might have considered, sir.

Q.   O bviously not, but you are the Officer who is in charge
     inside and outside the ground at the Leppings Lane end.
     A.    The c o n s i d er at io n that I would have given is that if
     it was necessary to evacuate the ground, those people in
     the central pens would have been evacuated through the
     central tunnel.

                     C ross-e xa mi ne d   by MR.    GLASGOW:

Q.   Chief Inspector, one matter, I think.   You told the
     Inquiry that you had heard it suggested that crowds were
     turning up in the general sense without tickets in order
     to create trouble in the hope of getting in.  Do you
     remember saying that?   A.   Yes.   To put it in context,
     I have heard that suggestion in the press.

Q.   Yes.   I think you are saying you heard it subsequent
     to this incident.   A.   That's correct, yes, sir.

Q.   Before this tragedy occurred you had not heard it suggested
     by anybody, through intelligence or othersise, that there
     had been problems with particular crowds turning up late
     or without tickets in respect of which contin ge nc y plans might
     be needed?   A.   That is correct, sir, and to clarify that
     further I am aware that intelligence gathering and liaison
     between Officers from Sheffield and Liverpool had taken place
     and to the best of my knowledge that information, if it
     exists, had not been forthcoming.

Q.   To put you in the picture with the rest of us, we have
     been told in the course of the Inquiry that there had been
     one particular series of incidents that had led up to
     commun ic at io n between the H er tfordshire Force and Liverpool
     as a result of at least one occasion when some 1500 Liverpool
     fans had turned up without tickets and a c on ti ngency plan
     had been made to deal with them.         You were unaware of
     that?     A.     Yes, sir.

Q.   Could I just ask you what sort of contingency planning
     you or anybody else might have come up with if you had
                              41


                                               R. W. C R E A S E R

     been told that that was the sort of problem that might
     arise, namely a substantial number of fans turning up
     either late and/or without tickets?      What could be done?
     A.    I was not involved in the policing of the event but
     I u nderstand the match took place towards the end of the
     season involving Sheffield Wednesday and Middlesbrough.
     It was a match the outcome of which depended on the
     relegation stakes in Division 1 and such a c ontingency
     as you suggest arose and quite e l a b°rate a rr an gements were
     made as to where those fans would be taken in the event
     of large numbers coming without tickets.       I think they
     had expressed their specific intention of coming to the
     match even though they had not got tickets.         I could be
     wrong;    it is hearsay, but there were quite elaborate
     contin ge nc y plans drawn up which would remove those supporters
     from the ground and take them to a place nearby.

Q.   Do you now know of the intelligence that was p a s s e d "by the
     H ertf or ds hi re Police after the Watford game with Liverpool
     at which they had e xperienced this difficulty with the
     1500 fans?        A.    I do not, no, sir.

Q.    But if I can put it to you in the terms in which we were
     told about it, that they had been held in a particular
     area several hundred yards away from the ground and then
     let in at a later stage, is that the sort of contingency
     p lanning that might have been considered if you had had
     that i nt elligence?  A.    Yes, sir.

Q.   I suppose the difficulty, though, Officer, would be if
     you know that the ground is already sold out on an a l l ­
     ticket occasion, there will not be anything that you can
     do in the way of letting those people in, even for payment,
     at a late stage, will there?    A.    Yes.  I think what
     had been done is that - whether it was effective or not,
     I do not know, but there had been press releases, other
     media releases, phone-ins on the local radio, I heard it
     several times that the Police were urging people not to
     attend not in p ossession of tickets.

Q.   Yes.   Can I then bring you to the question of those not
     having tickets and, without being in any way offensive, can
     I just ask how on earth you know what proportion of those
     who went in through the three gates had tickets or did not
     have tickets?   How on earth can you make an estimate of
     that?




                                   /A.    I estimated     that
                                       R. W. CREASER



A. I estimated that there were probably about 200 people
present who did not have tickets.

We all appreciate how you did it. - A. If you accept that
figure all the people that were outside the ground went
in, so all my 200 will have gone in.

I see the logic of that, but with the greatest respect I
am having some difficulty in following the premises.
How on earth can you sensibly do a projection on the
basis of the number of people - half a dozen or so - who
may have asked you out of a crowd of 4,000 or 5,000?
How can you project to an intelligent conclusion as to
the total number of that crowd that are likely to be in
the same position? - A. Because my particular duties
included the supervision of the initially 40 Police
Officers who were on duty there.    I mingled, I spoke to
those Officers, were there any problems, any problems
with counterfeit tickets, that sort of thing, and they
would tell me they had problems with people without
tickets.    I saw people without tickets who had been sent
off by other Police Officers.    Some people approached me
and I explained in quite strong terms that I did not want
to see them again, they were not in possession of a
ticket.    I told them to leave the vicinity.   I saw
those people leave me and join groups of four or five who
were people obviously in the same boat without tickets.
It is only a best estimate - 200 - it could have been
400.    It is very difficult to estimate numbers in that
situation, but I think about 200.    It is from speaking
to other Officers who had dealt with similar situations.

If you had been in possession of the intelligence from
the Hertfordshire Police which I accept you were not, and
you had known of a specific anticipation of a large
number of people turning up without tickets, and you had
thought it sensible to do what they did and to have a
holding area for those without tickets, at what stage
would you have thought it sensible to try to weed out
those who were destined for the holding area?   Would you
wait for them to get up to the turnstiles to be turned
back or would you try and have some filtration system? -
A. You are asking me a question which is the sort of
matter, which the evidence, or the suggestion or the
intelligence of which would be received by Police
Officers and got down and discussed and thrashed out.    A
strategy would be agreed.   You are asking me to give one
off the spot, what I would do.   I will try and answer it
if you want but perhaps not so much weight should be
attached to such evidence.

If it is unfair I will not press it.   I appreciate it
sounds very unfair at this stage to put it to you,
                                         R. W. CREASER


Officer.   Perhaps you could agree with me to this
extent.   It is, of course, vitally important that all
intelligence concerning a particular club should be
circulated, both to the Police and to the club if at all
possible, so as to anticipate any problems. - A. The
South Yorkshire Police have - it is a Police Constable's
full time job to be concerned in that regard.

In which event it would obviously disturb you to know
that an important piece of intelligence about Liverpool
Club itself had not been collected by that Officer with
the specifically designated role of liaison?   That is
quite worrying, is it not? - A. It is worrying that he
has not been able to get hold of that information, but if
I can reiterate, the experience was it had never happened
before.

I entirely accept that and I invite you to underline it.
Your experience of previous games, including semi-finals,
had been that the Leppings Lane end specifically'had
worked wholly satisfactory? - A. Yes, sir.

Nothing in the Police experience and presumably in the
stewarding experience insofar as that was common to your
knowledge, had ever led you to believe there could be a
problem at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Not to paint too
rosy a picture - we do have problems at that end - but
they have all easily been accommodated by the numbers of
Police Officers that have been there, sir.

        MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you very much.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Just before we move on, we
have not had any evidence of any occasion anywhere where
gates have just been opened and people let in
indiscriminately, except, I think, in an incident at York
where there was an emergency because I think there is
evidence where on occasions people have turned up without
tickets where they have been allowed in for payment
because there was room in the ground?   The club wanted
the revenue and the Police wanted them out of the town?

      MR. COLLINS:   That is right, the Watford example
was an all-ticket match but not a sell-out and the same
applied, I think, at Norwich.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I was going to ask about
that.     We will have to look at Norwich as well possibly.

      MR. COLLINS:    I say it was at Norwich.   There is
another similar incident at Norwich as I understand it.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Which may have been about a
fortnight before this match?
                            44



                                               R. W. CREASER


         MR. COLLINS:   Yes.     Sir, I am not aware of any
   other case other than the   one we have heard about at York
   where gates were opened letting people in
   indiscriminately.   The York one was similarly a crush,
   as I understand it.

         MR. COLLINS:   Yes, Mr. Woodward.

Q. Of course, awareness of it not having happened does not
   mean that it did not happen.   The evidence at this
   Inquiry is, as yet, in its early days, as I understand.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Oh, yes.

              Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Creaser, may I ask you first of all about the
   responsibilities of Policemen and Officers, for example,
   of the rank of Inspector? - A. Yes.

Q. It has been put to you byvarious questions that the
   planning did not set out every contingency and did not
   give specific detail of what an Inspector should do or
   what the appropriate action should be in the event of
   something occurring.   Do you follow? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is that unusual? - A. No, sir.

Q. Not to cover every eventuality? - A. No, sir.   The
   quantity and quality of Senior Police Officers present at
   this semi-final was such that they would be able to deal
   with most eventualities.

Q. Would you expect, for example, Inspectors to be turning
   to Control every time there was a decision to be made? -
   A. No, sir.   To perhaps give some feel of the
   responsibilities of an Officer of the rank of Inspector;
   we are sat here in the fourth largest city in England and
   at six o'clock this evening there will be an Inspector in
   charge of the city centre, as there is an Inspector in
   charge of the city centre at the moment, but he has
   probably got more Senior Officers to whom he can can turn
   for advice.   However, unless those Senior Officers make
   visits back to the station in the evening, which they
   frequently do, there will be an Officer of the rank of
   Inspector in charge of this city right through the night.
   At any time during the night he will be the most senior
   Officer on duty.

Q. What operational responsibility and control does he in
   fact have? - A. In the case of the Officer in this city
   he will have control over any eventuality that might take
   place until more senior Officers can perhaps be called
   out.
                                       R. W. CREASER


Would the same be happening in respect of those
Inspectors at an event such as the Hillsborough semi­
final who had responsibilities for certain areas and
serials? - A. Yes, sir.

They would have the operational control of that area and
that zone? - A. Yes, sir.

And the responsibility to act and organise upon their own
initiative? - A. Yes, unless something was deemed to be
beyond his control or in which he wanted extra resources,
he would deal with it himself.   He might report the fact
he is dealing with it to the Control Room, but he would
deal with most aspects.

May I ask you about the briefing of stewards and the
stewards' responsibilities?   In 1989 were you present
for any part of the briefing of the stewards? - A. Yes,
sir.   At one point - I cannot place a time on it, but it
would be early on, noonish, about that time, perhaps
earlier, I went into the West Stand where Inspector White
had assembled a large quantity of the stewards and he was
outlining their particular responsibilities in relation
to how they should deal with the crowd.

Was there any emphasis being placed during that briefing
upon the responsibilities of the stewards as opposed to
the Police for the organisation, placing and monitoring
of the crowds? - A. Yes.   I did not hear all the
briefing, but the bit I came in on, and I made a sort of
mental note of it because I was impressed by the
competent and very professional attitude of Mr. White in
briefing the stewards and that is why I remember it.    He
was outlining the duties of the stewards in relation to
the people arriving in the West Stand, saying that the
Police would in no way be responsible for seeing people
to their seats, that was the stewards' responsibility.
In the event of disputes over a seat, a fan might say
there was somebody sat in seat B26 and he had got the
ticket to B26, we would say that was a Steward s
responsibility, but he was saying there would be Police
Officers to assist if things got out of hand.

From what you heard there was some line being drawn, was
there, between the responsibility of the Police and the
responsibility of the club and the stewards, concerning
the positioning and ordering of people at the ground? -
A. That's right.

Had you ever heard that discussed or uttered before to
stewards in your presence? - A. Yes, I have seen the
stewards briefed.   I have briefed them myself.   I was
just impressed by the way in which it was being
conducted.   They were all seated in a cluster in the
t




                               46



                                              R. W. CREASER


       West Stand and being given very clear and concise
       instructions.

    Q. Is that a point at which some emphasis is made on those
       occasions? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. According to your experience at Hillsborough, and it
       includes semi-finals and includes also numerous League
       games? - A. Yes, and in fact quite large other FA Cup
       matches where Sheffield Wednesday have been involved,
       capacity crowds.

    Q. So your experience of capacity crowds is not restricted
       to semi-finals? - A. No, sir.

    Q. Would your attendance at matches at Hillsborough when
       there have been very large crowds, be considerable?
       Would there be many, many occasions when you have been
       there?    Do you know how many it is? - A. It is going
       into double figures, sir.

    Q. When there are capacity crowds, of course one cannot
       predict with certainty when individuals will choose to
       attend? - A. That is correct.

    Q. According to your experience of capacity crowds
       attending, has there been any tendency to spread
       themselves out fairly evenly, or to come suddenly at a
       particular time? - A. My experience at Hillsborough has
       been that - particularly for an evening match, perhaps an
       FA Cup replay which could be on a Tuesday evening - that
       despite the fact people have to get home from work and
       have a meal and arrive at the match, they have not go the
       luxury of two or three hours which they would have for a
       three o'clock kick-off - they arrive in plenty of time.
       It has got to be said that the Sheffield Wednesday fans
       have a reputation of arriving late at Hillsborough.

    Q. Would they be going to the Leppings Lane end? - A. No,
       sir.   A lot of the visiting fans, the time of their
       arrival would be controlled because they would be coming
       by coaches or service trains or special trains.

    Q. On previous occasions you have spoken of the manner in
       which the terraces have been filled, or allowed to fill?
       - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. On the occasions of semi-finals, have you any direct
       personal experience of having any cordon, or guard, as it
       were, mounted on the access through the tunnel to the
       terrace? - A. Yes, that has been employed previously.

    Q. Your own direct personal experience at a semi-final? - A.
       Yes, sir.
                               47



                                              R. W. CREASER


Q. When? - A. Leeds against Coventry in 1987.

Q.   On the Sunday game? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   What time was that done at? - A. I could notgive      a
     precise time, sir.

Q. You did something, did you? - A. I was there concerned
   with the packing of the terraces.

Q. What did you do on that occasion? - A. On that occasion,
   and I cannot recall the order, but the pens were filled
   progressively and it was found that the tactic was not a
   success because of the facts I have mentioned of people
   wanting to leave those pens once they had got in them.

Q. They wanted to go into other pens? - A. Well, yes.   If
   you can imagine the situation of fans arriving two hours
   prior to the kick-off, which is not unusual, it is a bit
   harsh to ask them to stand in a pen and no leave it when
   they want to use the facilities, such as they are, of the
   club - refreshments, toilets, that sort of thing.

Q.   What did you do in 1987? - A. In relation to thosepeople
     that caused those sort of problems?

Q.    Well, in relation to the tunnel and theaccess  to the
     terrace.   What did you do in 1987? - A. I was concerned
     with the supervision of that area and the doors at the
     rear of the tunnel were closed.

Q. At what time did that happen? - A. I do not know, sir.

Q. How long were they closed for? - A. They would be closed,
   but they would be opened to let people out and there
   would be perhaps a horse or two or three Officers, three
   or four Officers, controlling those gates.

Q.   Perhaps what...? - A. Perhaps two or three, four or       five
     Officers controlling those gates.

Q.   Did you say a   horse as well? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Did you see a horse there in 1987? - A. I am aware that
     horses have been used at that location.    I cannot be
     specific to 1987.

Q.   Let's try and be clear about it.   Are you saying there
     was a horse at the tunnel in 1987, to stop people going
     in? - A. I am aware of horses being deployed there but I
     cannot be specific to that particular match two years
     ago.
                             48



                                            R. W. CREASER


Q. You say the gates were closed, or the doors to that
   tunnel were closed in 1987? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. At what time did that happen?   Are you able to help us?
   - A. No, sir.   It would happen at the time when it was
   considered.

Q. Yes, but in relation to the game...

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    When it was considered? - A.
     When it was considered that the pens were full.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD:   It would not be done otherwise? -
     A. Right, sir.

Q. That time has arrived.   When was it in relation to the
   game? - A. No, I cannot recall, sir.

Q. Can you say how long the gates were closed for? - A. No,
   sir.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can you say who was   on those
     gates when they were closed? - A. There would be   Police
     Officers from...   Can I name the Officers?

Q. Are you able to identify any of... - A. No, sir.

Q. Did you report that in your de-briefing afterwards to
   anybody? - A. It was at that time the agreed...  The
   particular Commander at that time wanted the pens filling
   in that particular fashion.

Q. What did the Commander want on that occasion? - A. He
   wanted pens filling individually.

Q. This is in relation to the 1987 semi-final.   You are
   saying the requirement was that the individual pens
   should be filled individually? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The practice on that occasion, it was not being allowed
   for people to go into the pens and then move to the side
   pens if they wanted to? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   That wasn't the situation? - A. That was the situation in
     1987.

Q. If the doors were closed how was that to be achieved? -
   A. I'm sorry...

Q.   If the doors were closed how was that to be achieved? -
     A. Can I clarify what the situation was, there is some
     confusion perhaps?
                            49

                                                    R.W. CREASER


Q. Please do. - A. The two centre pens would be allowed to fill.
   Once they were full there would be a Police Officer placed
   between the two outer pens, that is the south pen and the
   north pen, controlling the gate at the top of that.

Q. In the radial fence, do you mean? - A. yes, sir. He would
   close the gate there. He would have that gate closed, to stop
   people obviously spilling from the central pens to the lateral
   pens.

Q.   I see. So the closing of those gates was to keep people in
     the pens? - A. Yes, the idea of filling the pen would be fill
     them to a comfortable level and then fill the next pen along.

Q.   So when you say gates were closed, what gates are you
     referring to? The radial gates or tunnel gates? - A. In fact
     both, sir.

Q. At the same time? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What happened then? - A. The Officers that had closed the
   gates would remain there until the outer pens filled, and
   perhaps when they were three-quarters full those Officers
   would withdraw.

Q. Leaving the gates shut or open? - A. Leaving the gates open,
   sir.

Q. Open? - A. Yes, sir, because even when that policy was
   adopted, as the two outer pens filled up those gets would be
   open to let the fans find their own level, because some people
   in the centre might see it was more comfortable being in an
   outer pen.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:   So then the radial gates were opened? -
     A. Yes, sir.

Q.    And were the tunnel gates opened? - A. Yes, sir. There has to
     come a point when you open it you perhaps leave Police
     Officers there and advise fans not to go in and say, "Look, it
     is full down there".

Q. Did you see that done in 1987? - A. The part I have just
   mentioned about the gates then being opened?

Q.   Yes? - A. Yes. They would not be closed for    theduration    of
     the match.  They would be open at some time.

Q.   But therecame a time when it was decided, according toyour
     recollection, to reopen the radial gates and open the door to
     the tunnel? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Did you see that happen, that the doors to the tunnel opened?
     - A. I know they were opened.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Well, does it matter, if he
     actually saw them open? He says they were not left open
f   .>




                                         50

                                                              R.W. CREASER


                  during the match, so they must have been open at some stage?

                       MR. WOODWARD:   They were not left closed during
                  the match, sir?

                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Not left closed. So it does not
                  matter precisely at what moment or whether he saw it, does
                  it?

         Q.            MR. WOODWARD:   Was that before the kick-off that it
                  happened? - A. It depends.  I can't recall after two years
                  what the flow of spectators was just prior to and just after
                  the kick-off.  They would be opened at a time when it could be
                  seen that there were not more people entering the ground
                  wanting to get access to the central tunnel.

         Q. Could you be confusing this event, the closing of the gates
            and the closing of the tunnel doors, as you say in 1987, with
            something that happened on some other occasions? - A. It is
            possible, but to the best of my recollection that is what
            happened at the Leeds-Coventry match.

         Q. You say something else was done in 1988? - A. Yes.

         Q. Did you see it done? - A. In 1988 there was a different policy
            adopted in letting the fans find their own level.

         Q. And so far as       any attention having been given to the tunnel
            access to the       terrace in 1988, are you intending to describe
            something you       saw or something you have heard about? - A. You
            are asking me       did I see those gates at all shut in 1988?
              \
         Q. Was anything done to block the tunnel access? - A. In 1988?

         Q. That you saw, yes? - A. Yes, the gates were closed

         Q.\ You saw that, did you? - A. Yes.       You are asking me something
                  that happened a year ago.  To the best of ray recollection I
                  can recall that gate being shut for a short period of time.

         Q . Where were you when that happened?        A. I would be on the
             outside of the gate, sir.

         Q.       Outside of which gates? - A. At the time the gates to the
                  central tunnel would have been closed I would have been in the
                  rear enclosure, probably.  To see it that is where I would
                  have to be.

         Q. Forgive me.  It may have been lack of attention to what you
            were saying, but were you saying earlier that you had heard of
            that having been done rather than you had seen it done in
            1988? - A. I can recall - I believe Ican recall - the gates
            being closed in 1988 for a short period.

         Q. Because your evidence was, "I believe that action was taken
            last year"? - A. Right. To the best of my recollection that
            action was taken last year.
                                                  R.W. CREASER



Q.    Something of your own recollection? - A. Yes.

Q.    Are you able to identify any of the Officers that did it? - A.
      No, sir.

Q. Or were involved in it? - A. I do know the identify of an
   Officer now.

Q. You know of the identity of an Officer now? - A. Yes.

Q. From something you have been told? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Well?

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Who was involved in shutting that
  ^ gate, or what? - A. Yes.

Q. Tell us about it. - A. I have seen sight of a statement of a
  j former Sergeant Higgins.

Q.j        MR. WOODWARD:   Do you know which serial?   Well, we will
      find out about that. May I ask you about the stewards' part.
      In 1988 were there stewards present when that door was closed?
      - A. No, sir.

Q. The stewards, do they stay at fixed positions, or are there
   any stewards that move round the ground? Are there any club
   staff moving round? - A. The stewards who would be in the
   proximity of that tunnel would be probably four stewards at
   the bottom of the gangway X, Y, Z, and if necessary a Police
   Officer would call on them to give assistance, but that would
   be unlikely.  There are people who supervise the stewards. I donft
   know what their title is but they are stewards with a
   supervisory responsibility, who move around who are I believe
   in radio contact on the club's radio scheme.

Q. These are individuals supervising what the posted or appointed
   stewards do? - A. That is right.  I think they wear an arm
   band in addition or perhaps an arm band instead of a
   waistcoat.

Q. Are there stewards at the gates A, B and C? - A. There are, I
   believe, four stewards on gate C as a result, a similar number
   on B and perhaps two or three on A. I am not sure of A.

Q. Were there stewards about in 1989 in accordance with that
   sort of arrangement? - A. Certainly, yes, sir.

Q. And did you see the supervising stewards coming round and
   checking on their men and on the situation? - A. yes, sir.

Q. And those supervisory stewards all have radio contact? - A. I
   believe they do, yes, sir.

Q. Are you aware whether or not the ground keeps any interest or
   concern upon the activities in the turnstiles and the way the
■t*

                                  52


                                                       R.W. GREASER


         turnstile operators are faring? - A. Yes, sir. There are
         members of the club office staff. For example, I know one as
         Basil - I don't know his surname -who was always in
         possession of a radio. He is frequently seen at Leppings
         Lane, and in fact this year he was asked to attend at Leppings
         Lane to examine some suspect forgery tickets.

      Q. You spoke of the crowds in 1989 and the progress of the
         spectators through the turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

      Q. Did you have the impression that the turnstiles were for
         whatever reason not coping as efficiently as they ordinarily
         did? - A. No, sir.  I got the impression that people going
         through the turnstiles as quickly as the turnstiles could
         .allow them. The fact was that so many people arrived at once.

      Q. So many people arrived at once? - A. Or in a short period of
         time.

      Q. Before I leave the turnstiles, just one matter. Did you
         observe people trying to defeat the turnstiles by crowding up
         close behind the chap in front who had got a ticket, or
         crawling underneath or climbing over? - A. I did not see that
         but I am aware that that took place.    Other Officers told me
         that was happening.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Do you want to change to another
         topic?

              MR. WOODWARD:     Sir, I am about to leave the turnstiles.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     We will break off until 2 o'clock.

                              (Luncheon Adjournment)
