             Charles Hendry encloses a letter from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family
             Support Group.

             A copy of Mr Hammond’s letter has been sent to all Members of Parliament, and this is one of
             a number of resulting Minister’s Cases.

                                         ? To P/S of M of S as within




                                                                           iLU Lf
                                                                            MWard
                                                                            29 January 1997




                                                                        MINISTER OF STATE wrote as          mm

                                                                                        0 5 FEB 1997




CODE 18 77
                        The Rt Hon David Maclean MP    H om e O ffice
                                                      QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                      LONDON SW1H 9AT



Our Ref:   PW/97 5/2180/13
           PO 1292/97




Thank you for your letter of 15 January to Michael Howard,
enclosing one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken
to consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
'Hillsborough1, and the representations which have been made to him
by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision, the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                             DAVID MACLEAN

Charles Hendry Esq MP
                        The Rt Hon David Maclean MP    H om e O ffice
                                                      QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                      LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                                    1Rd1
                                                                       !
                                                              OS'
Our Ref:   PW/97 5/2180/13
           PO 1292/97




Thank you for your letter of 15 January to Michael Howard,
enclosing one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken
to consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
'Hillsborough', and the representations which have been made to him
by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision, the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                             DAVID MACLEAN

Charles Hendry Esq MP
Thank you for your letter of 15 Januaryrto Michael Howard, enclosing one from Mr Phil
Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.


As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken to consider carefully
the points which were made in the programme Hillsborough, and the representations which
have been made to him by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would need to be convinced that it
would be in the public interest to do so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that terrible day.


In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether there is any new evidence;
he will also consider whether that evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been
put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the
verdict of the jury would have been different.


The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the Home Secretary with a
detailed report of all the points raised by the programme. The Home Secretary has promised
that he will reach a decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been able to
consider all the issues.
                       Dlvlslonol File ftcfarenco    Hi)Mr                   Q

HOME OFFICE
MINISTERS CASE DRAFT REPLY

A d d re s s e e !
 Nam e                             n \<?
 Address                      Reference
  Tick on* to*-
        Gr        House of Commons
        □         House of Lords
        □         Other - Insert full postal address




Letter drafted for Signature by]

                                                    (Name of Signatory


Enclosures

                        —   _ —




C opies to be s e n t to




                                           (F u H addresses, if necessary!
           CHARLES HENDRY, MP. (High Peak)


                                        i n      w
                                                     rs


                 HOUSE OF CO M M O                    01pU
                  L O N D O N SW1A0A.

The Rt Hon Michael Howard QC MP;
Secretary of State
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT

                                     15th January 1997




I am enclosing a letter from Phil Hammond, Secretary of
the Hillsborough Family Support Group, and would
welcome your comments so that I may reply to him.

I am grateful to you for your assistance in this matter.



        ■sjDue -eve*.


               uLou
                                                                      •. •



    'typpCfc^                                                       JDPP0®^
                          Hillsborough Family Support Group
All Members of Parliament


                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - JUSTICE CAMPAIGN


Mr Charles Hendry M.P


I am writing to ask for your support for the campaign mounted by
the Hillsborough Family Support Group for the justice and
accountability which we believe has so far been denied to us by
the complete failure of the judicial system in the aftermath of
the Hillsborough Disaster.

You should be aware that following the broadcast on Independent
Television on December 5th 1996 of the drama/documentary
"Hillsborough", the Home Secretary is presently considering
whether, on the basis of the new and unused evidence which
emerged from the programme, there are grounds for him to order a
fresh Inquiry into the Disaster. Mr Howard in fact spoke
personally in the House of Commons adjournment debate which was
held about Hillsborough on 17th December, 1996 and he later met
privately with the many family members who had travelled to
London to be present at the debate.
                                            *«
The Hillsborough Family Support Group is hopeful that the Home
secretary will order a fresh inquiry, particularly in the light
not only of the new evidence but also of overwhelming public
support we have received - people from all walks of life from
right across Britain have written to us and telephoned to express
their outrage and anger at the treatment of bereaved families.
However, regardless of the decision of Mr Howard, the families
have also separately instigated the following legal actions to
take forward our quest for justice

i) a complaint to the Director of Public Prosecutions seeking a
criminal investigation into possible misconduct in the way
evidence was or was not presented to the Inquest jury. This
action is based on the evidence which has now come to light of
video- technician, Roger Houldsworth, who was not called as a
witness to either the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest and whose
existence was not known to the families until the TV programme
was made. The new evidence directly contradicts what some South
Yorkshire police officers told the jury and Taylor inquiry.

ii) an application to the Attorney General under section 13 of
the coroners act asking the High Court to consider quashing the
inquest verdict and ordering a fresh inquest.


CHAIRMAN                                SE^SfeTARY                TREASURER
T. Hicks                               P. Hammond                 Mrs. J. Traynor
7 Moor Lane                            21 Rosemont Road           43 Gorse field Road
Grassington                            Liverpool                  Birkenhead
Nr. Skipton BD23 5BD                   L17 6BX                    Merseyside
Tel: 0756-752345                       Tel: 051-724 5771          Tel: 051-652 7503
   Liverpool City Council, at an extraordinary meeting held on 19th December 1996, have
   already pledged their unanimous support to the families in our campaign. With the
   assistance of the City Council, the campaign is now being taken out across the country
   where it is our intention to seek the support of local authorities in all areas of Britain in
   response to the massive public disquiet which has emanated from the television
   programme (the "Daily Mirror", for example, has received a huge response to the
   petition it launched in december, on behalf of the families, supporting the call for a new
   inquest into the Disaster.) The response to the programme clearly indicates this is a
   matter of public intrest and should be dealt with accordingly.


   The Bereaved families of Hillsborough will forever be in debt to writer Jimmy McGovern
   and to G ranada Television for bringing the tale of our fight for justice into homes and
   consciences of the British people. However, in some ways the story told on television
   could not truly reflect the scale of what we have been made to endure by having the
   absolute grief of losing our loved ones compounded by what can only be described as
£ t h e biggest farce and cover up in British legal history. As if this was not enough of a
   burden, the families, despite the unequivocal findings of the Taylor Inquiry, have also
   had to fight to counter a concerted and seemingly intentional campaign by certain public
   and m edia figures to scar the reputation and memories of our loved ones by blaming
   them, and their fellow supporters, for causing the Disaster.


   The "Hillsborough" television programme seems at last to have washed away the
   cartload of lies about the Disaster which have stood as a barrier to the reaching of a fair
   and just conclusion about the needless deaths of 96 people. On behalf of the
   Hillsborough Family Support Group I would now urge you to help us go one step further
   and establish as a matter of public record for all time the truth of what did happen on
   that dreadful day of 15th April 1989. Only if that can be done may the bereaved families
   be able to put our loved ones finally to rest.




   Phil Hammond
   Secretary - Hillsborough Family Support Group.
