                                                                     Patly N o. J 01605




PARLIAMENTARY Q U ESTIO N FOR ORAL ANSW ER O N M ONDAY 15
MARCH 1999




Ms H elen Jackson (Sheffield Hillsborough): T o ask the Secretary of State for the
H om e Department, how many tim es since May 1997 a complaint against a police
force has been externally investigated.




DRAFT REPLY


15 complaints cases were recorded as having been referred to another force for
investigation in England and Wales in 1997/98, the latest year for which figures are
available. Each case may consist o f one or m ore complaint. This figure does n o t include
investigations involving allegations o f criminal or disciplinary offences in which no
com plaint has been received from a m em ber o f the public.


The G overnm ent supports the recom m endation o f the H om e Affairs Select Committee
in its report on police disciplinary and complaints procedures that investigation by an
outside force should becom e a m ore regular occurrence than it is at present. The new
guidance which we will be issuing shortly on police discipline and complaints procedures
will encourage chief officers to make greater use o f investigating officers from outside
forces.




::ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#90213#l
Lines to take

Will the H om e Secretary ensure that a greater proportion of police complaints are
externally investigated?

The decision to appoint an investigating officer from an outside force rests with the chief
officer o f the force which receives the complaint. There is wide discretion for the chief
officer to have an outside investigation if he considers it appropriate. W here the
com plaint is supervised, the Police Complaints Authority m ust also approve the choice
o f investigating officer.


As I have indicated, the new guidance which we will be issuing shortly on police
discipline and complaints procedures will encourage chief officers to make greater use o f
investigating officers from outside forces.



Do we not need an independent system of investigation of complaints?

We wish to take measures to increase public confidence in the complaints system,
including examining the scope for introducing a greater independent element. T hat is
why we accepted the Select Com m ittee’s recom m endation to conduct detailed feasibility
studies into the independent investigation o f complaints. We are currently preparing the
proposals for research and this w ork will begin shortly.



When does the H om e Secretary intend to implement the Select Committee’s other
recommendations on police complaints?


W hen I accepted the HAC’s recom mendations last year on police complaints procedures,
I made it clear that implementation o f m ost o f the recom mendations would have to
await a suitable legislative opportunity and that, where there were additional cost
implications, this w ould be subject to the availability o f resources. This remains the case
and, although there is no immediate prospect o f legislation, we will continue to look for a
suitable opportunity .


[The recommendations included No. 5 (right o f appeal to PC A against the police refusal to record a
complaint); No. 10 (power to call in fo r supervision non-complaint investigations —accepted by the
Government with the proviso that it should befo r the Home Secretary to refer a case to the PC A);
No. 13 (PCA to have power andfunds to commission independent investigations — accepted subject to the
availability o f necessary additional resources); and N o.42 (to relax the restrictions on the disclosure of




::ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#90213#l
 information by the PC A). We were unsuccessful in securing a Private Members Handout B ill to take
forward some of these proposals and no suitable legislative vehicle hasyet been identified].


What other action is being taken on police complaints?


W here it has been possible to take forward recom m endations by way o f guidance to
police forces, we have included it in the new guidance to chief officers on complaints and
discipline procedures which is being issued to co-incide with the introduction o f the new
police discipline procedures in April.


 [This includes guidance on ensuring complainants are aware o f what they have agreed to under the
 informal resolution procedure (recommendation7); encouragingforces to make greater use o f apologies and
 ex gratia payments (recommendations'); encouraging the greater use of outsideforces to investigate
 complaints (recommendation 14); and PC A participation in the preparation o f discipline cases which
follow a PC A direction (recommendationl8).J


When will he introduce new police discipline procedures?

N ew procedures for police discipline will come into effect on 1 April this year; they have
been in the process o f revision for some years. The new procedures will operate on the
lower burden o f p ro o f than the criminal standard applied at present. There will also be a
fast track procedure to deal swiftly with officers caught com m itting serious criminal
offences.

There will also be greater powers to hold a hearing in the absence o f an accused officer
(to deal with the problem o f proceedings aborted if an officer is sick — in future the
hearing can proceed in h is/h e r absence).




::ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#9C)213#l
BACKGROUND N O T E


The decision to appoint an outside force to investigate a complaint rests with the chief
officer o f the force concerned and, where the complaint is supervised, the Police
Complaints Authority. It is no t clear w hat has prom pted Ms Jackson’s Question. The
South Yorkshire Police are not aware o f her showing a particular interest in any recent
complaints cases.


2.     The H om e Office collects complaints and discipline statistics on an annual basis
and the figures for 1997/98 are the m ost recent. We understand that o f the 15 cases
nationally referred to an outside force, 3 were from South Yorkshire Police.


3.     The H om e Affairs Select Comm ittee’s report on police disciplinary and
complaints procedures recom m ended that investigation by an outside force should
becom e a m ore regular occurrence than it is at present (recommendation 14). The new
guidance to chief officers on complaints and discipline to be issued shortly encourages
forces to use outside investigations in the interests o f bringing greater independence to
the process.




::ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#90213#l
