    A   TY/>£b     C e P '/   Of                           MMLb -J> A v/S ’
f o C M & r S qo M. r/or~£S (                   of M S       p^B^^asi. V



                                                                                74

11.00   NOTES MADE REGARDING YESTERDAYS INCIDENT

         Mounted patrol around the ground with Insp. Wilkinson from 10.30

         Halifax Road Penistone Road - Ground checked on deployment of all

         horses. 'Whilst in Halifax Road observed groups of Liverpool fans

         drinking outside White Horse Pub and going to the off-licence opposite.

^       Further down Halifax Road gangs of youths were sat on the grass verge

         outside




                                                                                75

         the Gateway Supermarket drinking bottles of beer and lager.

         At 13.30 myself and 5 were at W. Bridge station awaiting the arrival

         of the special train at around 13.45 an announcement came over the

         radio to the effect that Claywheels Lane was now full of coaches, and

         the coach parking would now continue up Halifax Road.   At approx. 13.55

         the special train arrived. (Definitely early - due at 14.02)

         Approx. 400 fans on the train - all quite and sober.    Marshalled than

         in the usual manner and set off down
                                                                          76



Halifax Road towards the ground.   Used the planned escort officers.

Myself Insp. W 5043 5855 6278 7081 and 2316 and P.W. 156.       Turned

right at L/I&ne roundabout and took supporters to the ground.    On

arrrival at the ground at approx. 14.20 the usual happened with the

crowd melting into the sides of the pavements - going into shop and

mingling with other hangers-about. Officers detailed to clear the

pavements and encourage fans to go inside the ground.   At this time

14.20 approx. no queuing at turnstiles




                                                                          77



and no real problems.   Most of train escort went into the ground

without any problem.    Sgt. 1764 and 195L Smith together with 3186 1300

1696 were supervising queues at the turnstiles.   After 14.30 and right

up to 15.00 large crowds of supporters arrived at the Leppings Lane

end.   Many were intoxicated and confused as to the correct entry point

into the ground.. They were unable to discern where the queues for

seats or standing were or which turnstile was the correct one.      All

mounted and others directed and assisted than towards
                                                                        78



the correct turnstile but quickly the crowd increased to vast

proportions.     I found myself walking to the right of the L/Lane end as

you look from the road.     Suddenly the pen that leads to those

turnstiles became jam-packed with supporters all of whan were quite

good humoured but seemingly oblivious to the overcrowding that was

occurring.     At this time I was working with P.C. Grunnill and

Stanbridge from Merseyside.     All 3 of us worked for a long time to

stop fans pushing and jamning up against




                                                                        79



the person in front of than - it was already causing problems at the

front of the turnstiles and one knew a serious situation was

developing.     I shouted continuously at fans to stop pushing as did the

other Officers and we waved our arms in an effort to convey our

meaning.     The crowd simply ignored us and kept on increasing in volume.

Things eventually became so overcrowded that my horse Hussar who is

17.2 h.h. and weighs well over \ ton was surrounded by fans who were

wrapped around his whole body like
                                                                         80



selophane or cling-film.    He could not move a leg or a muscle and he

began to lose his footing as he was lifted by the crowd.    We somehow

were pushed to the left and my left leg was trapped against a large

steel upright or stanchion.    Hussar who is one of our best horses was

clearly in a situation which he had never faced before and I knew the

horse was far from happy.     If he had kicked, reared or even moved a leg

I was extremely worried that the safety of the crowd




                                                                          81



would be further risked.    Nobody in the crowd was taking the slightest

notice of our pleas - even those with small boys with than.     I decided

to cane out of the pen and try to work from the rear of the crowd to

at least stop anyone else from joining the rear of the melee.     I tried

this tajjtic with minimal success.   I couldjthat that P.C. Grunnill and

Stanbridge had followed my example and we were joined by P.C. Scott.
  We,
Whe» then shut the blue wrought iron gates with the assistance of a

foot officer.
                                                                          82



These gates lead into the pens - to attempt to alleviate crushing on

the turnstiles which by now was getting quite nasty.    He managed to

hold the gates for a couple of minutes but the crowd in a determined

mood forced than open.     Realising the hoplessness of the situation I

formed a line of horses across the L/Lane access area outside of the

blue gates, in an second attempt to stop further fans joining the

melee! I would think that around 11/12 horses lined up and formed a

quite effective barrier.




Insp. Wilkinson and P.S. 1952 together with P.W. 156 and P.W. 186 were

near me and we held the line.     I could see the tactic working to some

reasonable effect.   On my right towards the turnstile the crowd began

to thin at the turnstile (only slightly). On my left looking into

L/Lane I saw that we had contained around 500 or so late comers.      They

were obviously distressed and frustrated at not being able to get to

the turnstiles but we had than contained.     Suddenly they started

throwing themselves under
horses legs and forcing their way between each horse with a complete

disregard for their own safety.     At this time a P.C. in a Landrover was

using the loud speaker on the vehicle and telling than to stop pushing.

He repeated this message continuously but he was ignored by the crowd.

They pressed heavily on our line of horses and broke through and ran to

join the rear of the pushing/shoving crowd at the turnstiles.     It was

at this time that a supported reported to me




                                                                           85

that a woman was injured at the front of the turnstiles near the gate

by the sweet shop.    I could see no way of getting to her with a horse.

It was at this time that the      orderwas given to open the gates.   It was

no doubt given to save loss of life at the turnstiles and was in my

opinion quite correct. Fansrushed through the gate       on my left (by the

sweetshop) in large numbers.      This passageway lead I think to the North

stand.   The opening of the gates had eased and released the problem

almost imnediately.    Shortly afterwards
                                                                                86



        I dismounted and ran inside the ground to Police Control.   On climbing

        the steps I noticed the West stand terraces were crowded and people were

        spilling onto the pitch behind the goal.   Imagining what I saw to be a

        pitch invasion I went back to my horse, remounted and took a team of 8

        horses around to Gate "0".   Shortly after our arrival casualties and

        bodies were brought off the pitch and set down all around us.   Almost

        all were apparently dead and those still alive were receiving

        attention.




                                                                                 87



        Eventual 1y when the decision to abandon the game was announced I went

        out of the ground and patrolled at the Leppings Lane end, assisting

        with the dispersal of supporters.   A debriefing was held later on that

        evening at Niagara Club.




12.30   To home Station
