                                                   H   ome   O   ffice
                                                 QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
         (h s .10.6/fsbl.peb
                                                  L O N D O N SWIH 9 AT



                                                                 3322



     FEP/89 35/48/118                       6 October 1989




Neil Kinghan
Sport & Recreation Division
Department of Environment
Room P3/167
2 Marsham Street
LONDON    SW1P 3EB




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL:      PART I - APPEALS AGAINST FLA DECISIONS
ON SAFETY

We had a word on the telephone when we discussed Parliamentary
Counsel's letter of 21 September to Richard Clayton about the
question of appeals under section 5 of Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975 (the 1975Act) in the light of clause 13   of the Bill.
Clearly we now need to resolve our policy quickly in order to
give instructions to Counsel.

We have been giving careful thought to this and our conclusion is
that although the     Bill is intended to provide a     means to
supervise the safety responsibilities of local authorities, there
is no reason why,     since the terms and conditions of safety
certificates have the same effect whether they are included on
the initiative of the local authority or as a requirement of the
FLA, it should adversely affect the rights and avenues of appeal
presently available to those who are concerned with compliance
with the certificate.

Our conclusion is that not only should the Football Licensing
Authority be under an obligation to consult before issuing
requirements relating to the terms and conditions of a safety
certificate, but that the certificate issued in consequence of
those requirements should be subject to appeal in the same way as
if it were any other safety certificate.

There are three arguments of principle which we would make in
support of maintaining the present system of appeals. The first
is simply that we would like to preserve the system of appeal
which already exists in the 1975 Act; the second is that we can
see no case for permitting the FLA not to be subject to the
supervision of the courts; and the third is that supervision by
way of judicial review and assessing the reasonableness of
requirements against Wednesbury principles is in our view too
high a hurdle for what may in- practice require a more practical
solution.

I am taking the line that since we are simply maintaining the
existing appeal avenues, we are not proposing a change of policy
and that all that is necessary are some small changes to the Bill
to establish the position of the FLA in the appeals procedure.
Subject to the views of Counsel these might be the need to
provide that the FLA will be able to respond to an appeal in the
magistrates' court, and be regarded as an interested party who
may appeal to the Crown Court against an order made in the lower
court. Richard Clayton will take this up with Counsel.   I attach
a draft submission by which I intend to explain the position to
our Ministers.

You asked whether in practice there were many appeals against
terms and conditions of safety certificates.   I am told that in
the ten years or so when appeals were made to the Secretary of
State, some 6 or 7 were started, but all of them were withdrawn
following local agreement before any deliberation was necessary.
We have no information about the number of appeals since the
system was changed by our 1987 Act.

I do not think that we should be concerned that the existence of
an avenue of appeal will water down the authority of the FLA. It
may   however serve to ensure that the FLA does not act
unreasonably    or   ride  roughshod   over  points   raised  in
consultation.   If that is the case, actual resort to the appeal
procedure will continue to be minimal, but the reputation of the
FLA will be higher than if there are unresolved grievances
against arbitrary decisions.

Please let me know if these proposals cause problems.

I hope you can agree with this.   If so we will put the arguments
to Ministers    and   instruct   Parliamentary Counsel to make
appropriate amendments to the Bill.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        P E BOLTON
                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                        Planning Department)
h s .10.6/fsb2.peb


                                    DRAFT SUBMISSION


FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


We have been giving further thought to the effect of the Football
Spectators Bill on the avenues of appeal which are available in
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act                       1975      (as amended)      against the
terms and conditions of safety certificates.                           At present the Bill
is    silent    on these      issues       and       some      provision    is necessary       in
order to make matters clear.


2.     The analysis of officials                 is that the purpose of the Bill
(insofar as it affects the safety of sports grounds) is to permit
the Football Licensing Authority to supervise the manner in which
local authorities exercise their responsibilities                               in connection
with safety in sports grounds.                       It has not been suggested that
those who       are    affected      by    the       terms      and   conditions    of     safety
certificates       should     not    continue             to   have   the   same   avenues     of
appeal as exist at present under the 1975 Act.


3.     Under section 5 of that Act, an interested party may appeal
to the Magistrates' Court against the inclusion in or omission of
anything from a safety certificate or the refusal of the local
authority to amend or replace a safety certificate; and the local
authority and any interested party can appeal to the Crown Court
against    any    Order     made     by    a Magistrates'              Court.      "Interested
party"    means       the   holder    of       the    safety      certificate,       any    other
person who is or may be concerned with ensuring compliance with
the    terms    and    conditions         of     a    safety      certificate,      the     Chief
Officer of Police, and either the building authority or the fire
authority.


4.     There is a counter argument:                        that the purpose of the Bill
is to provide powers of supervision to a national authority (the
Football Licensing Authority) and that the existence of an avenue
of appeal to what, although a judicial body,                            is in fact a local
inexpert       body,    could   result         in     a     dilution    of the     authority's
powers     and      responsibilities.               It         could also inject anelement of
delay   into  the            process         of     securing            changes            in     safety
certificates.


5.    We   think     that      the       arguments       in    favour         of preserving            the
rights     of appeal     are      stronger.         The purpose           of the            FLA is to
supervise the        local        authority,        not       to    alter       the        rights      and
safeguards of those who are affected by the terms and conditions
of safety certificates.                  We do not propose, in this context, that
the   local      authority should have              an avenue of appeal against a
requirement from the Football Licensing Authority but it might be
necessary to provide,             for the purpose of clarification, that the
Football      Licensing        Authority          should       be       heard       in     any    appeal
against terms and conditions of a safety certificate where those
terms arose from a requirement made by the FLA? and it might also
be necessary to make clear that the FLA, as an interested party,
has a right to appeal to the Crown Court against any order issued
by a Magistrates' Court.


6.    So far as we know, there are not many appeals against terms
and conditions          of   safety certificates.                   In the 10 years                or so
when appeals were made to the. Secretary of State                                     (between 1977
and   1987)      some    6   or      7    were     started,         but       all     of    them       were
withdrawn following local agreement before any deliberation was
necessary.        We have no information about the number of appeals to
the Courts since the system was changed by our 1987 Act, but if
there were any, we think we would have heard about them.


7.    We do not think that maintaining the avenues of appeal will
water down the authority of the FLA.                          It may serve to ensure that
the FLA does not act unreasonably or ride roughshod over points
raised     in consultation.               If that is the case,                  actual resort to
the   appeal      procedure          should       continue         to    be     minimal          but    the
reputation of the FLA is likely to be higher than if there are
unresolved grievances against arbitrary decisions.
Summary


8.      Ministers   are    asked   to note    that the continuation        of the
existing avenues of appeal against terms and conditions of safety
certificates does not amount to a change of policy but that minor
amendments to the Football Spectators Bill will be necessary in
order    to   establish,    beyond   doubt,    the   position   of   the   FLA   in
relation to the appeals procedure.
