HILLSBOROUGH STATEMENT: 18 February 1998

   The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Jack Straw): With
permission, Madam Speaker, I should like to make a statement about the Hillsborough
stadium disaster.

   Few events in recent years have touched the lives of so many people. The families
and friends of the 96 Liverpool fans who died at Hillsborough have suffered
immeasurably. The whole nation has been profoundly disturbed by what occurred
that day. Although almost nine years have now passed, many of the families and
others felt very strongly indeed that new evidence was available that would cast new
light on the events. As Home Secretary, I was determined to do all that I could to
establish whether that was indeed the case.

   On coming into office in May last year, I gave that question intense and urgent
consideration, and on 30 June, I announced to the House that the Attorney-General
and I had decided to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the
Court of Appeal, to conduct an independent scrutiny of the matter. His terms of
reference were

    “To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989; which was not available:

(a) to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

(b) to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General fo r the purpose o f
discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or

(c) to the Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police in relation to police disciplinary
matters;

and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is o f
such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary o f State fo r the Home
Department o f a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their
attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which should
be taken in the public interest. ”

   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report, which I am publishing
today. It is available in the Vote Office. His scrutiny is the latest in a series of
lengthy and detailed examinations of the evidence in this case. The public inquiry led
by the late Lord Justice Taylor considered fully the causes of the disaster and made
wide-ranging recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events.
Those have had a profound and positive effect on both crowd safety at football
grounds and on the policing of football matches.

   The deaths that occurred were also the subject of inquests conducted by the coroner
for the Western district of South Yorkshire in two parts in 1990 and 1991. Those
inquests involved more than 80 days of public hearings. A further investigation was
conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised by the Police Complaints
Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for criminal or disciplinary
proceedings against the police. That investigation involved taking more than 5,000
statements. At a later stage, in November 1993, a judicial review of the coroner’s
proceedings upheld the inquest verdict of accidental death and the conduct of those
proceedings. We have now had this further detailed scrutiny by a senior Lord Justice
of Appeal.

    The main causes of the disaster have long been clear. They were identified by
Lord Taylor in his interim report in August 1989. Lord Justice Taylor did not
attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 of his report
he made it clear that

“the main reason fo r the disaster was the failure ofpolice control”.

Both Lord Taylor, and now Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, have been damning in their
condemnation of the senior officer in charge that afternoon, the then Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith refers in his report to:

“M r Duckenfiled’s disgraceful lie ”

about one of the gates at Hillsborough -

“Gate C being forced open by fa n s”.

    The South Yorkshire police have in turn accepted the main share of responsibility
for the disaster. Sheffield Wednesday football club and the local authority were also
criticised by Lord Taylor.

   With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that, over time, some new
information may become available, but that does not necessarily mean that the
outcome of any previous inquiries would have been different. What is crucial is not
just whether the information is new, but whether it is of such significance - to use the
phrase in the terms of reference - as to justify a new inquiry.

   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail all the evidence put before
him. That included all the relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and
inquests. He has looked equally rigorously at all the information presented to him, by
individuals and official bodies, including those representing the families of those who
died and others who have acted in support of them. He has produced a thorough and
comprehensive report and goes into immense detail to analyse and reach conclusions
on each of the submissions made to him.

   Let me briefly summarise what Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says on the key
allegations relating to video evidence and the cut-off time of 3.15 pm for the inquest,
and allegations of interference with witnesses. I refer first to the video evidence. Two
sets of allegations were made to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about video evidence.
They were, first, that video tapes were stolen from the club’s control room to conceal
material evidence from the earlier inquiries. There is no dispute that the theft of two
tapes took place. The tapes were pictures from the club’s closed circuit television
cameras, not from police cameras. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that, in any event
the tapes would have shown nothing significant. Moreover, he is satisfied that all the
police tapes were made available in their entirety to Lord Taylor’s inquiry and to the
coroner.

   The second allegation relating to video tapes, with which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
deals at considerable length, was made principally by Mr. Roger Houldsworth, a
video technician at Sheffield Wednesday football club. It was that the police had
blamed their failure to see overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on camera 5 being defective,
when it was not; that evidence of the video tapes taken by camera 5 was deliberately
suppressed and concealed; and that two police officers gave deliberately false
evidence that camera 5 was not working correctly.

   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the police did not try to blame their failure to
spot overcrowding on the terrace on faulty CCTV equipment. He says that the police
controllers had a good view over the terraces from the control box, and did not
pretend otherwise. He also concluded that

 “the importance ofM r. Houldsworth’s evidence has been exaggerated out o f all
proportion

and that Mr. Houldsworth’s existence and evidence were known to the Taylor inquiry
and to the coroner. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that the allegation that the
police hid video tape evidence of the terraces is “unfounded”.

    There are allegations about the conduct of the inquest, and in particular about the
cut-off time of 3.15 pm. One o f the issues that has unquestionably caused most
distress to those bereaved at Hillsborough was the decision o f the coroner to rule that
all those who had died had received the injuries that caused their deaths by 3.15 pm.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the coroner did not say that all those who died did
so before 3.15 pm, or that all those who became unconscious subsequently died. It
was only in relation to how or by that means the deceased came to their deaths that the
cut-off time was imposed. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the cut-off time did not
limit the inquiry undertaken by the inquest, and that he does not consider the inquest
to have been flawed. The Taylor inquiry considered in detail the response of the
emergency services after 3.15 pm as well as before, and concluded that no valid
criticism could be made of them.

   The main allegations concerning interference with witnesses were that specific
witnesses had had pressure put on them by the West Midlands police, and that the
South Yorkshire police had collected evidence from their own officers in an
unacceptable manner.

  On the first allegation, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that there was no
improper attempt to alter the evidence of those witnesses. On the second, he records
that a number of the initial statements made by South Yorkshire police officers were
subsequently amended on the advice of solicitors to the force before being submitted
to the Taylor inquiry. He says that in a very few cases, which are referred to in
appendix 7 of the report, what was excluded was either factual or comment in which
factual matters were implicit. He says that

“it would have been preferable”

for those matters not to have been excluded, but he is satisfied that Lord Taylor’s
inquiry was not in any way inhibited or impeded by what happened.

   The report also deals comprehensively in appendix 10 with the 10 questions posed
by the Granada Television programme in December 1996.

   Taking those and all other considerations into account, the overall conclusion that
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith reaches is that there is no basis for a further public inquiry.
He also finds no basis for a renewed application to quash the verdict of the inquest,
and he concludes that there is no material that should be put before the Director of
Public Prosecutions or the police disciplinary authorities that could cause them to
reconsider the decisions that they have already taken. He also concludes that none of
the evidence that he was asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence
that was available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.

   I, the Attorney-General and the Director of Public Prosecutions have considered
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report very carefully. We have no reason to doubt his
conclusions. That will, I know, be deeply disappointing for the families of those who
died at Hillsborough and for many who have campaigned on their behalf.

   I fully understand that those who lost loved ones at Hillsborough feel betrayed by
those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the state of the
ground on that day. I hope and believe that the changes that resulted from the Taylor
inquiry will mean that such a disaster will never happen again.

   However, there is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough
families. As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report:

   “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has personally been
held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or even to the
extent o f losing their job

   That highlights some of the serious shortcomings in the police disciplinary system.
Earlier this year, the Select Committee on Home Affairs produced a report that made
major recommendations for change. I shall respond fully to that report soon, but what
happened after Hillsborough is a prime example of why we must improve the current
arrangements.

   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also comments on whether coroners’ proceedings are
appropriate at all in respect of a major disaster that has already been the subject of a
public inquiry. He endorses the recommendation of a Home Office working group on
disasters and inquests - published in March 1997 - that the role of the coroner after
such a public inquiry should be limited.

   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report emphasises the exceptional difficulty o f the
coroner’s task in conducting the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I think,
unnecessary burden on the families involved, given that the Taylor report had covered
substantially the same ground. Certainly, I am sure that Hillsborough proved that the
inquest system in its present form is an unsuitable means of dealing with disasters of
that kind. I think it would be far better - above all, for the bereaved families - if there
were one fully comprehensive inquiry into the causes of death and the wider
circumstances.

   When I instigated the scrutiny, I said I would do my best to ensure that the
evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published. Most of the main
material that he has considered is contained in appendices to his report. Much of the
other evidence that he has considered is already in the public domain, consisting of
transcripts of public hearings or material considered by the Taylor inquiry. As I told
the shadow Home Secretary, I am arranging for the other material considered by Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed in the Library of the House, save where there are
overriding reasons for doing otherwise. Let me make it clear that the material that
will be published will include all the original statements made by South Yorkshire
police officers, together with the amended versions submitted to the Taylor inquiry.

   All hon. Members will have profound sympathy with the families and friends of
those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend what they
have suffered. In his report, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says:

   “I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them ”     -




the families and friends of those who died -

“especially since they have had their hopes raised that something more could be
done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to look
dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light o f the
evidence which had previously been considered”.

   My right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General, the Director of Public
Prosecutions and I have had to consider Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same
light, and we accept its conclusions.

   The entire country is united in sympathy with those who lost loved ones at
Hillsborough. We cannot take the pain from them, but I hope that the families will
recognise that the report represents - as I promised - an independent, thorough and
detailed scrutiny of all the evidence that was given to the committee.
