OVERSEAS VISITS : NOTES OF DISCUSSIONS ON 8 SEPTEMBER

Holland

Spoke to Mr de Vries of the Ministry of Health, Welfare and
Culture. The Utrecht stadium is owned by the Municipality and
managed by the Utrecht Football Club. Matches usually take place
at 2.30 on Sundays. He will fax us some details about the
programme.  We should check whether a match is being cancelled by
the Mayor if there is a risk of violence. He will make enquiries
about good hotels but there is a Holiday Inn in Utrecht. Nearest
airport Amsterdam.  He would expect us to meet Mr Pot, who is the
Chief Clerk at the Municipality and also responsible for sport,
and the Lady Mayor, Mrs Vos. He would come to Utrecht to join us
and would also bring with him the Dutch FA Security Adviser, Mr
de Becker.

Italy

Spoke to Mr Godfrey in the Consulate in Rome. A visit could
comprise seeing a match at the stadium in Rome:  there is one
presently being used and a new one being built. Also a visit to
the San Siro Stadium in Milan. Matches usually take place during
the week or on Sunday afternoon. There are some new regulations
requiring member clubs to issue identity cards. We could also
meet the Italian football authorities who are organising the
World Cup. Would we want to meet judicial authorities?   [NB
Italian Government and security]

Portugal

Spoke to Alan Marshall in the Consulate in Lisbon. Benfica is
the biggest ground in Europe (up to 120,000) built in the mid-
1950s.  It is earthquake proof.  It is never full (the crowds are
usually less than 100,000) but it is worth seeing. There is
rarely crowd trouble. Matches take place on Sunday afternoons
when the entire city is paralysed by traffic jams near the
stadium. He will post us a programme of Benfica matches.    He
will be on leave for the next three weeks but his Consulate
colleague, Miguel Rocca, who is a football enthusiast, will
advise us. The Consulate would be happy to do hotel bookings and
to make arrangements for us to meet the Portuguese FA and the
Club. The Ambassador might want to give us lunch or a dinner.

France

Spoke to Mr Newell in the Consul's office in Marseille. An
enquiry had already reached him via the Paris Embassy. The key
person is Monsieur Bouscet. He is the Mayor, the MP, the
Chairman of Nimes Football Club, and the boss of a local clothing
empire, Cachavel. There is therefore no reason to contact anyone
else locally such as the Prefet.  Suggest we contact Mr Bouscet
direct but keep the Consulate informed. The club are used to
having visitors from all over Europe to see their gates but might
regard us as higher profile so we would need to consider
publicity. As a special favour the Consulate could hire us
interpreters locally. For transport they suggest we get a hire
car (Hertz or Avis) from Marseille - journey time to Nimes about
an hour and 20 minutes. Matches usually take place on Saturday
evening but sometimes during the week. As a courtesy we should
probably write to the French football authorities to tell them
that we are visiting.

Spain

Office closed for holidays: contact Mr Holloway, Consul in
Barcelona, when it opens on 12 September.




                                        RMW
