                             RESTRICTED: POLICY


From:       Linda Rushton                                cc: Mr Michael
            APS/Mr Howarth                                   Mr O’Brien
            Room 702                                         Lord Williams
            Queen Anne’s Gate                                Mr Omand
            S 273 4238                                       Mr Boys Smith
                                                             Mr Middleton
             27 January 1998                                 Mr R Evans
                                                             Mr Pugh
                                                             Mr Edmundson
                                                             Ms Scott
                                                             Mr Warner
                                                             Mr Owen




Clare Sumner
PS/Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH


Mr Howarth has seen Paul Pugh’s submission of 22 January concerning the
handling arrangements of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report.

2. As I mentioned yesterday Mr Howarth feels that, in view of the reaction
that this report will provoke on Merseyside, it would be helpful if a meeting
could be arranged between himself, the Home Secretary, Jane Kennedy and
Peter Kilfoyle (who are also Liverpool MPs) before the handling arrangements
are finalised. He was content with your suggestion today that he could
discuss this matter informally with the Home Secretary however he still feels
that a meeting with the above would be necessary.

3. With regard to handling, Mr Howarth has stated that the positive
measures that have been introduced (or are in the process of being
introduced) to reduce the likelihood of such a disaster repeating itself should
be emphasised as fully as possible. In particular, he has made the following
points:

•       Emphasis should be given to the measures being taken by the Home
         Secretary and Mr Michael to reduce the numbers of serving police
         officers who seek to evade disciplinary action by taking medical
         retirement.

•       As far as possible, the failure on the part of the South Yorkshire Police
         to disclose sections of the video tapes should be deplored.
                     RESTRICTED: POLICY


Subject to Lord William’s views, it will be important to have lines to take
on Coroner’s Inquests in such cases.




                        L i^ d a £uSkfca,v -


                         Linda Rushton
                                          RESTRICTED-
                                                   'i-r                       b & > K


n                                      RESTRICTED: POLICY



    From: Paul Pugh                     cc: Mr Michael                   Mr Middl^tpir^
          Head of Operational               Mr O’Brien                   Mr R Evans
          Policing Policy Unit              Mr Howarth                   Mr Edmundson
          Room 529                          Lord Williams                Mr Granatt
          Queen Anne’s Gate                 Mr Omand                     Ms Scott
          S 0171-273-3141                   Mr Boys Smith                Mr Warner
          22 January 1998                                                Mr Owen



    Home Secretary

    HILLSBOROUGH

    Issue

    Handling of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report.

    Timing

    2.     The report will be delivered at the end of next week, so a steer from you in the
    next few days about handling would be helpful.

    Recommendations

    3.    We should issue a short press statement when the report is received and aim
    for publication and an oral statement to the House next month, after consultation
    with the Attorney General, the DPP and the business managers. I should tell
    Richard Wells, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, that the report is due.

    Consideration

    4.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report will be delivered next Friday, 30 January. I
    have had a sight of an early draft. It will be a very long report - over 60,000 words
    plus appendices which may be as long again - considering in great detail all the
    allegations about new evidence and other points which have been put to him. I
    expect the tone to be sympathetic, but uncompromising in his conclusions that there
    is no substance in the claims about new evidence or other allegations which have
    been made by or on behalf of the Hillsborough families. The report concludes
    unequivocally that there are no grounds for a new public inquiry, new inquests,
    criminal or disciplinary proceedings.




    f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0526pd.doc
5.     There are two issues which have caused the judge to question the way in
which matters have been handled previously, although on both he comes to the firm
conclusion that they do not provide sufficient cause to re-open any previous
proceedings or doubt the previous conclusions. The first issue is the editing of
police statements, which he described to you at the meeting on 11 December. We
expect him to be critical of the process, and critical that some passages were
inappropriately removed, but very clear that this was not improper. The second
issue concerns evidence brought forward by South Yorkshire Police about the
inadequacies of the crash barriers on the terraces. This is evidence which was not
available to the Taylor Inquiry but was used as part of negotiations between the
police, the local authority and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club about their
respective financial liabilities in meeting compensation claims. The implication of the
technical evidence now available is that the football club got off very lightly from the
Taylor Inquiry and they should have taken a greater share of the blame. The judge’s
view is that this does not, however, call into question Taylor’s findings.

6.     We will offer you substantive advice as soon as we have the final report. But
my provisional view is that the judge’s report really does put an end to speculation
about new evidence or unanswered questions. The only possible further action
would be a further police investigation into whether the editing of statements
provides any conceivable grounds for disciplinary or criminal proceedings. We will
have to see how conclusive the judge’s report is on that point. If we wanted to go
down that route, it would have to be via the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
getting an outside force to investigate (possibly under PCA supervision).

Handling

7.     It is bound to become public knowledge that the report has been delivered:
the Hillsborough families ask the Scrutiny Secretariat every few days, and
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is due to be sitting in court from 3 February, so it will be
plain that he has finished his work. We think we should therefore issue a short press
statement immediately the report is received simply stating that you have received
the report, that you are considering it, and that you will publish it as soon as
possible. The judge himself has no wish to make any press statement or give any
interviews when the report is delivered or at any later stage.

8.    The judge’s terms of reference require him to advise you, the Attorney
General, the DPP and the Chief Constable about anything relevant to your
responsibilities. The Attorney’s office and the DPP are aware that the report will be
delivered very soon, and we will arrange for them to receive copies. Given the chief
constable’s role as disciplinary authority, I think he should also be warned that it is
coming and provided with a copy immediately. If you agree, I will speak to
Richard Wells personally. Our experience before you announced the scrutiny shows
that he can be trusted to keep things in confidence.

9.    As you announced the scrutiny by oral statement, I assume that you will want
similarly to publish the report by laying it before Parliament and making an oral



f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0526pd.doc
 statement. We will also need to make arrangements for any relevant evidence not
 included in the report itself to be placed in the Library of the House.

 10.     The report dashes any remaining hopes that the Hillsborough families might
have had about re-opening previous inquiries, and they can be expected to be very
critical publicly of the report, the scrutiny process, the judge, and you if you accept
the report’s conclusions. Following the pattern when you announced the scrutiny
and the pattern which we adopted with the Lawrence family, I think you should see
the families and explain what is in the report before you make your statement and
answer their questions afterwards. But this report is much more substantial than the
published report on the Lawrence case, and it is not reasonable to expect them to
have digested it all in the short time that will be available on publication day. The
same is true for MPs. Given the intense public interest likely to be generated, you
might want to offer the opportunity for a debate on the report soon after publication,
but long enough to allow people the opportunity to consider it in detail. That would
obviously need to be agreed with the business managers beforehand.

11.     The need to consider this very long report in detail, and to agree your
response with the Attorney and the business managers - together with the logistics
of printing such a document - suggest that we are probably looking at publication in
mid-February. Communications Directorate will submit a draft press notice and a
detailed media handling plan next week.




                                    PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0526pd.doc
