              THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
              Room 1106
              50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
              D irect Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Brian Alderson                                                   Your reference:
South Yorkshire Police Authority
P 0 Box 37                                                       Our reference:
Regent Street
BARNSLEY S70 2PQ                                                 Date:             October 1997




For the purpose o f my scrutiny of the question of fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough
disaster I am anxious to ascertain the position with regard to the civil proceedings brought by
or on behalf of those injured (other than the police) or bereaved. I have been told by South
Yorkshire police that you are the person who is best placed to answer my questions.


2.       I understand that many claims were made against the Chief Constable o f South
Yorkshire Police. Were these in the form o f a group action with a master statement of claim?
 If so, could you provide me with a copy of it?


3.       If they were separate actions could you let me have a sample of a fatal accident case
and a personal injury pleading. I understand these claims have for the most part been
settled, with liability on the part of the South Yorkshire Police not being in issue. Can you
tell me whether any formal admission of liability was made and if so when and in what
terms? If there was no formal admission o f liability, how was the matter dealt with?


 4.       I should like to know how many claims in each category have been brought and
 settled, and in total have been paid:

           (a) to the relations of the deceased

                      (1) for loss of dependency

                      (2) for bereavement and funeral expenses; and

           (b) to those who suffered personal injury (not the police).




 G: | H IL LSB O R \ M AIN \ CIVIL. 1 2 3
5.      I also understand that contribution proceedings were taken by South Yorkshire Police
against the City Council, the club and Eastwoods. Is this correct or were they defendants in
the original action? I also understand that this action was heard, but settled after 2 or 3 days.
Can you please tell me the terms o f settlement? If those proceedings were settled on terms
which were not made public and were agreed to be confidential to the parties, I shall of
course respect the confidence if that is the wish of those concerned.




                                          Xa.        C

LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




 G: | H ILLSB O R \M AIN \ CIVIL. 1 2 3
