         H o m e O f f ic e
         Operational Policing Policy Unit
         50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
         Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 273 2703 Direct Line: 0171 273 3612

                                                                      Our reference:    PW/98 110/145/2

                                                                      Your reference:

Michael J C Burgess Esq                                               Date:             26 March 1998
Hon Secretary
Coroners' Society of England & Wales
44 Ormond Avenue
Hampton
Middlesex
TW12 2RX




 L l     Mr
THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY


The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter of 20 February, following his
statement to the House about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny.

The disaster, and the subsequent legal proceedings and official investigations were the cause of a great
deal of distress and concern to all involved in whatever capacity. As the Home Secretary explained,
he fully accepts the findings of both Lord Justice Taylor and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, and hopes the
matter can finally be brought to a close.

Your letter also highlights the report of the Home Office working group on disasters and inquests,
publishes in March 1997. There is no immediate prospect of a legislative opportunity to amend the
Coroners Act 1988, but the Government intends to pursue the matter when such an opportunity
arises.

Finally, I should like to thank you for the kind comments in your final paragraph, which will be
passed on to all concerned.

Yours sincerely




              j   A
Mike Ward




G:\HIIJLSBRO\CORONEHS.DOC
From Bon. Secretary                                 Coroners’ Society of England & Wales

Michael J. C.Burg*                                                       44, Ormond Avenue,
H .tt. C atenapr Sxrr&p - « - Sgk                                        HAMPTON, Middx.
                                                                                TWI2 m s.



R t Hon. Jack Straw, E j
Secretary ofState,
Home Office,
50, Queen Anne’s Gale,
London, SWIM *AT



Dear Mr. Straw,                                                                        ^ ^

re:          Your Statement (House of Commons -18 February 1998) Hillsborough
On behalf of both Or. Stefan Popper and (tie Society, I write to thank you for the statement
which you made to the House and for the tribute which you paid to Dr.
of it. Alttosgb we perceive that mtSaam. will ever satisfy some, the
which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith carried out, and to which Dr.Popper and this Society
provided assistance, did not find any shortcomings with the coronal jxooedMss, per je»
sufficient at any ratetojustify their impugning. TTie matter had already been thesubject of
5 days of legal argument in a judicial review, with the same result. Dr.Popper, forhispart,
found die! whole experieiKe of Hillsborough at all stages as much a nightmare as it has proved
to he for many of the families and, it has seemed, without any real end in sight. Thus, your
statement has, I know, given him comfort ami I thank you for that.
Coroners are no different to other concerned members of society. They do seek; to acquit
themselves, to the best of their ability and, within the constraints of the coronal system, seefc
some eettaai answers even if, m occasion, ft© answers are unwelcome or not as clear m
might be hoped or expected. Your department's Report m Disasters (March 1997) with its
recommendations is one which we made a contribution to and would ffloe to see implemented
at some time. Rest assured that when there is time to cm y the proposals forward to debate
and ultimately to legislation tfien the Society will be there to assist.
Dr. Popper and the Society have received, over the years, support from your officials at the
Home Office; Lord Williams of Mostyn, your Minister of State, Iras also teen supportive and
helpful and I certainly would go on record by expressing our gratitude to them all.
  'ours sincerely,
