        Jones, DCI (Eng) TD

                                           : Mr D Hodgkins, SPD
                                             Mr J McQuaid, RLSD
                                             Mr F Lindsay. APAU
                                                         ^ Ent.NIG
                       DCI (ENGINEERING)     Mr H Cavanagh, Ent.NIG
                                                              MD
                          M     nCT 1989                     C
                                                             AU
                     TECHNOLOGY DIVISION                       TD
                                                               CIO
                     FILE No:               :            J   SPDA
                                             Mr A Jones, RLSD
                                                      '   SPD D3


HILLSBOROUGH

Thank you for your minute of 7 September about Hillsborough and
policy on overcrowding.  I am sorry TD was not copied in on the
original correspondence and will copy TD in on any future
correspondence.

The main policy work being done at present on overcrowding is the
joint SPD C4 and SPD D3 literature search.  Initial views are that
relevant material is sparse and of little use to HSE in policy
formation.  Preliminary contacts with outside bodies suggest that
current practice is very diverse and that an HSE initiative would
be helpful.

A working group would be a sensible way of developing policy.
The many strands of research, technical development and policy in
HSE that are involved means that a pooling of expertise is
important.  I envisage its main task as being the initiation and
co-ordination of research into the general issues of crowd safety,
followed by the production of guidance if that is considered
desirable.  It could also co-ordinate further HSE contributions to
the Hillsborough Enquiry and any HSE input to the Home Office
"Green Book".

I attach an annex with draft terms of reference for the meeting to
consider and a list of possible members.  If other names occur to
yourself or others please suggest they attend the meeting.   My
secretary will be in touch to arrange a date in mid-October.




LINDA DERRICK
SPD D

19 September 1989




dl\14
Draft Terms of Reference for HSE Working Group on Crowd Safety



To examine the research literature, current guidance and good
practice on crowd safety in outdoor spaces (concerts, shows,
railway termini etc) where the crowd is generally mobile, and
consider the development of HSE policy and guidance on crowd
safety in public spaces.


To co-ordinate the presentation of HSE policy on crowd safety.



Representatives from the following are invited


Mr J McQuaid, RLSD
Mr F Lindsay, APAU
Mr H Cavanagh, Entertainment NIG
                   Medical Division
Mr P G Jones, TD
            'D C
              LAU
Mr A J Linehan, CIO


Invitations could be extended to OGDs and outside bodies when the
working group is underway.




DL\15
lltf
                                            TD3/5A



Dr Linda Derrick
H/SPD'D'
Baynards House




                          HILLSBOROUGH
I recently discussed with Dr A Jones, D/SEL, our involvement with
the Hillsborough disaster and the       extent of subsequent HSE
assistance to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry team.

Having dealt with the specifics I asked about  'Policy'  interests
in crowds and crowd control issues, and Dr Jones drew to my
attention the exchanges of correspondenceassociated with      your
minutes of 28.4.89 and 26.6.89 [which I note did not include TD].
Perhaps I can record our interest, so that you may include us in
any subsequent consultations, etc.

In relation to our assistance to the Hillsborough Inquiry team, I
know that Dr Nicholson   (RLSD) has offered the facility of  some
research in this area, aswell as an HSE input to any re-issue of
the Green Guide.       As far as I am aware the Inquiry team
(Prof. Maunder)  has not yet responded to these offers, but    he
might in future.

Notwithstanding the Hillsborough dimension, I put it to Dr Jones
that HSE had legitimate interests in crowds and crowd control
(leisure industry, railways, etc), and could well sponsor research
or guidance    of its own.    I have raised the latter point with
Mr Linehan,    and if he agrees with my view it       would   seem
appropriate for us     to form a small working group to take the
matter forward, which could if needed also provide a forum     for
developing our input to a Green Guide Mk II.

I would be interested in your comments on these possibilities.




pp P G JONES
DCI(ENG)/TD

7 September 1989
                                           TD3/5A



Mr A J Linehan, HMCIF




                          HILLSBOROUGH


By minute of 18.8.89 (with enclosures),      I advised you of my
discussions with D/SEL regarding the HSE contribution to the
Hillsborough Inquiry.    In para 9 of my notes of the meeting with
Dr Jones, I raised the question of further guidance by HSE:-

     '•I suggested that in view of HSE's legitimate interests
     in   crowds and crowd     control issues,   it   may be
     appropriate to develop our own guidance on the subject
     (internal,  external or both).    I said I would check
     this idea with FAID, and if they agreed that something
     was needed, the HSE working group (see para 8) could be
     set up now".

I am in the process of considering what more we need to do at this
stage regarding the aftermath to Hillsborough.    On the question
of HSE guidance, do you see a need for us to develop something at
this stage, or do you feel we should await the publication of Lord
Justice Taylor's final report on safety at sports stadia,    before
considering 'reading across' to other situations?

Other possible TD/FAID involvements may arise by virtue of     the
RLSD offer to the Inquiry team to respond to requests          for
assistance with research in this area, or re-drafting of the Green
Guide.   However, we can deal with these as the 'need' arises.




pp P G JONES
DCI(ENG)/TD

7 September 1989
y?
                 Re c e iv e d  in      ■

                                                         v „.
                             the di

                         '   • '*   0 M M IS33   V   <




DR L DERRICK      technology dj
SPD D                                                           c .c .   Mr   Hammer
                                                                         Mr   Hodgkins
                                                                         Mr   Barren
                                                                         Mr   Linehan


                                                                         Dr A Jones
                                                                         Dr Nicholson
                                                                         Mr J Robertson


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

As you will know, Dr Nicholson DD/SEL1 has been appointed to lead
the technical investigation for the Public Inquiry. He is working
closely with the police and Professor Maunder, the Technical
Assessor to the Inquiry.

In this kind of Inquiry, it is essential that the ’policy1
responsibility should be clearly located, so that there is a
single focus for liaison with the Home Office, dealing with PQ's,
advising the Commission and Ministers, and so on. I advised
Dr Nicholson that this in my view was SPD/D's responsibility.
However, in order to be clear on this, I consulted Mr Hammer and
he confirmed that this is indeed the case. My reason for doubt
was your diversion to Mr Hammer and |       1 of Dr Nicholson in
his quest for policy guidance on whether the Inquiry or the Home
Office or neither should be charged for RLSD's services. You will
appreciate that Dr Nicholson is fully committed on the technical
aspects of the Inquiry and cannot also be expected to resolve
policy matters, of which the above may be the first of many.

For your information, and that of copy recipients, the technical
investigation is currently looking into:

a)   Crush Barriers - a broken one has been removed for
     examination.

b)   Turnstile operation - how they operate when subjected to
     crowd pressure and an examination of the counting mechanism.
     The interest here is the accuracy of the attendance figures.

c)   The stability of a wall at the entrance to the ground - the
     technical lead on this is with TD.

Dr Nicholson will, of course, be ready to assist you in providing
any information that you need.

On another matter, and referring to your minute of 28 April to
          \ you raised the interesting question of whether there
is any research information on the psychological or design aspect
                              -   2   -




of crowd control. On the former, I don't know offhand what has
been done but I do know that the subject is covered by a research
topic in a forthcoming EC research programme on Major Technological
Hazards, in the context of public behaviour in emergencies. The
Hillsborough disaster may provide a stimulus for work on the
subject. On the design aspect, there has long been a recognition
that the 'flow' of crowds (and motor traffic) can be analogous in
many respects to the flow of granular solids. Whether the Inquiry
will wish to pursue that analogy remains to be seen, but TD and
RLSD have already recognised the possibility and will be ensuring
that the Inquiry is appropriately informed.




J McQUAID
Research Director

5 May 1989
l|s
                                                    DCI (ENGINEERING)
                                                      2 5 APR 1989 ^
                                                  TECHNOLOGY DIVISION
For information
                                                  FILE No:   ■^ ^   .


Mr A C Barrell (0/R)                         cc   Dr A F Ellis .
Director, TD                                      Mr P G Jongs^l 3V '




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

1    Dr Ellis' note of 24 April 1989 records TD's commitment to
giving assistance on the Hillsborough disaster.        This was in
response to Dr Jones'   (RLSD) request of 20 April that we should
report to the request for help received via Mr Hammer's office from
the Chief Constable of the West Midlands.

2     As you know, the FCG (|___________________________ have been
involved from the beginning, as have the Area and Mr            I from
TD3B.    Because of the difficulties which arose with Piper Alpha, I
asked                   to agree with              ]that the normal
procedure tor provision of technical and scientific advice should
obtain, viz t     h   a    t  a   s    FCG SSI should be the channel
for commissioning, communicating and coordinating all technical and
scientific advice.      This was agreed between                  | and
              and               ~1 took steps to ensure that all
involved at that stage were aware of this.    In other words, we made
sure that we put into practice HSAM 38 GAP. Of course, all this
was in the few days when the investigation was under the aegis of
the Director of Environmental Health for the District (the LA being
the enforcing authority).

3   Today, we are in a different set of circumstances - but there
is still a need for a single channel for communicating with
requests from Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry team.  I suggest that
HSAM 38 GAP should have been used as the model for determining who
does what - we know the system works well and we have only just
reaffirmed the procedures at the joint TD/RLSD meeting in Buxton.
But Dr Jones' fast footwork on behalf of RLSD has now undermined
the system (and my faith in RLSD's affirmation).

4    In this particular case, the pass is now sold and we are of
course cooperating with Dr Nicholson as leader of HSE's scientific
and technical investigation - a remarkable inversion of normal
procedures.   But I think Mr Hammer might be reminded that there is
a well tried and tested procedure (HSAM 38 GAP) which fits not only
ciircumstances where HSE enforces but others as well   (ie Piper
Alpha) and we all ought to stick to it. Ad hoc arrangements will
ultimately only lead to confusion.

5    Dr Ellis is much more sanguine about this affair than I would
be and I understand why.   (Nevertheless, he has undertaken to 'rap
Mr Hammer's knuckles'!)  But I do feel that there is likely to be
considerable benefit to RLSD as a Division in being in the lead on
this - and thus much less 'glory' for TD. And if RLSD can lead the
scientific and technical investigation this time, why not in other
cases?    Where   would that    leave   TD -    particularly   post
regionalisation?




m r 'j p g i l t r o w
HEAD OF FIELD SERVICES (NORTH) TD

25 April 1989

JPG/45/04/GEN
\ h
      »
                                            TD3/5


   Dr Alan Jones
   D/SEL
   RLSD, Sheffield                     cc   Mr   J   D G Hammer DDG/HSE
                                            Mr   A   C Barrell D/TD
                                            Dr   A   F Ellis DCI(CHEM)
                                            Mr   J   P Giltrow HFS(N)
                                            Mr   W   S Twaddle HFS(S)
                                            Mr   M   A Fountain H/TD3
                                            Dr   C   Nicholson DD/SEL1



                         HTT.T-qRORQUGH DISASTER


   Reference your minute of 20.4.89.

   Mr Fountain H/TD3 has arranged for the TD(Eng)       Specialist in
   structures, PSI              I, to be associated with the technical
   enquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster.

             assisted in the development of the 'Green Guide' on
   safety of grandstands etc which covered inter-alia the loadings on
   crowd barriers and other associated equipment.

   Should Dr Nicholson identify any other needs from TD(Eng) perhaps
   he would let me know.

   One thought which might aid HSE input is the technical analogy one
   could draw between the bulk flow of powders through hoppers etc
   and that of crowds through restricted accesses and the like.   The
   relationships between pressure on vessel walls, flow restrictors,
   and powder dynamics have been well researched, and might have some
   relevance.




p.p P G JONES
    DCI (ENG)/TD
    24 April 1989
l/t
  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
  Dr Jones [RLSD, Sheffield] phoned.           He said that RLSD and        TD      had
 been   assisting       with the      local   authority investigation       of      the
 disaster but that investigation looked like becoming                  subsumed          by
 the main Public Inquiry.


 Mr   Hammer had agreed         that HSE should    assist the Inquiry         as per
 Kings Cross [technical work not as technical assessor].


 Dr   Jones was asking if TD would assist the Sheffield laboratories
 in this work which Chris Nicholson will co-ordinate.


 At   the     present   time,    it    involves   work   on    crash     barriers,
 turnstiles and walls.


 I agreed to TD giving assistance.
                                                         r   DC! (ENGINEERING)
                                                                                  ,ss!
                                                             2% APR 1989
                                                         TECHNOLOGY DiVISSON j
p/A F ELLIS                                              fileNo:
                                                             Ko:7-v::. | S . 1
i DCI/CHEMICALS
  nn/THFMT
                                                                                          .
                                                                          •• - -i* .- ■' .•!

 24 April 1989



 Dictated by Dr Ellis and signed in his absence.




 MINS\DO\<)3 .04
Is
fa,—          fJ- ( W                                                                    nsso           lit*
        wfSN/PAA fA -v«■* ^   C-Q^W ^                     I                         (7
       ^ Ip          ^        N   e   f   /   P   t   /   s   €   >                 HEALTH & SAFETY
        TO ALL FAID STAFF AREA 14                                                      EXECUTIVE
                                                                                         2 5 APR 1989
        cc:                      .' SSI, NlrrS«'T
               Dr A Jones, Direc .or s£L, RLSD                                       NORTH EAST FCG
                              „CPO, IAS 1, BH                                          SSI's OFFICE
                              , Leeds
               Mr D Thornton, DCI, FAID 1, MH                                                              0
        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.

        The arrangements for an initial local inquiry which I explained in
        my note of 17 April have now been overtaken by the setting up of a
        Public Inquiry. West Midlands Police Force are responsible for
        the investigation and HSE will provide scientific and engineering
        support direct to the Inquiry. Chris Nicholson from RLSD will
        lead the work and he will call upon expertise in other parts of
        HSE as required.
        If media enquiries are received at the Area Office about HSE
        involvement in the investigation, please re-direct them to Chris
        Nicholson (Sheffield 768141 ext 3015) and make no comment.

        Any complaints about the disaster should be referred to
        _____ without comment. She will maintain a manual record and as
        advised by              ^ will arrange for them to be sent to the
        office at Furnival House which has been set up by the West
        Midlands Police Force. Copies will be sent for information to
        David Purchon1s office at Town Hall Chambers.

        Any media enquiries about previous inspection of the football
        ground should be referred to me or               W i t h o u t comment,




        Area Director, Area 14                                        \ y t

        24.4.89                                                               tOf
#
                                            D5EL 14.4

                                            cc    Mr Hammer


Dr   J   McQuaid
Mr   A   C Barrell
Mr   A   C Linehan
Mr   A   D Osborne
Mr   P   G Jones
Dr   A   F Ellis                        1




                                         TEC>‘' « 1 0 C Y D iV S tQ fj




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

A request has been made today by the Chief Constable of the
West Midlands for the Safety Engineering Laboratory to provide
scientific and engineering support to the Hillsborough
Inquiry.  The request was made through Mr Hammer's office.

Dr Nicholson (DD/SEL1) will lead the work and he will call upon
expertise in other parts of HSE as required.




ALAN JONES
D/SEL
RLSD Sheffield

20 April 1989
                                               TD3/5

      Dr Alan Jones
      D/SEL
      RLSD, Sheffield                     cc   Mr   J   D G Hammer DDG/HSE
                                               Mr   A   C Barrell D/TD
                                               Dr   A   F Ellis DCI(CHEM)
                                               Mr   J   P Giltrow HFS(N)
                                               Mr   W   S Twaddle HFS(S)
                                               Mr   M   A Fountain H/TD3
                                               Dr   C   Nicholson DD/SEL1


                            HTT.T.SROPOUGH DISASTER

      Reference your minute of 20.4.89.

      Mr Fountain H/TD3 has arranged for the TD(Eng)      Specialist in
      structures, PSI                to be associated with the technical
      enquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster.

      1         assisted in the development of the 'Green Guide' on
      safety of grandstands etc which covered inter-alia the loadings on
      crowd barriers and other associated equipment.

      Should Dr Nicholson identify any other needs from TD(Eng) perhaps
      he would let me know.

      One thought which might aid HSE input is the technical analogy one
      could draw between the bulk flow of powders through hoppers etc
      and that of crowds through restricted accesses and the like.   The
      relationships between pressure on vessel walls, flow restrictors,
      and powder dynamics have been well researched, and might have some
      relevance.




p.p   P G JONES
      DCI(ENG)/TD
      24 April 1989                                                 < | TO   lot
IIn   xX
       V
                                                                         %>7fi Ua
                                                                                                    <M \
                                                                                            .7 0
                         Health and Safety Executive                                   SAM 38 GAP

  sr           »         To all staff ir HSC/HSE
                         down to and including
 A
 o              o
                    ^    HEO (or equ valent)
                                                          30 A?^'986

                         PROCEDURES FOR Ri                  TNG TO MAJOR INCIDENTS



                         Introduction
                        1 Each fieldDivision has itsown instructionsfor responding to
                        significantincidents.This HSAM does not replacethem but setsout
                        the additional stepsthatneed to be taken to helpthe Executive and
                        Commission to reach certain decisions and to carry out their
                        functions in the case of those major incidents that attract or are
                        likely to atiract the attention of Parliament, Ministers and the
                        national press.


                        Qualifyingmajor incidents*
                        2 Itise^ential for the Chairman of the Commission and the
                        Executive t>be kept aware of two main kindsof major incidents.
                        These are:

                             (i) incicentswhich are — or are likelyto be — thefirststory in
                                 tht national press and on national television, and the
                                 suuject of bulletins as a picture of the event emerges.
                                 National journalistsand film crews would travel to the site
                                 and would be pressing Government, including HSE, for
                                 information. MPs and otherswould be pressingforaction;
                                 and

                             (ii) incidents which, though less damaging to people or
                                  property, stillattract (orare likelyto attract)the marked
                                  attention ofthe pressand public, perhaps because of their
                                  clear significance to a wider topic of major concern; for
                                  ex.imple, a nuclear emergency not leading to any injury

Secretariat
September 1985          *These do not include incidents known or suspected to be the result of
SEC/FO G/104/1985       terrorist activ ty, for which special arrangements apply.
         might well qualify under this head. Such events would
         attract stronc media interest and would be extensively
         reported in the national press; some journalists would
         travel to the site and would be pressing for information.
         Again MPs and otherswould be pressing Government for a
         response.

3 Area Directors and other Divisions' senior supervisory grades
should also bear inmind that itispossibleforother incidentsto
escalate to the status of one about which the Chairman and
Executive need to be informed. This may occur either upon
investigation or because disproportionate media interest develops.
Where this happens, the incidentshould continue to be treated asa
qualifying incident as at para 2 above for as long as there isa
foreseeable need for a:tion by the Chairman or by a Minister.

4 Itneeds also to he borne in mind that an event of world
significance occurrini) abroad may be felt to have such
potential or relevanceto the UK asto require a reaction from the
Commission or Executive, who willwish to be guided by the expert
adviceavailableto them inthefieldand SpecialistDivisions,and to
have access to any special knowledge that may exist within the
Executive. Those who have had lead responsibility had the event
occurred inGreat Bri:ain (seeparas 14 etseq below) should take
the lead in co-ordinating responses to the Commission and
Executive.

5 In casesofthese kinds, fallingwholly or partlywithin HSE's
responsibility, the Chairman and Executive must be able to form
a picture of the event and itsconsequences and perhaps further
potential as quickly as possible. Ministers will turn to them for
information and may wish to make early Parliamentary
announcements as to the facts, to the action the authorities are
taking, or to any viow thay have formed on the situation if
itisstill active. The Executive may wish to guide Press Office's
responseto media inquiries.


Establishingthe Executive's position
6 Major incidents may involve more than one Government
Department or authority, and itisfrequently necessary for the
Commission and Executive either to establish their own position
 and authority in relation tothe incident— or to say thatothers are
 responsible. This possibility hasto be seen againstthe background
 both ofthe Com nission'svery wide responsibilities under Section 3
 ofthe HSWA, and ofthefunctions of several Departments ofState
 asthe sponsoring bodies (and sometimes the ultimate authority for
 safety also) forparticularincidents.

 7 Usually, thedeterminingfactors inthe situation and itsfuture
 development are which Minister will make a Parliamentary
 statement and or whose advice;who isto investigatethe incident;
 and whether the report will be published. In the case of major
 incidents these matters have often to be decided quickly in the
 lightofthe best1actscurrently available.The swiftnesswith which
 atrue impression can be formed may be criticaltothe Executive's
 ability to influence the- positiion as well as to its future
 responsibilitiesirrelationto incidents inthe same category.

8 Inthe caseof any major incident,which clearlyfallswithin the
 Commission's authority, the Commission will need to decide, often
after consultation with other Departments, whether to order a
public inquiry or an investigationby the Executive, under Section
14 ofthe Act. A decision to have a public inquiry would be likelyto
require considerabledeliberation and would requirethe consent of
theSecretary ofState. However the option to directthe Executive
tocarry out a statutory investigation (which does not foreclose a
public inquiry) has the advantage of establishing the Executive's
authority and may have to be exercised quite quickly and indeed
announced inParliament on thesame day asthe event.

9 The Executivewill alsowish toform a view on how wide its
investigation shojldgo, includingwhich Divisions may need to be
involved,and who should conduct the investigation.


Communications
10 Incidents occurring during working hours will normally be
brought to HSE ;attention either directly by management at the
workplace concerned or via the emergency services, acting under
existingagreementswith HSE.

11. Incidents occurring outside working hours (i.e.from 1730 to
0830 on weekdays and allday on Saturdays and Sundays) may be
  notified to HSE Inspectorates in the same way or via the Duty
  Officer system (see HSA Note 1984/210). The Duty Officer has
  theprivatetelephone numbers of HQ and seniorstaffand actsasa
  reference point and where necessary a channel of communication
  between thefield Inspectoratesand HSE HQ.
 12 Where inspectors orother HSE staffhear of incidentsoutside
 working hours, they can contactthe Duty Officerviaan answering
 machine serviceatMagdalen House on 051-922 0609 or 051-922 0137,
 orviathe custodian serviceat Baynards House on 01-229 3456. This
 givesthe Duty Officer's name and privatetelephone number and thatof
 a reserve.The Duty Officerwillthan be atthe disposal ofthe reporting
 inspectorto relay information.
 13 Inthe lightofthe needs outlined inparas 5-8 above, itismost
 important for members of staffwho have gone to the site of an
 event under Divisional instructions to establish a ready line of
 communication through their base (via the Duty Officer if
 necessary),and to furnish by the readiestmeans and assoon asthey
 are able to make a reasoned assessment, thefollowing information,
 however rudimentary

     (a) estimated njmber dead and injured;

     (b) observed extentand type ofthedamage — main cause and
         circumstance ifevident;

and to followthis up with fullerand more reliableinformation as
soon as this is available (see para 23). They should remain
contractable so far as circumstances allow. These matters are the
subjectofseparate Divisional instructions.


Responsibilitiesand <ction
     (1) HSE and related bodies

14 Where HSE isth.»enforcingauthority, the source of information
inthe fieldwill be th.sArea or DistrictOffice inwhose sphere of
interestthe incident lies.The Area Director or the relevantsenior
supervisory grade in other Divisions' field offices must be kept
informed of allmajor incidents and other incidentsthought likely
to escalate to this stctus. These officers will be responsible for
deciding on the need for an on-site Inspectorate presence and
scientific? or specialist support. They will keep their Chief
Inspectors informed about these incidents and of any other
incidents in accordance with their own Divisional Instructions.
They will also inform, either directly or through their Chief
Inspector, the Duty PressOfficerat HQ (telNo 01-723 3418 during
working hours, or via the custodian service at Baynards House
(telNo 01-229 3456 — out of hours).

15 Where HSE isthe enforcingauthority,the source of information
atHQ will be the Chief Inspector inwhose sphere of interestthe
incident lies. The Chinf Inspector will be responsible for ensuring
arrangements are made for initiating consultation and co­
ordinating subsequem action at the operational level, including
with specialists in the Technical, Specialist and Medical Group.
These arrangements will alsoensure thatthe relevantPolicy Branch
isconsulted and involved in preparing the necessary response and
thattheSecretariatand Duty PressOfficerare kept informed ofthe
action beingtaken.

16 Where responsibil ty forenforcement iscovered by an agency
agreement under section 13 of HSWA, there should be astanding
arrangement for the ngent to inform the HSE sponsor Branch
immediately of any major incident and of any incident thought
likely to escalate into a major incident. The HSE sponsor Branch
should at the same time be kept aware of the agent's (or of
relevant Department's or Organisation's) views on what form of
investigation or inquiry isconsidered appropriate. HSE's sponsor
Branch willbe responsibleforco-ordinatingsubsequent HSE action
and willensure thatthe Secretariatand the Duty Press Officerare
kept informed.

17 Where HSE isnoi the enforcing authority and there is no
agency agreement, but excluding the local authority sector of
enforcement, the relevant Policy Branch will,after informing the
Head of Division, liaise and co-ordinate with the enforcing
authority and Department concerned, and with relevant HSE
Inspectorates as appropriate. For example, in dealing with a
qualifying incident arising from dangerous substances in harbours,
the Policy Branch will consultthe relevant Harbour Authority and
the Department ofTransport, and the British PortsAssociation and
Factory Inspectorate .isappropriate). The relevant Policy Branch
willbe responsiblefor ensuringthattheSecretariatand Duty Press
Officer are kept informed.

18 Inthe localauthority sectorof enforcement, knowledge of any
qualifyingincidentmay come through the normal channels, through
the local authority seeking help via eg FI's Enforcement Liaison
Officer (ELO) or via the Duty Officer system. In any case where
help issought, or where HSC might have a legitimate interestinan
incidentinthissector,the ELO will be the centre point forcontact
with the local authority. He will advise on and arrange, in
consultation with the Area Director, any medical, scientific or
Press and informotion specialist support wich the local authority
may seek. He will keep his Area Director informed just as for
incidentsoccurring inthe HSE sectorof enforcement. Inturn,the
Area Directorwill keep the Chief Inspector of Factories informed,
who will arrange for any necessary consultation with Policy
Brancheswith interestsinthe hazard concerned and, inconsultation
with them, with the Department of Environment, and keep the
Secretariatand Duty Press Officerinformed.

19 The Chief Inspector or Policy Branch Head co-ordinating
action as at paras 14-18 above should arrange for any necessary
consultationwith any interestedGovernment Department, to avoid
any confusion about the division of responsibilities for any
immediate action necessary.The division of responsibilitiesbetween
HSE and DoE for chemical disasters isset out in Appendix 1.
Responsibility for incidents may change as an incident progresses
and itisimportantto ensure that nothing isdone to prejudicethe
Commission's and Executive's ability to take action under HSWA
and its relevant statutory provisions. The Executive will find it
helpful to know whether the interests or other Government
 Departments may require a published report, and ifso, whether
 investigation under Section 14(2)(a) would be appropriate forthe
purpose. The Chairman will consultthe DirectorGeneral or Deputy
 DirectorGeneral and the Solicitorand,where possible. Commission
 members before decidingwhat action ifany, to take under Section
 14 HSWA.

     (2) Secretariat

 20 •The Secretariat (telNo 01-723 1262 Ext 120 or 01-724 0312)
 and the Press Office (01-723 3418) must be the main points of entry
 forcompleted briefingand should be kept inclosetouch from the
)   <


• •

        time of initial awareness of the incident. The Secretariat will be
        re’spcnsibleforalerting and co-ordinating briefingforthe Chairman.
        Executiveand other seniorstaffasappropriate, inaccordance with
        revised briefing insutractions (HSAM 22 GAP (Revised)). Out of
        hoursthe Secretariat should be contacted viathe Duty Officer.

        21 The Department of Employment (DE) must be kept informed
        of allcases where HSC/HSE are involved in the investigation of
        major incidents and may need to be warned of the possible
        escalation of other incidents to this status. The procedures for
        keeping DE informed and briefedare described below atpara 30.

        22 Where other Government Departments have an interest, the
        Secretariat will also be responsible for onward transmission of
        briefing. But in emergency situations, there might be situations
        where unacceptable delay could occur by routing all
        communications via theSecretariat. Heads of Divisionsand Policy
        Branches should then use their direct contact with Government
        Departments but ensure that the Secretariat isprovided with a
        copy of any documentary material supplied and kept generally
        informed of developments.

        23 To help in preparation of briefing by Inspectorates and
        Divisions, inspectors' attention isdrawn to an aide-memoire of
        relevant considerations at Appendix 2. Inspectors should ensure
        thatasfaraspossible allrelevantquestions areconsidered intheir
        preparationof briefilgmaterial forsenior staff. However, briefing
        should not be delayed because some information isincomplete;
        supplementary briefing should be used to fill in any gaps in
        knowledge when the necessary information isavailable.

            (3) DIAS

        24 Where the Press Office isthefirstto know ofa major incident,
        itwill contactthe Aiea Directoror other relevantseniorsupervisor
        immediately. Where the information comes directtoan Area Office
        orotherpartof HSE, orthrough the Duty Officer,the PressOffice
        must be informed r.peedily, in accordance with Divisional
        instructions. Out of hours, the Duty Officerwillautomatically be
        responsibleforinforming the PressOffice,which willdecidewhether
        the Regional SIO, Central Officeof Information (COI) needsto be
        involved.
25 The Duty PressOfficerwill inform the ChiefPress Officerand
the Director, IAS, who will consult the relevantChief Inspector or
Head of Policy Brunch about the need to alertthe DirectorGeneral
and Chairman, and willadviseabout theirpublic involvement.


26 The Director, IAS (or the most senior press officer available)
will consultthe relevantChief Inspector or Head of Policy Branch
about the need for on-site action by DIAS. Where in the initial
stages itisclear that a major incident isinvolved the Chief Press
Officerwill nominate a pressofficerfrom the London PressOffice
or COI region totravelto the siteto liaisewith the Area Director or
the relevant senior supervisory grade in other Divisions, and if
appropriate with the PressOfficersofthe companies concerned and
otherGovernment Departments. The role ofthe on-sitepressofficer
will be,inco-operationwith the local inspector, to helpto keep the
 media consistently and accurately informed about the role of the
 HSE and the Inspectorates and as far as possible to minimise the
diversionof inspectors' attention from the process of investigation.
The on-site press officer will liaise closely with the Chief Press
Officerover developments.

    (4) Medical Division

27 Where an incidentinvolvesexposure to toxic substances, advice
on health risksand immediate treatmentmay be required asan aid
to incidentmanagement. Local medical staffhave accessto advice
from the National Poisons Information Service or from-Medical
Division. Subsequently investigation of those exposed may be
needed to establish the extent ofany adverseffectsand to provide
information to guide the management of future incidnets. The
Senior Employmert Medical Adviser for the region should be
informed and can mobilise specialistsupport for such investigations.

     (5) RLSD

28 The SpecialistServicesSection ofSELI, Sheffield, provides in
addition a number of support services which may be of major
benefit to HSE officers investigating incidents. These include film
and still photographic services,video tape and other means of
recordingdetailsof the locationor effectsof the incident,with due
regardforany future need for information.
        (6) Wider Government action

29 In a disaster on the scale of Bhopal it is likely that the
Government's wider civilcontingencies arrangementswould be put
into effect and that a senior HSE official would be part of the
briefing team. The Chief Press Officer would nominate a press
officer to accompany that official and to form part of the Civil
Contingencies Unit (CCU) pressteam or, ifthisisnot possible,keep
inclosecontactwith hismost immediate counterpart.

       (7) Ministerial statements

 30 Any statementon a relevantmajor incidentwillbe made by the
 Parliamentary Minister with policy responsibility under HSWA,
following consultation with HSC and other Ministers concerned.
 The Secretariatwill inform DE Private Office (viaDE HSL1),the
Private Offices of any other appropriate Ministers, and the
 Chairman's Office, as soon as possible of any qualifying incident
and will commission and then convey, as appropriate, a draft
Ministerial statement prepared by the relevant Division. Any such
draft will be copied to the Private Office of any other Ministers
concerned forcomment aswell astothe Director General, Deputy
Director General and Heads of Policy Branches and Divisions
concerned.

    (8) Media publicity

31 The general aims of information dissemination atthe time of an
incidentwhere thi;Commission hasauthority are:
    —     to expla n to the public through the media what has
          happened and isnow happening;
    —     to presertthe HSC, HSE and Inspectorate(s) asthe main
          authoritctive and independent body/ies in determining
          what went wrong;
   —      to contribute to reassuranceforthe publicthat
          Government inthewidest sense and the HSE inparticular
          isdoing <illthatcan be done to findthe cause of an incident
          and prevent itsrepetition;

   —      to answer questionsfrom the media accurately and quickly
        and to keep the media as fully informed as possible.

32 In order to fulfil these aims itisimportant that an initial
statement should be made through PressOffice,assoon aspossible
afterthe incidenthas been notified,along the following lines:-

    "The Health and Safety Executive isaware of the (nature of
    incident) at (location). Inspectorsfrom (..... Inspectorate)
    ofthe HSE are on theirway tothe scene and are expected to
    arriveat (time)/'

Detailsto be givenv'illbe receivedfrom and agreedwith theArea
Directoror other relevantseniorsupervisor, or Chief Inspector or
Head of Policy Branch concerned, or theirauthorised representative.

33 Insome cases, eg.atNational Coal Board coal mines, the site
owner's or occupier's own information system may, in linewith
their usual practice, take the lead in keeping the media informed
abouteg. progresswith rescueor itsown investigations. However,
DIAS will take the lead in keeping the media informed, as
appropriate, about HSC/E decisions,actionsand involvement.

34 The publicity options outlined above are particularly
appropriate for the first24 hours following an incident. The aim
isto setthe tone fo- media recognition and reportingof HSC and
HSE involvement. The media willthen recognisethatthere isa limit
towhat we can say asthe investigation proceeds. However, itmust
be recognised that the media will look for answers to anyone -
ranging from academics to plant owners and workforce and the
general public- who hasatheory. We should therefore aim fora
continuouscontrolled releaseof information inaway thatdoes not
prejudicethe course!of the investigation.

 35 Inthe longerterm, DIAS can provide production facilitiesand
 expertise inpublishingand publicisingreports on incidents.

     (9) Visitsto site

 36 Consideration should be given by the relevant Chief Inspector
 or Head of Policy E-ranch, inconsultationwith the Secretariatand
 PressOffice, to arranging an earlyvisitto the siteby the Chairman
 orpossibly the Dirc.-ctorGeneral. The Private Office of the Minister
concerned must be told of any intended visit and arrangements
co-ordinatedwith any visitplanned by the Minister. The aim ofa
visitby the Chairman orthe DirectorGeneral would be to direct
attentionto the practicalwork being undertaken by the inspectorate
to find the cause of the incident. Where practicable, itmay be
possibleto link the visitwith an announcement of formal action
beingdirected by the HSC. Inany case itisrecommended thatany
visitshould take place inthe early stagesof the incidentonce any
immediate rescue work is coming to an end. A visit will be
appropriate in most cases where an investigation or inquiry is
directed under SI4(5)(a)or (b)of HSWA.




Annotation of instructions

  (AM/5/MF dated 12 January 1978 — Cancel
  IAM/26/GAP dated 26 January 1982 — Cancel
                            APPENDIX I



Chemical disasters: departmental responsibilities
1 This note liststhe various responsibilities of DoE and HSE
inseeking toguard aciainstand then dealingwith achemical disaster
should itoccur.

2 A chemical disaster of the type envisaged presumably would
involve a 'major hazerd' plant subject to the NIHHS or CIMAH
Regulations. Public orotection in relation to such plants is
concerned with actionsaimed at preventing a disasterand actions
tobe taken should a disasteroccur. HSE (on behalf of HSC) and
DoE each have responsibilities before and after the event, as
described below.

3    HSE responsibilitiesbefore the event:

     (i) to enforce HSWA with its reasonably practicable
         requirement; for employers to secure the safety of
         employees and members of the public, thus reducing the
         possibility o1 a disasteroccurring;

    (ii) to provide the LAs with health and safety advice about
         plansfor development inoraround potentially hazardous
         installations, thereby minimising the number of people at
         riskfrom an incident;

    (iii) to enforce statutory requirements for on-and off-site
          emergency plans, safety cases,etcfor CIMAH sites.

4    DoE responsibilitesbefore the event:

     (i) toestablish an adequate legaland policy framework within
         which local planning authorities can take decisions on
         planning applicationsrelatingto hazardous installationsand
         development; intheirvicinity;

    (ii).to support Home Office inthe making of provisionsto deal
         with emergencies and their aftermath, particularly in
         respectof consequencesoff site.
5    HSE responsibilitiesafterthe event:

     (i) to provide support, advice, etc to the emergency services
         during an eme gency inrespectofthe emergency services'
         lead responsib lityfordealingwith the emergency;

    (ii) to enforce HSWA as appropriate while the emergency
         servicesare dealing with the emergency;

    (iii) to help to identifythe initiallead department and provide
          information and advice to the relevantMinister;

    (iv) to pursue the cause ofthe incidentafterthe site isreleased
         by the emergency services;

    (v) to consider ard ifappropriate introduce any necessary
        changesto regjlationsrelatingto major hazard plants.

6 DoE responsibilities after the event (in conjunction as
appropriatewith LAs):

    (i) to consider any request for contribution to local
        authority costs indealingwith the emergency;

    (ii) to provide advice on:
         — the environmental consequences of toxic
              substances, environmental pathways, persistence/
              degradation inthe environment; design and execution
             of monitcring programmes; the survey of contaminated
             sites; remedial action needed to ensure the safe
             redevelopment ofcontaminated sites;
        —    the safe cisposal of hazardous wastes, contaminated
             debrisetc;
        —    problems ofwater contamination inconjunction with
             expertise ofthewater authorities;
        —    structural integrity, properties of building materials,
             performance of materials in fires, relevant aspects of
             accident investigation.
     Inaddition, where a DoE Ministertook the lead inreportingto
     Parliament, the Cabinet etc (seepara 5(iii)above), the following
     responsibilitiescould alsoarise:

    (iii) to consider taking Emergency Powers;

    (iv) to request asappropriate specialistresourcessuch asthose
         in HSE, UKAEA and PSA;

    (v) to considei any requirement for military aid, over and
        above that available to local authorities under the
    - ^ "military aidto civilcommunities” arrangements;

    (vi) to considei activating the appropriate regional emergency
         committee under the DoE Regional Director.

7 Certain responsibilitiesin paras3 to 6 would also be pertinent
inrespectofdisasters involving non-major hazard plants, transport,
etc.

8 Both HSE and DoE might be involved inprovidingadvice, etc
to MAFF under the Food and Environmental Protection Act should
a chemical disasteroccur.
                           A P P E N D I X I!



Aide-memoire foruse following major incidents
1 The guidance given here is intended to assist staff in HSC/
HSE investigating incidents about which senior staff, in particular
the Director General, Cnairman and Ministers, need to be kept
informed.

2 Where HSE istheenforcement authority, on-site inspectorsand
others involvedwill operate through theirArea Director (orsenior
supervisory grade in other Divisions) and their Cheif Inspector,
inaccordance with their Divisional Instructionsand the procedures
setout inthisHSAM.

3. Where HSE is not the enforcing authority, relevant Policy
Branch staffwilloperate through their Head of Branch and Division
in accordance with Divisional instructions and as outlined in this
HSAM.

4 Much information on premises, localityand hazards associated
with dangerous processes or on similar incidents will be readily
available from SHIELD, office records, current literature, and
expertise within both Policy Branches and Inspectorates in HSE.
Government Department, particularlythose directlyconcerned may
alsobe a useful source o" information. However, experience shows
thatthe questionsarisincifrom from an incident may be varied and
wide in content. This instruction gives some idea of the range of
questions and the supplementary.factors to be considered in
formulating repliesto questions. The listisnot exhaustive and not
everything will be appropriate to every incident or occurrence.
However this aide memoire may be useful in anticipating
supplementary questions and inaccumulating datafor incorporating
in background notes or supporing material for use in Ministerial/
HSC/HSE briefingand repliestothe variety of enquireswhich may
ariseoften atvery short notice, asthe incidentdevelopes.

5 Particularcare should be taken to ensure that security classified
information or commercial information given or obtained in
confidence is adequately marked as such, and does not
inadvertently find itswjy into briefs that are likely to form part
of a publicstatement,or be passedto othersoutside HSE who are
notauthorised to receive it.


Listofpotentially relevantconsiderationsforbriefing material:-
    ,(i) What arethe factsof the caseasknown to HSE? (asketch
         ofthe site/surroundingsmay be useful).

        a) identifya company (and parentgroup ifapplicable)

        b) nature ofoccurrence and possiblecause

        c) physical damage

       • d) casualties

        e) riskto public

        f) pollution or other'fall-out'effectsand any associated
           dangers

        g) residual risks

        h) potential escalation of incident (eg. nearby LPG
           tanks, etc)

        j) functioning of the emergency services in response to
           incident

        k) which Inspectorate is taking the lead in HSE's
           involvement with the incident? Which units are so
           farinvolved.

    (ii) Do the factsasknown to HSE conflictwith media reports?

   (iii) On what aspectsareany essential factsmissing or
         inconclusive, and what isbeingdone about them?

   (iv) What isthe background to the premisesand process, etc?

        a) when builtor commissioned?
    b) arethere similar premises/processeselsewhere
       (includingoverseas),and have they suffered any such
       incidents?

    c) when Iasi inspected and with what resultsand follow-
       up?

    d) can there be any suggestionthat commercial interests,
       etcmay have out-weighed health and safety
       requirements atthisor similar plantsatany time?

    e) have any inspectionsor special measures been
       undertaken previously to safeguard against this type
       of incident inthisor similarestablishmentselsewhere?

    f) whether the site islisted as a notified site and ifso
       why?

    g) isthere a local emergency plan? Has itbeen tested
       recently?

(v) What legislativeprovisionsare relevanttothe incident?

    a) under HSW Act and itsrelevant stautory provisions?

    b) under other legislation?

    c) any applicableguidance notes or codes of practice?

    d) any exemptions from HSW legislation?

    e)* what enforcement arrangements had HSE made for
        premises/site (eg.agency inspection, etc)?

    f) have any statements been previously made in the
       House (as aresult of PQ's/debates, etc)or media on
       subjectsrelatedtothistype of hazard oritsassociated
       dangers?

(vi) What implicationsfor HSE or DE arisefrom thisincident?

    a) does itaggravate any already sensitive public concern
       inthistype ofwork?
                                                                       i

       b) are any pressure groups, etc, currently active in this
          sphere?

       c) what Government Departments have a significant
          interest? To what extend are they likely to want             '
          direct involvement in any proposed action, etc, and
          what liaisonarrangements exist?

       d) arethere possible implicationsforwider Government
          policy (eg. crea or industrial devlopment plans, etc)?

           will itcompromise any impending HSE, DE or other
           Government Department's statement in this area of
           activity?

      f) are there an>/ international implicationswhich should
         be made known to the Minister (eg.Trade, EC, ILO,
         NATO, etc)'                                                   i

      g) are there an /significantcommercial strategic
         implications which could follow from this incident
         (eg.only UK source of supply knocked out)?

(vii) To what extent isthere any relatedwork or study already
      inhand in HSE c-rGovernment Departments?

      a) any recent relevantofficial reports,etc?

      b) any research programmes being undertaken in UK
          or abroad intothe hazards associatedwith thistype of
         • incident?

      c) any official inquiries,etc,which might have an interest
          inthis incident?                                    •    t
                                                                       ■

(viii) What follow up tiction isplanned?                           j
      a) isany action being taken or planned to check similar
                                                                   s
                                                                   ;
                                                                   ■
          establishments, processesor plantagainstsuch             ?
          incidents?                                               i
                                                                   i


      b) will a public or other investigation or inquiry (eg.      f
         unc!ersection 14(2)(a)or (b HSWA) need to be
         considered, and ifso what possibleterms of
         reference might ithave? Does the scaleofthe incident
         or public interestjustify production of a special
         report?
     c) is there likely to be any prosecution action, etc,
        arisingout ofthisincident?

     d) doesthe incidentappear to pose questionswhich will
        involve HSE inundertaking some background study or
        research?
                                                                w
(xi) Any other relevantpoints?

     a) Local Authority area?

     b) Parliamentary constituency?

     c) local MP and party?

     d) does the incident touch a subject area of known
        concern to any particularMP?

(x) Ministerial statement

     a) arews committed to conferringwith other Minister(s)
        on any point before issuinga statement inthe House or
        elsewnere?

     b) hasthe briefinsofaras itrelatesto possible
        Government Department interests been cleared with
        those concerned?
