                              DRAFT




Dear

                  of the HSE Library Information Service has passed
me your letter of 21 September asking for information about public
safety at football matches and about HSE's involvement with the
Hillsborough inquiry.

First, please will you accept my condolences for your loss of a
relative in such terrible circumstances.

I should like to clarify for you HSE's responsibility with regard to
Hillsborough and football grounds generally. The Health and Safety
at Work etc. Act 1974 applies to the health and safety of employees
and others who may be affected by work activities and the way
undertakings are conducted. Enforcement is carried out by the Health
and Safety Executive and by local authorities. However, it is the
stated policy of the Health and Safety Commission that, as a general
principle, they and the Health and Safety Executive wish to avoid
duplication with the enforcement functions of other authorities under
any more specific relevant legislation.


In the case of sports grounds there is other more specific
legislation, the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975, which is
administered by the Home Office and enforced by local authorities.
The Home Office issues guidance to local authorities ("Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds" HMSO 1986 ESBN Oil 340840 4) which covers
crowd safety amongst other issues. It follows that any enforcement
action would be taken by the local authority, or possibly by the
police, rather than by HSE.
                                  2

IlSE's Research and Laboratory Services Division, which is based in
Sheffield, have however been involved in providing technical advice
in the investigation into the tragedy. They have considered the
siting and strength of crush barriers, means of exit and entrance
from the ground, the turnstiles, calculations about the maximum
number of people allowed into the stands and the structural integrity
of constructions at the ground.

Following on from the initial stage of inquiry HSE is now involved on
a technical working party which has been set up to "Review technical
aspects of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds; identify areas
needing clarification or amendment; and recommend accordingly." The
working party reports to Lord Justice Taylor. HSE has also been
asked to give technical assistance in the consideration of whether
any criminal charges should be brought following the Inquiry.

I enclose some information listings provided by the Library Service.
I hope that the information and explanation I have been able to give
you is of some help.
