                                                                              A
                                                                                           ''   i ■i.-/
                                                                 Reference




               Dr C E Nicholson                         cc:      Dr Derrick, SGPD C3
               DD/SEL3                                           Mr P Jones, TD
               Sheffield                                                         HPD D
                                                              ✓I                LAU
                                                                 Mr F Lindsay, APAU
                                                                 Mr H Cavaxiagh> POD (Area 18)


               HOME OFFICE - REVISION OP THE 'GREEN GUIDE1 ON SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


               1)   Thank you for sending me this "First Aid" section for comment.
                    Clearly the policy comment will come from             BPD/D.

               2)   However, I can perhaps add a few related thoughts:

                    (a)   Do we have any idea of the average accident and ill
                          health rate/10,000 attendees at a football match or
                          any large public gathering ?

                    (b)   If we haven't got these statistics, perhaps we should
                          get them (via an extramural research programme) ?

                    (c)   How do the number of cases of ill-health vary with
                          temperature, type of event (horse-riding v. soccer etc),
                          density and type of accommodation, access to alcohol ?

                    (d)   Should (or do) the first-aid rooms have accident books ?
                          If they do, have we looked at them ?

               3)   If we had this sort of information we could give informed guidance.
                    This draft suggests a room "large enough to contain the minima
                    of a couch".

                    It seems such a room (with one couch) certainly is an inadequate
                    provision at a large first-division match.

               4)   Clearly the present guidance will go out. Should we commission
                    some research concerning accident and ill health rates at public
                    sports gatherings (if this information is not available) ? We
                    in HPD/E would be happy to help.




               EPD/E
               5 July 1990




CODE   18-77
Dr C Nicholson
RLSD                                        cc: Dr Derrick



                    REVIEW OF THE GREEN GUIDE



1.   Thank you for your letter of 3 July.

2.   Whilst I note that the current draft is without prejudice to
the Health and Safety at Work Act (paragraph 13) the statement in
paragraph 26, viz "Local Authority Safety Officers ... will help
management to discharge this responsibility..." is I think likely
to be ambiguous.   This arises from the involvement of different
tiers of local authorities.   In this particular context, I
imagine that the reference is to the County tier of authority who
will issue the certificate under the Safety of Sportsgrounds Act
and not to the District Authority who will be enforcing the health
and safety legislation.(Except, of course, in the case of
Metropolitan District Councils and London Boroughs where both
functions are combined though probably in different departments
within the local authority)!   In any event, I would have thought
"help" is wrong and "advise" might be better.

3.   There is also reference to a written safety policy in
paragraph 27. This, presumably, is a reference to the Health and
Safety at Work Act provisions.

4.   I notice that a number of the annexes which are referred to
in the draft are missing.  I am therefore unable to comment on
those.

5.   As you will be aware, there are «- numerous references to the
duties of management and I think that the Home Office need to be
left in no doubt that once this guidance has been published, the
District Councils may use this as a basis for enforcement of the
Health and Safety at Work Act. My advice to the Home Office would
be to delay the publication of the Green Guide and see whether it
would be possible to combine it with advice on how employers at
sportsgrounds can comply with their duties under the Health and
Safety at Work Act.   This formula is already being used in
relation to pop concerts and should work.   I know we have tried
before without success but the effect of the Health and Safety
[Enforcing Authority] Regulations changes the position.    We
cannot guarantee a demarcation agreement between the different
tiers of LAs.
6.   Given the timescale, I am afraid these are very much
first reactions and I will go through it more carefully.   If I
identify any further points I shall let you know but at this stage
I thought it would be useful to air the possibility of raising
again the joint health and safety/Home Office guidance point.




Local Authority Unit
4 July 1990
                                    HSE
                                 Health & Safety
                                   Executive



IAU 1
Room 227
Baynard's House                                                  3 July 1990




Dear

HCME OFFICE - REVISION OF THE 'GREEN GUIDE' CN SAFETY AT SFCKTS GROUNDS

As you may know, following the Hillsborough Inquiry and reports issued by Lord
Justice Taylor, the Home Office are currently reviewing the above 'green guide'.
Following HSE's involvement in the provision of technical assistance to the
Inquiry, I was asked to assist the Home Office Working Group in this revision. In
addition, Policy Division (SGPD C3) have already fed various papers to the Home
Office for their consideration for incorporation into the guide.

On Friday 29 June 1990 I received the first draft, a copy of which is attached,
together with a letter from the secretary of the working group, Mr A Brown. This
draft was discussed at the first meeting of the group held yesterday, the
2 July 1990. I was able to comment in detail on the Annex which deals with barrier
testing but there was no time for consultation within HSE to enable me to comment
further.

The Home Office are committed to produce a final published version by the Autumn
and have already received the views of various bodies to aid their review. Copies
of responses they received were circulated yesterday and I have made further copies
for your information. Those views are not yet incorporated into the current draft.

Mich of this draft varies little from the version issued in 1986, but the
alterations made in the sectionon barrier testing following submissions from
others, have not been incorporated acceptably. However, most of my comments, based
on RISD's and TD's earlier views expressed to the Inquiry, were readily accepted at
yesterday's meeting. The Home Office seem very amenable to change but I await the
minutes and re-draft with interest.

I would welcome your views on the enclosed draft and attachments, and would expect
that the following recipients could comment on their own topics but would not wish
to restrict comments on any parts of the guide.

In view of the tight timescale, I am sending this letter and the draft directly to
all those listed below:

       Dr Derrick, SGPD C3                   - Policy matters
       Mr P Jones, TD                        -Engineering topics, barrier testing
                    | HPD D                  - First aid and medical facilities
                                             - (Also copied to Dr Gompertz, 0MHL1)



                     Research and Laboratory Services Division
                           Broad Lane, Sheffield, S3 7HQ
                                 Tel: 0742 768141
                    IAU                       Local authority matters
      Mr F Lindsay, APAU                      Safety management
      Mr H Cavanagh, POD (Area 18)            Entertainment NIG interests
      Yet to be identified                    Fire precautions

The Home Office have apparently requested that APAU provide a chapter for the guide
on Safety Management, but this is being dealt with between SGPD and APAU.

The next meeting of the working group has been arranged for 18 July 1990.   I would
appreciate receiving your ccranents by MONDAY. 16 JULY 1990.




C E NICHOLSON
Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1
                                                 tfg} -JOI': > 0/&'<y
m


    SGPD C3

    CC




    HOME OFFICE REVISION OF THE GREEN GUIDE

    h        ret“rn,   y°ur minute of 25 April I'm   afraid, nobody
    in LAU came back to me with contributions.




    LAU
    17 May 1990
      HOME OFFICE
      Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H 9A T
                                     Direct line 0 7 1 2 7 3 2 7 6 5
                                    Sw itchboard07-] 2 7 3 3 0 0 0



Dr C E Nicholson                                       Your reference
Health and Safety Executive
Research and Laboratory Services                       O ur reference
Broad Lane                                         FEP/90 35/35/1
Sheffield                                            Date
S3 7HQ                                             28 June 1990


Dear Dr Nic


REVIEW OF THE GREEN GUIDE

Further to my letter of 12 June please find enclosed the
initial draft revision of the guide.

Illness has regrettably prevented distribution of the draft
sooner or in the exact manner we would have preferred.

The draft requires some minor work on cross-referencing,
annexes etc and this work is in hand. Copies of responses for
those groups involved in the consultative process will be
provided at the meeting on 2 July, which will start at 10.00
am.

One aspect of this draft which is substantially the same as
the original guide is that of egress time/emergency evacuation
time. We have however been uneasy about this for some time
and wondered whether the guide has been properly interpreted.
We should like to discuss this. For example, is it feasible
to expect a modern stand complex which contains latest fire
engineering and conforms to building regulations to provide
additional exits in order to evacuate spectators more quickly
than the normal egress time (8 minutes) when they are, in
effect occupying an open-fronted (sometimes partly-covered)
fire resisting compartment from which there are fire
resisting/protected exit routes?

Please accept my apologies for the lateness in providing the
draft.  I hope it does not provide too much inconvenience.

                                                    Yours sincerely




                                                    (Fire and Emergency
                                                    Planning Department)
                                                        UdO'l
                                                         ’ " }(
                                                             11




KH .6.28/GUIDESSG.DM




GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


1.    INTRODUCTION



Scope and Status of the Guide


1.    This booklet provides guidance to ground
management, local authorities and technical
specialists such as engineers on measures for
improving spectator safety at existing sports
grounds.    The Guide has no statutory force.
Although the Guide is a voluntary code many of its
recommendations may be given statutory force at
individual grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 by their inclusion in safety
certificates.     Whether or not a ground is the
subject of a safety certificate ground operators who
have primary responsibility for the safety of their
spectators should apply the criteria, enlisting
professional expertise where necessary, in order to
help ensure safe conditions at their ground.


Background to the Guide


2.    Guidelines on measures for improving the safety
of spectators at sports grounds first became
available when the Wheatley Report on Crowd Safety
at Sports Grounds was published in 1972.     The
recommendations in the Appendix to that Report were
extended to include fire precautions and means of
escape from an emergency situation such as a fire,
and then formed the basis of the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds (which became known as the 'Green
Guide').

                             1
3.   The application of those guidelines to football
grounds over the following few years revealed a need
for advice to be amended in certain respects.
Furthermore, since the safety of spectators can be
affected when crowds are disturbed by hooligan
elements, the recommendations of the Working Party
on Crowd Behaviour were incorporated in a new
version, published in 1976, which was aimed
specifically at football grounds.


4.   Following the fire at Bradford City FC ground
in 1985 in which 56 people died, a working party,
established under the aegis of Mr Justice
Popplewell's Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control
at Sports Grounds, reviewed the Guide and produced a
series of recommendations which were taken into
account in consultation with others to produce a
revised and expanded second edition in 1986.


5.   This third edition incorporates further changes
made following re-examination of the guidelines in
the light of recommendations by the Inquiry by Lord
Justice Taylor who reviewed the guide with technical
assistance in the course of his inquiry into the
tragedy at Hillsborough in 1989.


Historical context


6.   Serious accidents at sports grounds involving
injuries on a large scale are fortunately few.     But
as demonstrated by those at Burnden Park in 1946,
Ibrox Stadium in 1971, Valley Parade in 1985 and
Hillsborough in 1989, the potential for disaster at
a crowded sporting event is such that it is
essential for ground management to take such steps
as are necessary to ensure reasonable safety at
their grounds.     This applies to all grounds
irrespective of the sport being played and whether
or not they are the subject of a safety certificate.


General principles of the Guide


7.   The problem of crowd safety at sports grounds
is complex and cannot be solved simply by ensuring
that each component of a ground, such as stairways,
passages or sections of terracing, is satisfactory
in itself.   The inter-relation of these and other
components is essential: none of them can be
considered in isolation without any consideration of
its effect on the others, and they should all be
compatible and combine to form a balanced unit;.


8.   The guide is intended to cover grounds where
sporting events of all kinds are held and where the
gathering of large crowds is likely to present a
safety problem.    Football has particular problems
such as overcrowding and misbehaviour, which are not
normally experienced to the same extent elsewhere.
Accordingly much of the guidance has particular
application to football grounds.     It should also be
recognised that crowd problems are [often directly]
related to the nature of the event and the numbers
attending it.     Indications are given throughout to
those sections of the Guide which are particularly
relevant to football grounds or stadia and to those
where close compliance with the guidelines is
desirable irrespective of the sport concerned.]


9.   The variety of type, function and layout of
sports grounds and the inter-relationship of the
different components means that a flexible approach
should be maintained to take account of the
individual nature of grounds.    The Guide does not


                            3
attempt to provide a universal minimum standard but
sets achievable standards.       Whilst it may therefore
be possible to deviate from individual guidelines
without detracting from the overall safety of the
ground any decision to do so should be recorded
together with the deviation(s) with supporting
documentation.   Unless alternative measures which
can be demonstrated to achieve an equal or greater
degree of safety are taken to those laid down in the
Guide,   a reduction of the numbers of spectators who
can be safely accommodated compare^^^^ the number
who would otherwise be accommodated will be
required.   That reduction may be severe.


10.   The Guide is aimed primarily at safety in
existing sports grounds and therefore attempts to
take account of the constraints and difficulties
which are present in these grounds.      Although it is
not in itself a design brief for new construction
work or reconstruction work at sports grounds, the
standards of such work should not be lower than
those set out in the Guide.      New work should conform
to the appropriate Building Regulations.       The scope
of new design work should lead to improved standards
on those that can be achieved at grounds already
built.


11.   When using the Guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of
spectators, the criterion to be aimed for is that of
a reasonable degree of safety.       [It would be
unreasonable, if not impractical, to seek standards
for absolute safety of everyone attending a ground.]


12.   The Guide is not specifically aimed at risks to
spectators from the sport itself, but clearly
management have a duty to take all necessary


                             4
precautions to safeguard spectators against the
effects of accidents in, or originating from, the
activity on the playing area.     Particular care is
needed when the sport entails the use and storage of
flammable fuels.


13.     The advice given in this Guide is without
prejudice to the operation of the Building
Regulations, the Health and Safety at Work etc Act
1974 and any other relevant legislation.


Using the Guide


14.     The principles referred to in paragraphs 7-13
above should be kept in mind by both ground
management and, where applicable, by the local
authority when applying the Guide to an individual
ground.     The Guide is an aid to professional
judgement and common sense, not a substitute.


15.     Although some of the safety standards are
likely to apply to all sports grounds however many
spectators are present, it is nevertheless important
to relate the Guide to the needs of each individual
grounds.     The required safety standard to be
attained should relate to the maximum number of
spectators who are to be admitted to the ground or
parts of it.     For example, a large football ground
with a maximum spectator capacity of tens of
thousands is likely to pose significant crowd
pressure risks particularly if it is full or nearly
full.     To accommodate such a crowd safely may entail
substantial remedial work if it is proposed to
maximise the potential of the accommodation;
alternatively, consideration might be given to
accepting a much smaller number of spectators who,
properly dispersed, could be accommodated safely
without having to incur costly repairs or
alterations.   Therefore the first step, using the
Guide's criteria, is to assess how many spectators
can be accommodated safely given the existing
condition of the ground.   In other words, determine
a safe ground capacity based on each viewing area,
entry and exit route.   This requires properly
detailed plans drawn to scale (1:200) of the ground.
[Annex A provides an example of the type of plan and
should be read in conjunction with Chapter 19.]


The problems


16.   There are essentially four types of safety
problem to be considered within a ground and its
immediate surroundings, all of which are inter­
related.


17.   Underfoot conditions: The first hazard is
tripping, falling etc by individuals which can not
only have serious consequences for the individual
concerned, but can lead to a serious incident
involving others.   This type of problem can be
remedied by proper care and maintenance; and
attention to the [general construction features] of
the ground.


18.   Crowd pressures: The second type involves crowd
pressures and is potentially the more serious.     When
large crowds are present and densities are high,
pressures build up within the crowd either through
motion or swaying which make it difficult, or even
impossible, for individuals to control their own
movements.   Under these conditions crowd pressures
can escalate to a dangerous level and if a person
stumbles or falls the crowd cannot adapt to avoid
him or her or to stop to help.   Since this type of
danger arises from crowd pressures its remedy lies
in their removal or restraint within safe limits.
These dangers arise particularly on terraces and in
entry/exit routes.     Careful attention must be paid
to avoid overcrowding, to restrain surges and
similar pressures on the terraces to ensure free
movement throughout the entry/exit systems.


19.   Emergency evacuation: The third type of safety
problem cannot be divorced from the second and in
some ways is an extreme version of it.     The danger
arises from emergency situations which can develop
following, for example an outbreak of crowd disorder
or fire.   The orderly evacuation of large crowds may
under emergency conditions become a very serious
problem.


20.   Fire: the fourth is the risk from fire itself,
particularly where there is a large crowd in a
confined area of an elevated covered stand where
spectators are in the upper tiers of a building, the
materials and construction of which might in
themselves constitute a fire risk (see Chapter 13).


Overcoming the problems


21.   Good ground management:    The importance of good
ground management cannot be emphasised too strongly
(see Chapter 2).     Much of this Guide contains advice
which should form part of the general upkeep and
maintenance of a sports ground.     If followed it will
reduce or eliminate risks to spectators and in the
long term should prove cost effective by preventing
serious defects.     A well-maintained and well-run
venue makes commercial sense and may attract more
events and a greater number of spectators.



                             7
22.   Improving safety by new design:     As mentioned
in paragraph 10 above, new design work can provide
an opportunity to enhance spectator safety and
should be given a high priority when deciding upon
the design, layout, materials and loading of new
buildings, or alterations in a ground.      Close
attention should be paid to new and existing exits
and exit routes, slip-resistant surfaces, lighting
and ease of maintenance.      All parts of the viewing
areas should always have a clear unobstructed view
of the playing area and designs should take account
of the need to facilitate effective stewarding,
which can plays an important role in controlling
crowd movement (see Chapter 16).


23.   New design work also offers the chance to
improve amenities and standards of comfort for
spectators.   Attention to decor and careful planning
of catering or other refreshment areas can encourage
spectators to arrive in good time, influence the use
of different ingress and egress routes and may
contribute towards improving crowd behaviour.


24.   Care and maintenance:    Although controlling
crowd numbers may serve to reduce some risks to an
acceptable level, remedial work is likely to be
necessary to overcome others.     Obvious defects such
as trip hazards (particularly at the head of stairs
or steps), loose or weak handrails on stairs, and
obstructed exits or exit routes, should be rectified
as part of a continuous programme of remedial care
and maintenance of a ground.     Structures should be
sound (see Chapter 4) and inspected by suitably
qualified persons (see Chapter 5).     Design, layout
and signposting of entrances, exits, entry and exit
routes require particular attention so as to ensure
that they can safely cope with the number of
spectators who will use them either in normal
circumstances or in an emergency (see Chapter 7).
Similarly, the condition of terraces or viewing
slopes (see Chapter 9) and condition of correctly
sited crush barriers (see Chapter 10) are important
factors.     Broken, uneven terraces causes stumbling.
Barriers not only serve to break up crowd pressures
but also assist in controlling movement from the
terraces by regulating the rate of arrival at exits
to suit their capacity, and encouraging the
formation of queues so that spectators arrive at
exits in an orderly fashion.


25.     Fire precautions:    Proper precautions against
the risk of fire are vital (see Chapter 13).       Good
ground management is crucial in reducing or
eliminating the risk.       Accumulation of litter is a
prime potential source of fire but can be eliminated
by regular and frequent inspections, good
housekeeping, ground maintenance and safe provision
over the care and storage of flammable materials.
The nature and type of materials used in the
construction of covered areas and stands will
strongly influence the safety measures required in
them.    For example, in some circumstances
consideration may have to be given to restricting
the number of spectators and/or to the provision of
additional exits from the building if it is to
continue in use.




                              9
CHAPTER 2


2. MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY


Effective ground management is an essential element
in achieving safety.    Management should constantly
look to improve safety standards.


26.   The responsibility for the safety of spectators
inside the ground lies at all times with the ground
operator ie those who stage the event and administer
the ground.    Local authority safety officers, police
and fire officers will help management to discharge
this responsibility and in certain circumstances may
require measures to be taken to achieve reasonable
safety standards.    This does not however exonerate
ground management from its responsibility for the
safety of its spectators.


27.   As part of the drive for success of the club,
team or individual event, senior management,
directors and board members must devote time, effort
and resources to safety management at the ground,
both in its day to day use or for any special event.
They should have a written safety policy known to
all staff and voluntary workers who may be involved
in ground operations.    They should require regular,
periodic reports on safety measures taken, progress
or others.    They should ensure that they are made
aware of details of any minor incidents (which might
suggest underlying problems) and the action taken to
rectify them.


28.   There should be an appointed safety officer who
should be of sufficient competence, status and
authority effectively to take responsibility for


                            10
 safety at the ground and be able to authorise and
 supervise safety measures.     He or an appointed
 deputy should be in attendance at a central control
 point when an event takes place.     All staff should
 know the location of this control point, who is in
 charge of safety on the day in question and the line
 of communication.


 29.   There should be a drawn up programme of checks,
 inspections, tests, personal training and remedial
 work programmes so as to eliminate or minimise the
 potential risks to spectators.     The safety officer
 is responsible for ensuring that such inspections
 are carried out on all structures, installations and
 equipment etc so that they are safe and fit for the
' purpose for which they were intended.    The results
 of any remedial action, as and when taken, should be
 recorded.   He must be given the resources to carry
 out these tasks, for which he should be accountable
 to the most senior management level or Board of
 Directors to whom he should have the right of direct
 access.


 30.   Where restrictions on crowd numbers to parts of
 the ground are required for safety reasons they must
 be imposed and enforced.     Similarly, if a part of
 the ground is required to be closed, for instance
 because it is potentially unsafe for spectators this
 must be done, and it must not be opened up as a
 result of an "attractive" fixture or event, unless
 measures have been taken beforehand to remove the
 dangers which led to its closure in the first place
 and appropriate authority given to re-open it.


 31.   Management should ensure that structural fire
 protection of buildings is adequate, and that fire
 warning systems are correctly installed and properly
maintained in accordance with manufacturers'
instructions or British Standards.     Similarly,
suitable fire-fighting equipment must be provided
and maintained to the standards specified in this
Guide (see Chapter 13).


32.   Staff training, particularly for stewards, in
carrying out both their normal duties and ensuring
that they are aware of their role in an emergency
situation, should be given high priority.     All staff
should be informed in writing what their duties are,
how to effect them and from whom to seek advice if
in doubt.    The safety officer should also carry out
active supervision and organise emergency drills to
maintain standards (see Chapter 16.)


33.   General repair and maintenance should be
undertaken with spectator safety in mind; litter
should not be allowed to accumulate.    Minor repairs
should be quickly and properly carried out.


34.   A properly equipped and staffed First Aid room
and suitable medical facilities should be provided
(see Annex B) in consultation as necessary with the
local ambulance authority and local medical first
aid services.


35. A summary of management responsibilities is
contained below


      i.    Appoint a safety officer


      ii.   Ensure compliance with the terms and
            conditions of a safety certificate or
            other notice covering the safety of
            spectators.
. Draw up and keep up to date records and
 plans of the ground; to maintain the
 general fabric of the ground, and arrange
 an annual detailed inspection of the
 ground.


 Arrange annual inspection of all crush
 barriers, handrails and ensure testing of
 a representative sample of any barriers
 and protection rails, keeping a record of
 their location and results of the tests.


 Maintain and test all electrical
 installations and, in accordance with the
 relevant British Standards, the systems
 for emergency lighting, communications and
 fire warning/detection, and fire-fighting
 equipment.


 Draw up in consultation with the emergency
 services contingency plans, including
 arrangements with police, for stopping or
 delaying an event, for:


 a.   various emergency situations
      including fire;


 b.   possible crowd disturbance;


 c.   coping with the exceptionally large
      numbers of spectators arriving at the
      ground; and


 d.   the failure of any detection,
      warning, lighting or communications
      system or other equipment.
vii. Devise a clear system of communications
      within the ground.


viii.Take necessary fire prevention and
      precautions measures.


ix.   Consult the fire authority about emergency
      evacuation time; fire risk in all parts of
      the ground particularly in stands; fire­
      fighting equipment.


x.    Consult the police and emergency services
      on access for emergency vehicles.


xi.   Store safely and away from public areas
      any hazardous and flammable materials,
      combustible items, and any accumulations
      of combustible waste which cannot be
      cleared from the ground before the next
      event.


xii. Provide first aid facilities and first aid
     staff.


xiii.Consult with the police to arrange
      adequate policing and police facilities
      and ensure that, where the police are to
      be present at the ground, there is a
      clear, understanding of the division of
      duties and responsibility as between them
      and the management.


xiv. Recruit, train and deploy stewards and to
      organise and carry out emergency
      evacuation drills using those staff.




                     14
xv.   Staff any secured exit gates at all times
      when the public are in the ground, to
      ensure that they can be opened immediately
      from inside by anyone in an emergency.


x v i . Ensure that all gangways and exit routes
      are unobstructed and capable of being used
      to their full capacity at all times when
      the public are in the ground.


xvii.Provide directional flow, exit and
      emergency exit signs.


xviii.Before each event:


      a.   test exit doors and gates, and their
           locks if they are to be locked;


      b.   test lighting, communications and
           fire warning/detection systems; and


      c.   check the ground for any
           accumulations of combustible litter,
           especially below stands and in exit
           routes; and for any source of
           potential missiles.


      d.   check the operation of the
           turnstiles.


      e.   check that all entry/exit routes are
           clear of obstruction.


xix. After each event:


      a.   to carry out a general visual
           inspection for signs of damage; and
      b.   to liaise with police so as to gain
           full benefit from any debriefing
           about crowd control.


xx.   To keep records of:


      a.   attendance figures; and


      b.   all inspections and tests, any
           defects noted and the remedial/other
           action taken.


      c.   any accident or reported incident
           which might have led to an accident.




                     16
CHAPTER 3

3.    PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES


Proper provision to accommodate safely people with
disabilities should be made at all grounds.


36.   The safety measure set in the Guide should not
be construed in such a way as to place undue
restrictions on people with disabilities.


People with impaired mobility


37.   Although it is unlikely that anyone whose
mobility is severely impaired will occupy standing
accommodations they will often wish to occupy seated
accommodation, perhaps with friends or relatives, in
stands.   Arrangements should therefore exist to meet
such wishes wherever it is possible to do so, for
example by the provision of wheelchair spaces within
the seated area, preferably in different parts so
that there is a choice of seating position.    Such
provision should take account of the sightlines
available from the allocated areas to ensure that
occupants have an unrestricted view.


38.   Wherever possible there should be more than one
ingress/egress for those with impaired mobility.
Although movement to and from accommodation at
ground level is easier for users of wheelchairs,
consideration should be given to the means by which
they can be accommodated on other levels without
prejudicing their safety or the safety of others.


39.   Where a person leaves their wheelchair in order
to occupy a seat, provision should be made for the


                          17
wheelchair to be readily accessible without it
causing an obstruction in a gangway or exit route.
Those who remain in their wheelchair should not
obstruct the movement of others.


40.   Support services and facilities for disabled
people should also be available within the stand.
Toilet facilities should be provided.    Consideration
should be given to how refreshments might be made
available to those unable to leave their seats
unaided.


41.   New design work for stands should incorporate
guidance in BS 5588 Part 8 Code of Practice for
means of escape for disabled people.    Where, because
of constraints posed by existing buildings, it is
not possible or practicable to apply the Code fully,
alternative ways of meeting its objectives should be
sought.


42.   The arrangements described above should be in
addition to any special provision made for the
admission (often at pitch level) of vehicles used by
people with impaired mobility.   The location of such
vehicles should be agreed with the relevant safety
authority in order to ensure that access to the
ground by emergency vehicles and means of escape are
not compromised.


43. Ramps which are to be used by wheelchair users
should conform to BS 5810.


Use of lifts in an emergency


44.   A lift should be used as a means of escape from
a stand only [in the case of fire] if it is an
evacuation lift or firefighting lift operated under
the direction and control of an appointed steward
designated with specific responsibility for its use
in an evacuation using an agreed evacuation
procedure.   BS 5588 Part 8 recommendations should be
followed.


People with impaired vision


45.   Signposting (see paragraph 84) especially fire
or other safety signs, should be sited so that as
far as possible they can be easily seen and readily
distinguishable by those with impaired vision or
colour perception.   Advice is available from the
Royal National Institute for the Blind or the
National Federation of the Blind of the UK.


People with impaired hearing


46.   Although people with impaired hearing may
experience difficulty in hearing messages broadcast
on a system designed for those with normal hearing
(see Chapter 14) a hearing impairment does not mean
that in all cases a person is insensitive to sound
and that they do not have a sufficiently clear
perception of all conventional alarm signals.     Where
this is not the case it is reasonable to expect
spectators who have been alerted to prepare for
evacuation to warn those with impaired hearing.
CHAPTER 4

4.    GENERAL FABRIC AND STRUCTURAL MATTERS


To meet safety requirements, all components,
installations and structures, eg terraces, stands,
stairs, barriers and pylons, should have the
strength and durability, and be maintained in such
condition and arranged in such a manner as to
perform properly their required functions.


47.   The design and construction of buildings and
installations should be in accordance with good
engineering and building practice, as set out in the
relevant British Standard specifications and codes
of practice.     They should be properly maintained and
repaired by suitable qualified persons.       Specialist
advice from appropriately qualified engineers
belonging to recognised Institution should be sought
to assess the safety and strength of load-bearing
elements in buildings and installations such as
crush barriers,    (see Chapter 10) brick/block walls
etc (see Chapter 9, paragraph 137).


48.   When walls, including perimeter walls, and
fences are to withstand crowd pressures, they should
be designed and maintained to withstand such
pressures safely and allowance should be made for
forces simultaneously and independently induced by
other factors eg wind forces or attached
installations.


49.   All parts of the ground used by the general
public, and especially the exit routes, should have
minimum headroom of not less than 2 metres.      Exit



                            20
routes should wherever possible have a headroom of
2.4 metres.


50.   Precautions should be taken to prevent people
from climbing on to roofs, pylons, hoardings and
other structures.    Where possible such structures
should be fitted with unclimbable devices eg stout
barriers or close-boarded enclosures.     Spikes,
barbed wire etc should only be installed above the
minimum headroom specified in paragraph 49 above and
preferably at a minimum height of 2.4 metres from
the base.    Spikes, or other similar obstructions
should not be installed on pitch perimeter fences.
Neither should such fences have sections overhanging
or returning inwards towards spectators,    (see
Chapter 18).


Electrical installation/wiring


51.   All electrical installations should comply with
the current edition of the Regulations of the
Institution of Electrical Engineers, or have been
awarded a certificate of satisfaction from a
chartered electrical engineer.


52.   [For new installations a diagram of the main
electrical circuit should be fixed in a position
easily accessible to the technical staff.     All main
switches or circuit locaters should be clearly
labelled to indicate the circuits which they
control.    Fuse-ways of such circuits of distribution
boards should also be clearly labelled.


53.   All cables and conductors of wiring systems
used for low voltage circuits of permanent
electrical installations should be enclosed
throughout in a protective covering of material


                           21
which has sufficient strength to resist mechanical
damage - for example armoured cables, mineral
insulated sheathed cables protected by screwed metal
conduit or trunking complying with BS 4678 Part 1 or
Part 4, or rigid PVC conduit complying with relevant
British Standards.


54.   The base of any floodlighting tower should be
earthed in accordance with BS 6651 which also
contains advice on bonding and earthing for
lightening protection.]


55.   Where the natural lighting in any section of
the ground accessible to the public is deficient,
adequate artificial lighting should be provided.      If
the ground is to be used after dark, all parts
accessible to the public should be provided with
means for lighting adequate to enable them to see
their way into, within and out of the ground.      These
provisions are particularly important in relation to
entry and exit routes and stairways used by the
public.   Advice on emergency lighting equipment
should conform to BS 5266: Part 1 (see Chapter 15).




                          22
CHAPTER 5


5.    INSPECTIONS AND TESTS


Inspections and tests should be carried out by
suitably qualified persons on behalf of management
to ensure that the safety standards of the Guide are
maintained.


56.   A detailed inspection of the ground, including
all components and installations, should be arranged
annually by the management.     It should be carried
out by a person with a relevant and recognised
professional qualification, and experience of
inspecting existing structures.


57.   Engineers commissioned to assess structural
safety of buildings may find the appraisal
techniques recommended by the Institution of
Structural Engineers (ISE) in the "Appraisal of
Existing Structures", published in 1980, of
assistance.   Hard and fast rules on the extent to
which a structural appraisal is necessary for
individual buildings are difficult to lay down: much
will depend upon the type of installation, its size,
condition, materials used in construction and
standard of maintenance.   A full appraisal is
however unlikely to be necessary unless defects are
identified or in evidence from the analysis of
information on the structure and visual inspection.


58.   Inspection and testing of crush barriers (see
also Chapter 10) should be carried out in accordance
with Annex C of this Guide.     When the guidelines are
first applied to a particular ground, a
representative sample of barriers of all types from


                           23
all areas of the ground should be selected for
testing.   Thereafter testing of barriers should take
place every 4 years unless from visual inspection
doubts are raised as to their strength/integrity, in
which case they should be retested.   Testing should
be carried out by or under the supervision of a
suitably qualified engineer, ie a structural or
civil engineer.


59.   Warning, detection, lighting and public address
systems are vulnerable to vandalism, and this should
be borne in mind when installing them.   All
automatic fire detection and fire warning, emergency
lighting and public address systems should be tested
24 hours before an event, in accordance with the
methods laid down in BS 5839: Part 1 and BS 5266:
Part 1 respectively.   Turnstiles should be tested to
make sure they are in proper working order.     In case
any of these systems is not operating properly and
cannot be fixed before the event, contingency plans
should be formulated, in consultation with the
emergency services, for the use of acceptable
substitute measures or (if necessary) the closure of
any areas of spectator accommodation until the fault
is remedied.


60.   Before an event, and a major soccer grounds in
particular, steps should be taken to ensure that the
ground does not contain any accessible items which
could be used as missiles (eg piles of bricks,
stones etc).


61.   The ground should be inspected before and after
each event to ensure that there are no accumulations
of combustible waste and that any hazardous
materials (if essential to be stored) are safely
stored well away from public areas.
62.   Following each event, a general visual
inspection of the ground should be made for signs of
damage which might create a potential danger to the
public.     Particular attention should be paid to the
condition of terraces, viewing slopes and stairways.
Crush barriers and balustrades should be examined
for deformation of any other overt signs of
weakness.    The fire precautions measures should also
be inspected for damage, and alarm and other
electrical installations should be checked to ensure
compliance with the relevant British Standards.
Turnstiles should be checked for damage which might
impair their efficiency.


63.   Records should be kept and maintained of all
inspections and tests together with a record of
remedial actions taken.     The required level of
competence of those carrying out the test should be
specified and the record of the results certified by
those carrying out the work together with their
qualification and status.


64.   Annex D provides a tabulation of tests and
inspections and their frequency of operation.
CHAPTER 6

6. INGRESS


The admission of spectators should be accurately
monitored and controlled in order to ensure that
overcrowding does not occur.   Spectators should be
admitted at a rate which is compatible with the
dispersal arrangements for them inside the ground.


65.   Where entry to a ground or parts of it is
controlled by turnstiles, these, by their number and
location, control not only the rate of admission
but, to a large extent, the dispersal of spectators
within a ground to the particular sections.
Turnstiles should be of such numbers as to admit
spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds
are kept waiting for admission and yet at no faster
rate than the arrangements for distributing
spectators within the ground permit.


66.   Each section should be served by its own
metered turnstiles which keep a tally of the number
of spectators admitted to that section.   Where a
section is served by a bank or banks of turnstiles,
arrangements must ensure that the metering system is
capable of recording the total of all the turnstiles
or that the total can be quickly available at any
given time and conveyed without delay to the central
control so that appropriate action can be taken
once a pre-determined figure has been reached.    This
is especially important if a capacity or near
capacity crowd is expected or if a particular
section of a ground is known to be popular or likely
to accommodate an unusually high number of
spectators for a particular event.


                          26
67.   Intercommunication systems and centralised
computer monitoring should be installed [in the 1st
and 2nd Division of the English Football League,
Premier Division of the Scottish Football League and
grounds used for international or other major
sporting events].


68.   The correlation between each viewing area in
the ground and the turnstiles serving it should be
as such to ensure that all spectators intended to be
admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
turnstiles within one hour.        If that cannot be
achieved, the capacity of that viewing area should
be reduced accordingly or the number of turnstiles
for that part of the ground increased (see also
Chapter 19).


69.   The maximum rate at which spectators can pass
through turnstiles will depend on a variety of
factors such as the design and age of the equipment,
the ability of the operator and the ticketing
arrangements.    The rate of admission at each
turnstile will therefore depend greatly upon local
circumstances.   The through-put or flow-rate through
turnstiles should therefore be measured at least
once a year and recorded.        Where a recorded flow-
rate is less than 660 persons per turnstile per hour
the actual figure should be used for calculation
pruposes of paragraph 68 above.       The maximum upper
figure for calculation purposes should not exceed
660 persons per hour.


70.   Entrances to viewing areas should, where
practicable, be designed in such a way and so
located as to allow for the even distribution of
spectators and to prevent local pressure building


                            27
up.   Attention should also be given to the siting of
turnstiles so that the flow of people from them to
the viewing area(s) is, so far as possible, evenly
distributed to the entrances to the viewing
accommodation.     Where this distribution is uneven
and gives rise to congestion at an entrance
consideration will have to be given to changing the
turnstile arrangements or siting in order to
encourage better use of under-used entrances.
Additional or alternative measures should also be
taken: for example improved sign-posting and
increased stewarding.


71.   Entrances and entry routes should not be
obstructed.    Entry and exit routes are often common
to each other and in such cases the considerations
which apply to exit routes therefore apply also to
entry routes (see paragraphs 85-89 of Chapter 7).
Amenities such as refreshment kiosks or toilets
should be located away from the area of the
turnstiles, entrances and entry/exit routes.


72.   Clear, comprehensive signposting must be
provided in order to show the routes to different
parts of the ground.     Tickets (where issued) should
clearly identify the location of the accommodation
for which it has been issued.     Information on the
ticket should correlate with the information
provided both inside and outside the ground.
Retained ticket stubs should [as far as possible]
contain information which will help guide spectators
once they are inside the ground.


73.   Where possible, programmes should include a
plan of the ground indicating the entry/exit routes
to or from different parts of the ground and their
destination.     Dangerous overcrowding can be caused
if spectators are able to force their way into a
ground already full or near to full capacity by
scaling or breaking through boundary walls or fences
or the gates in them.     To avoid this danger such
walls, fences and gates should be of appropriate
height and strength and should not provide the
opportunity for hand or foot holds which might
assist climbing.     They should be regularly inspected
[not less than twice-yearly].


74.   Installation of closed circuit television
should be considered in order to assist in the
monitoring of crowd densities outside the ground and
throughout the ingress/egress routes (see also
Chapter    ).


75.   Contingency plans should be made to deal with
situations where the available entrances at a ground
have proved insufficient to stop unduly large crowds
from gathering outside.    Local knowledge of the
ground, crowd patterns and advice from the police
should be taken into account in drawing up
contingency plans.    Opening additional or under­
used entrances may have to be considered.    However,
under no circumstances should there be uncontrolled
admission into the ground.




                            29
CHAPTER 7

7.    EGRESS


There should be a smooth, unimpeded passage through
an exit route and a free flow of people from one
element to the next until they reach the boundary of
the ground.


76.   It is generally recognised that a period of
great risk to crowd safety is at the time of
leaving.    Pressures can be set up within a departing
crowd; such pressures can and must be contained and
controlled by careful attention to the detailed
design of barriers (Chapter 10), stairways (Chapter
8), gangways (Chapter 9) and exits.


77.   Additional consideration which must be given to
egress from covered stands and seated accommodation
is given in paragraphs     of Chapter 11.
[Calculation of the exit systems is contained in
Chapter 19 and paragraphs 85-89 below.]


78.   A smooth free flow through an exit route to the
outside is best achieved by controlling the crowd
flow at the beginning of the exit route, so that
departing spectators are held back in a relatively
safe place eg on the terrace, enabling access to the
exit route at a calculated rate.   That is to say the
width of the first part of the exit route leading
from the terrace or other enclosure should have [the
same or] lower capacity than any subsequent element.
The exit route will then be able to discharge people
at a rate compatible with that at which they enter
into the route.




                           30
79.   Where deviations in design or construction from
the recommended guidelines are such as to create a
manifest danger, that section of the exit system
should be closed until remedial action has been
taken, and a reduction made accordingly in the
spectator capacity of the section of the ground it
serves ie the exit route is excluded from the
capacity calculations [see paragraph         below.]   Any
exit which contains an element less than 1 metre
wide should be excluded from the calculation.


80.   Exit systems should ensure that in the event of
an emergency which blocks the usual exit route
spectators will be able to use an alternative exit
route including forward evacuation on to the pitch
which will normally be regarded as a place of safety
or form part of the emergency evacuation route, see
Chapter 13 paragraph    ].


81.   There should be no "funnelling" effect causing
people to converge on a narrower means of access or
egress.   This will slow down the rate at which
people can pass through the entire exit system and
pack more closely together.       However a narrowing in
the exit route may be acceptable when it is preceded
by an open space or "reservoir area" where the
holding capacity is sufficient to contain the
spectators held up because of the difference in the
flow rate into and out of the reservoir area (but
see also paragraph 82 below).      The capacity of the
reservoir areas should be calculated using the
appropriate flow rate given in Chapter 20 and the
recommended exit time given in paragraph 83 below.
A packing density of 40 persons per 10 square metres
of the area available for standing within the
reservoir area is the maximum for safety.



                             31
Arrangements should be such as to prevent this being
exceeded.


82.     Reservoir areas should be avoided wherever
possible and should not be permitted within 45
metres of any combustible building within the ground
eg a timber stand, or within 15 metres of any non­
combustible building within the ground.


Egress time


83.     Some research has indicated that when it takes
more than about 7 minutes to vacate an area of
terraced spectator accommodation, the crowd flow
tends to become turbulent.         In these conditions the
rate of flow may be reduced and individuals can lose
control over their own movements; thereby increasing
the potential for accidents.        Exits from each area
of spectator accommodation should be designed so
that all spectators can leave that area and pass
into a free flowing exit route system within 8
minutes or less.       See Chapter 16 paragraphs         for
example if calculation of exit route .......


Note:        Normal egress time is not necessarily the
             same as emergency evacuation time (See
             Chapter   paragraphs     ) which involves
             other considerations.


Signposting


84.     A comprehensive system of signposting which
clearly indicates routes to the various parts of the
ground, and to exits from the ground, should be
provided.     Signs relating to fire safety should be
in accordance with BS 5499: Part 1: 1984, and other
safety signs (eg first aid facilities) should be in


                              32
accordance with BS 5378: Part 1: 1980.      Exit gates
themselves should be clearly signposted, preferably
using illuminated signs in accordance with BS 2560
or BS 4218.     Directional signs should be provided to
encourage crowds in any particular section to flow
in one direction when leaving the ground and should
provide information on the destination of the exit
route (eg north side car-park, High Street) so as to
provide confidence to people using them, specially
if they are evacuating the premises.


Exit routes


85.   Exit routes should be kept clear of
obstructions.    In particular, no catering, sales or
toilet facility should be situated in such a way
that it, or any queue it attracts, obstructs an exit
route.


86.   The minimum width for any section of an exit
routes should be 1.1 metres.    However, the required
width for any particular section is dependent on the
crowd flow it will be required to carry.     (For
capacities of exit routes, see Chapter 19,
paragraphs      ).


87.   Where there is a simple exit route, ie a direct
passage from the accommodation area to the exit gate
from the ground, every part of that route should be
able to accommodate the flow from the terrace or
stand exit.


88.   For a more complex exit system which combines a
number of exit routes and/or offers a choice of
alternative routes to exits, the system should be
analysed in the form of a network in order to check
that the capacity of the exit from the terrace or
the stand is sufficient to ensure a free flow of
spectators to the various exits from the ground.
Where branching of routes gives spectators a choice
of paths, the proportion of the crowd likely to use
each path should be derived from local knowledge, eg
the exit closest to a railway or bus station may be
likely to attract a higher proportion of spectators.


89.   Grounds which have complex exit systems
described in paragraph 88 should have illustrative
plans of the network system which serve each
section, identifying the capacity of the routes
within the system and clearly showing them on the
plans.   These plans should be kept with the drawings
of the section of the ground to which they relate.
Any changes to the ground which affect the
entry/exit routes should be identified on the
network plan.    Examples of [fictitious] network
plants] for normal egress is/are at Annex D.


Exit doors


50.   All exit doors on an exit route should always
be capable of opening outwards so that crowds can
escape in an emergency.    This is particularly
important for doors within covered stands and at the
foot of stairways.


91.   All doors on an exit route should be secured in
the fully open position before the end of play.
When open, no door should obstruct any gangway
passage, stairway or landing.


92.   All exit gates from the ground should open
outwards.    Where this is impracticable for existing
doors, eg because it would cause an obstruction on a
public highway, the gates should be resited (ie put
further back) within the exit route they serve, or
provision made for two-way opening.   Where
practicable exit gates should be sited adjacent to
entrances.   There should be no obstructions eg no
changes in level etc at exit doors.


93.   Sliding or roller-shutter gates should not be
used because they are incapable of being opened when
pressure is exerted in the direction of crowd flow
and have mechanisms or runways which are vulnerable
to jamming.


94.   Where exit gates have to be secured against
outside intruders they should be fitted with panic-
type bolts, but all exit gates, unless secured in an
open position, should be manned at all times while
the ground is used by the public and be capable of
being opened immediately from inside by anyone in an
emergency.


95.   Facilities should be provided in order to eject
anyone whose presence is unwanted and to enable
people to leave the ground at any time.   For this
purpose a number of reversible turnstiles or,
preferably, pass doors, so operated as to limit the
opening to the passage to one person at a time,
should be provided.   Reversible turnstiles are not
acceptable as a means of escape from a ground and
should not form any part of, or be installed into,
the normal or emergency exit system of the ground.




                          35
CHAPTER 8

8.    STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS


The disposition and construction of stairways and
ramps should be such as to help provide a smooth and
unimpeded ingress and egress for spectators under
all conditions set out in Chapters 5 and 6.


96.   For the purpose of this section the term
"stairway" has the meaning given to it in the
Glossary (Annex E) and is distinct from a radial
gangway on a terrace or in a stand.       Guidelines on
terrace gangways is given in Chapter 9, paragraphs
126-133 and for stands in Chapter 11, paragraphs
•




97.   Movement on stairways, especially downwards
poses a considerable potential risk to crowds both
in normal circumstances such as at the end of an
event, or in an emergency.       The effects of
stumbling, pushing and jostling, and congestion are
potentially dangerous if, as a result, the crowd
suddenly surge forward.     Likewise, if sections of
the crowd decide, without warning, to change
direction the resultant turmoil can have disastrous
consequences.   Steep ramps can also cause or
exacerbate uncontrolled forward movement and lead to
an accident.


98.   Stairways should therefore minimise hazards by
having uniformity of width, going and risers, secure
footing, not too steep a gradient, and a width
sufficient to allow free movement but narrow enough
to provide everyone with access to a handrail.      The
head of the stairway should be so designed that flow
onto it is uniform across its width and crowd


                            36
pressures cannot easily be generated.     Flights
should not provide long, uncontrolled paths down
which crowd pressures and surges can be created.
Adequate separation should be provided between
channels and multi-channel stairway arrangements so
that there is no overspill from one channel to
another.


Disposition of stairways


99.     Stairways should be carefully positioned to
take advantage of natural light and ventilation.
Where the natural lighting is deficient the stairway
should be adequately lit by artificial light (see
Chapter 4, paragraph 55 and Chapter 15, paragraphs
      for emergency lighting).


Construction of stairways


100. The width, rise and going of the steps should
be uniform within each stairway, and should ideally
be uniform throughout the entire exit system.


101. Stair treads should be provided with slip-
resistant surfaces and durable edgings.    Adequate
drainage should be provided.


102. Open risers should not be used.


103. On any stairway the preferred going of treads
should be 305 mm but not less than 280 mm; and
preferred height of risers should be 150 mm but not
more than 190 mm.


Stairways should:


       i.   be without winders;
       ii.   be in flights of not more than 16 or fewer
             than 3 steps; and


       iii. not have more than 2 successive flights
             without a turn, and, if there are more
             than 12 steps in a flight, should not have
             more than one flight without a turn.


104. The going of the landing between flights should
not be less than the width of the section or channel
of the flight.


105. Protection should be provided on both sides of
      stairs and landings.    Where next to open wells,
or spaces, such protection should be enclosed, in
accordance with Building Regulation requirements,
and should be not less than 1.1 metres in height
(measured vertically from the centre of the step, or
the surface of the landing).      The protection should
have a strength equivalent to that of the crush
barriers of the weaker type, described in Chapter
10.    (ie 3.4 KN/metre width design force, 4.1
KN/metre width test load.)


106. Every person on a stairway should have access
to a handrail.    The minimum width of a stairway
should be 1.1 metres with stairways wider than [1.8]
[1.65] metres being divided as far as possible into
channels having a width of between 1.1 metres and
[1.8] [1.65] metres.    The strength of the handrails
(including supports) used to divide a stairway into
channels should be as described in Chapter 10 i.e.
3.4 KN/metre width design force or 4.3 KN/metre
width test load for handrails at right angles to the
direction of the crowd flow; 2.2 KN metre width



                             38
design force or 2.7 KN/metre width test load for
handrails parallel to the direction of the flow.


107. Handrails should project not more than 100 mm
and should be provided on both sides of all
stairways, steps and landings at a height of not
less than 840 mm (measured vertically form the
centre of the step or the surface of the landing).
All handrails should extend by at least 300 mm
beyond the top and bottom of any stairway or ramp.


Access to stairways


108. Access to the head of the stairways should be
controlled along the following lines to ensure a
free flow of spectators.


109. Where a stairway is divided into channels the
access should be designed to secure a uniform flow
down each channel.


110. The approach to the head of the stairs should
be level and should be so arranged that the
spectators converge on the stairway from the front
and/or the sides only.     There should be no approach
from behind, involving movement around the ends of
the balustrades or side walls of the stairway,
except where this approach is already controlled by
physical means such as by the gangways in the seated
areas of the stand.


111. The extent of the approach in the direction of
the stairway should not be less than 1.1 metres and
preferably not more than 3 metres.


Figure 1   Examples of an approach(s) to the head of
           a staircase


                            39
112. Where restrictive elements such as barriers or
gateways are installed in the approach from the
terrace to a stairway in order to meet the foregoing
provisions, the total width of the passage formed by
these elements should not be more than two-thirds
the minimum width of the stairway.      This is to
accommodate the slower flow rate down a staircase as
compared with the flow rate on flat areas and
through portals (see Chapter 20).


113.    For an application of these principles to a
multiple stairway leading direct from a terrace, see
Figures 1 and 2.


Figure 2      Exits attracting spectators from higher up
              the terrace should be protected by
              barriers so that spectators are forced to
              pass around them and approach from the
              side.


Discharge from stairways


114. All exit stairways should discharge either:


       i.     at ground level and lead directly to a
              place of safety* in the open air; or


       ii .   on to walkways or concourses of adequate
              dimensions at any level provided these
              also lead directly to a place of safety in
              the open air.


*      In Scotland 'place of safety' is a defined term
       in the Scottish Building Regulations.


Fire Protection
115. This is dealt with in Chapter 13, paragraphs


Ramps


116. The gradient should preferably be constant and
not broken by steps.


117. The maximum gradient acceptable will depend on
the particular ramp's length, purpose and usage but
a ramp subject to heavy crowd flow should not exceed
a gradient of 1 in 10.


118. Ramps installed for wheelchair users should
conform to BS 5810 (see also Chapter 3 on provision
for people with disabilities).




                         41
CHAPTER 9

9.   TERRACES AND VIEWING SLOPES


Arrangements should be made to encourage the even
distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide
ease of [ingress] [access] and egress; to control
and facilitate movement, particularly if a local
emergency should arise during the event; and to
[prevent the build up of pressures from reaching
dangerous proportions.


119. In addition to the incidental dangers of
standing for long periods on steep terraced slopes,
crowds are subject to excessive pressures generated
by spectators straining to see the event, by
excitement, or by surging deliberately induced by a
certain type of spectator.


120. Failure to provide spectators with an
unobstructed view invites them to stretch and
strain, and so generates dangerous pressures within
the crowd.


121. Terraces are recognised as presenting a special
safety problem especially at football grounds.     The
following guidance is therefore aimed mainly at
football stadia but can be applied to any ground
where standing terraces or viewing slopes are used
for accommodating spectators.


Terrace steps


122. A terrace step should not be less than 280 mm
or more than 380 mm wide.    The preferred dimension
is between 355 mm and 380 mm.
123. The height of risers should be between 75 nun
and 180 nun.    75 nun is related to the minimum width
of 280 nun.    if the riser height is greater than 180
mm, a crush barrier should be provided at the top of
the riser.


124. Excessive variations in the gradient of a
terrace should be avoided.     Gradients steeper than 1
in 2 could be dangerous [and should not form part of
any new design work],


125. The surface of terrace steps should be even and
of a slip-resistant material.     Adequate drainage
should be provided to prevent rainwater causing
deterioration.


Gangways


126. For the purpose of this section the term
'radial gangway' has the meaning given to it in the
Glossary [Annex E ] .   A radial gangway whether or not
stepped should not contain winders and is not
automatically subject to the requirements of
paragraph which relates to stairways.


127. Gangways, both radial and lateral are the means
by which spectators are channelled in an orderly way
to viewing areas or the vomitory exits which begin
the exit route(s) from the terrace or stand.     Siting
of gangways, together with crush barriers (see
Chapter 10) and barriers governing the flow at the
head of stairways (see paragraphs       Chapter 8) and
handrails dividing stairways (see paragraphs 106-
107 Chapter 8) should be designed to provide (as far
as possible) a uniform flow of spectators to each of
the vomitory exits.
128. All gangways should be painted a conspicuous
colour and spectators should be informed by signs
and other means (for example in programmes and by
the public address system) that no standing is
allowed in them (see point xvi Chapter 2).     Where
necessary stewards should be used to enforce the
instruction.


129. Every spectator on the terraces should be
within 12 metres of a gangway or exit, so that they
can move quickly on to exit routes in normal
circumstances or in the event of emergency.     A
pattern of gangways (not less than 1.1 metres wide)
linked to the exit system.


130. Spectators should be prevented from standing in
lateral gangways because this disrupts free movement
about the ground (or within sections of it).
Spectators on the terrace steps behind the gangway
may also have their view obstructed, which will
cause them to stretch and strain, and so generate
dangerous pressures within the crowd.   Spectators
would be discouraged from standing in these gangways
if they were sunk approximately 150 mm and if crush
barriers were provided behind but not immediately in
front of them.   Gangways should not disrupt viewing
and should not create a trip hazard.


131. Spectators should also be prevent from standing
in radial gangways.   Here again movement on the
gangway is obstructed by the presence of spectators
using it to view the activity on the playing area.
Moreover radial gangways are often relatively long
and uncontrolled downward paths through terraces and
spectators standing in them are not protected by
crush barriers in the event of a sudden movement
forward.   Although difficult to do so it is
essential that radial garigways are kept clear. It
may be helpful to sink them approximately 150 mm
where possible to interrupt an otherwise
continuously descending gangway by turns along
lateral gangways.


132. Balustrading at the foot of radial gangways
should be as strong as crush barriers of the
stronger type, ie, 5.0 KN/metre width design force,
or 6.0 KN/metre width test load (see also Chapter
1 0 ).


133. The going of a radial gangway should be uniform
and surfaces should be slip resistant.     Step
dimensions should be compatible with those for the
terrace which they serve (see paragraph 122 above).



Division of spectator accommodation


134. A ground should be divided into sections to
prevent potentially hazardous migrations by
spectators which might cause dangerous overcrowding.
Each section of a ground must have its own limit of
safe capacity (see Chapter 19) and be served by
turnstiles or other arrangements which keep a tally
of the number of people admitted (see Chapter 6).
Each section of a ground, for example, each end or
side, should be self-contained with its own
entrances, exits and toilet/refreshment facilities.
For soccer [major] grounds [used by football league
clubs] in particular there should be no access from
one such major section to another except in an
emergency.


135. Sporting events such as greyhound racing
spectators may need to move freely between different


                         45
parts of the ground and this should be borne in mind
when considering access to and from the sections of
the ground and when considering the need for
subdivisions of sections in paragraph 137 below.
Other sports, including Rugby Union and Rugby
League, also frequently allow the freedom of
movement for spectators.     The advantage of this
arrangements is that it provides spectators with an
opportunity to disperse throughout the ground in a
way which avoids concentrations of the crowd.
Grounds may nevertheless still have their popular
areas.   Considerable care is therefore needed to
ensure that any concentration of spectators does not
exceed the safe capacity for the particular area in
question.   Well trained stewards can be valuable in
checking, monitoring and marshalling of spectators
at such grounds.     In such cases where mobility of
spectators is a feature of the event, overall
calculated packing density for standing (see Chapter
 ) should be below the maximum of 47 persons per 10
square metres.


136. Each of the major sections should be subdivided
by such means as gangways and crush barriers,
arranged so as to minimise the sway and surge of
spectators and to discourage movement throughout the
section.


137. Railings, fences etc dividing sections of the
ground should be of the strength of the crush
barriers, as should handrails dividing stairways
into channels as appropriate, described in table 2
of Chapter 10.     Brick/block and similar solid
structures lacking sufficient mass or tensile
strength are poorly suited to withstand horizontal
pressures, and where used to divide spectator
accommodation, should be subject to regular
structural appraisal by appropriately qualified
persons (see Chapter 4).


Crush barriers


138. Detailed advice on crush barriers is given in
Chapter 10.


Viewing slopes (ie non-stepped sloping areas
providing standing accommodation for spectators)


139. The surface of this form of terrace should be
covered with a slip-resistant material, eg packed
ash, and should be even and properly drained.


140. The desirable maximum gradient for a viewing
slope is 1 in 6 (ie 9.5 ).      Note: this is different
to the stepped terraced gradient quoted in paragraph
94).   Viewing slopes with any steeper gradient
should have continuous crush barriers between
gangways.


141. The spacing of crush barriers should be the
same as for those on terracing (see Chapter 10).


Terrace to touchline distance


142. To prevent undue crowd pressures generated by
spectators stretching and straining for an
unobstructed view, it is desirable to provide a
minimum distance between the front of the terrace
and the playing area of the pitch.


143. The minimum recommended distance between the
two is 3 metres where the terrace gradient is 30° or
steeper.    Where the gradient is shallower than this,



                           47
it may be advisable to increase this distance so as
to enable spectators to obtain a clear view.




                         48
CHAPTER 10

10.   CRUSH BARRIERS AND HANDRAILS


Many of the hazards arising from crowd pressure on
terraces can be eliminated by provision of well
constructed, correctly positioned and properly
mounted crush barriers which positively control and
contain crowd movement.



Dimensions and Design Features


144. In order to locate the top rail against that
part of the body most able to tolerate pressure the
height of crush barriers should be between 1.02
metres and 1.12 metres above the nosing of the step
immediately behind the barrier, with a preferred
height of 1.1 metres [see Figure         ].


145. Crush barriers should be designed so that there
are no sharp projections or edges.       Although a
barrier with a top rail of 50 mm diameter tube has
been favoured at many sports grounds, research has
shown that there would be advantages in the use of a
flat rail of 100 mm vertical depth.


Spacing of Crush Barriers


146. The maximum spacing of crush barriers will be
dependent on the gradient of the terrace or viewing
slope.   Paragraphs   -          below give
recommendations for the spacing and strength of
crush barriers.




                            49
147. Ideally, crush barriers should be provided
along the full width of a terrace, with gaps only at
the radial gangways.


148. Where barriers are not continuous between
radial gangways, the alignment of gaps in successive
rows of barriers on a terrace should form an angle
of less than 60° to the barriers.   There must be no
more than 2 consecutive gaps in any line of gaps.
(See figure     overleaf).




Figure 3   Arrangement of gaps between crush
barriers



149. Where there are gaps in the line of crush
barriers these should be at least 1.1 metres and not
more than 1.4 metres in width.


150. Column A in Table 1 opposite provides the
maximum distances between barriers conforming to the
greater strength requirements of crush barriers as


                         50
      described above;       column B provides the maximum
      distances between barriers conforming to the lesser
      strength requirements.       Interpolation may be made
      between these figures.       [The distinction previously
      made between 'peak' viewing areas and other areas
      has been removed.]

TABLE 1




                                                Maximum horizontal
                                                distance between barriers

Terrace Gradient


                    Step riser:    Step width          A          B



05°            ie        1    in      11.4            5.0m       3. 3m

10°                      1    in       5.7            4. 3m    2. 9m

15°                      1    in       3.7           3. 8m     2. 6m

20°                      1    in       2.7           3. 4m     2. 3m

25°                      1    in       2.1           3.1m      2.1m

30°                      1    in       1.7           2.9m      1 ,9m




      Strength of Crush Barriers and Handrails


      151. The structural integrity of crush barriers is a
      major factor in ensuring safety and a 25%
representative sample frbm each part of the ground
should be tested annually (see Chapter     ).    All
barriers should also be visually inspected each year
for signs of wear, distortion, corrosion or other
signs of weakness.   If from such inspections and the
records of earlier inspections and tests, there is
any doubt as to the integrity of a barrier it should
be tested.   This test should be in addition to the
25% representative sample.


152. Existing crush barriers and handrails should be
capable of resisting the forces indicated in the
existing test load columns of Table 2 overleaf when
applied in a test as described in Annex     .    Where
existing crush barriers and handrails fail to meet
these test conditions, they should be replaced or
strengthened in such a way as to do so.   Barriers
and handrails so strengthened should be retested in
accordance with Annex


153. New crush barriers or handrails should be
designed to resist safely a horizontal force as
indicated in the " design force" column in Table 2
applied as a static load acting on the top rail of
the barrier or handrail at right angles to the
longitudinal axis.   The foundations of new barriers
or handrails should be designed to resist the
overturning movements and sliding forces, induced by
the forces described in the "design force" column
overleaf, with a factor of safety of 2.
TABLE 2


Table of strengths for crush barriers and handrails




                            Design Force    Test Load
                            for New         for Existing
                            Barriers        Barriers




Crush barriers spaced in    5.0 KN/metre width     6.0 KN/metre width
accordance with the
distances in column A
of Table 1


Crush barriers spaced in    3.4 KN/metre width     4.1 KN/metre width
accordance with the
distances in column B
of Table 1


Handrails at right angles   3.4 KN/metre           4.1 KN/metre
to the direction of flow    width                  width



Handrails parallel to       2.2 KN/metre         2.7 KN/metre
the direction of flow       width            width




                                    53
CHAPTER 11

11.     COVERED STANDING AND SEATED ACCOMMODATION



The general safety considerations for stands are
similar to those for other parts of the ground but
with the additional need to safeguard spectators
against the risk of fire (see Chapter 11).


154. Stands may consist of seated accommodation only
or may contain a mixture of both seated and standing
areas.     The following advice can be applied to all
sports grounds where spectators are so accommodated.


155. The opportunity provided by new design work
should be taken to enhance the comfort and amenities
for spectators (see paragraphs , Chapter 1).    This
is particularly relevant to redevelopment of major
football grounds when all-seated stands are
provided.


156. All spectators should have a clear,
unobstructed view of the whole of the playing area.
Designs should ensure that sightlines are such that
spectators are encouraged to remain seated and do
not have to strain or stretch to view the playing
area.    Cantilevered stands should protect as many
spectators as possible from the elements.    Exits and
exit routes (which will also serve as entrances and
entry routes) should be based on the principles set
out in Chapters      and


157. There is generally a less hurried departure
from the seated accommodation in stands at the end
of an event.    Moreover, spectators are induced by
the layout of the seats to form orderly queues.


                            54
Even so, attention should be paid to the points
below as well as the other structural considerations
in respect of stairways, exits, egress and, where
appropriate, density levels and crush barriers.


158. Fire safety is particularly important and is
dealt with in Chapter 11.     Every stand should be
provided with sufficient exits to allow for the
orderly evacuation of all the spectators to be
accommodated.    Evacuation time will depend to a
large extent on the fire hazard present in the stand
(see Chapter      , paragraphs ).     Egress time from the
seated area (see Chapter 6, paragraph         ), should be
no longer than 8 minutes using the calculations in
Chapter  , but the emergency evacuation time is an
overriding criterion.


159. New work should conform to the relevant
Building Regulations requirements and should
incorporate fire safety engineering for the
protection of the occupants.        Seats and gangways
should be so positioned as to provide ready access
to exits.    No spectator in any part of the seated
area should have to travel more than 30 metres from
their seat to the nearest exit measured along the
line of the seatway and gangway.


Gangways


160. As with gangways on terraces (Chapter         ,
paragraphs     ) all gangways in stands should have a
slip resistant surface.    They should be of
sufficient width for the seats served       and in no
case less than 1.1 metres wide without projections.
[New designs should increase the width by 5 mm for
every seat served over 220 seats (in accordance with
Approved Document B1 which supports Building
Regulations).]


161. Any stepped side gangway should be provided
with a hand-rail fixed at a height of 840 mm
(measured vertically above the mid-point in the
going of the step) and projecting no more than 75 mm
into the gangway.    The handrail should conform to
the strength requirement of Table


162. Radial gangways should be uniform.     In general
they should conform to Building Regulation
requirements.    The going and height of stepped
gangways should meet the measurements set out in
paragraph      , Chapter 7 above but should not be
regarded as a stairway for the purpose of limiting
the number of steps in any flight.    New design work
should nevertheless avoid, wherever possible, steep
gangways which do not contain a break in their
descent and which may be hazardous.


Balustrading


163. Those sections of balustrading at the foot of
gangways or stairways should be as strong as crush
barriers of the stronger type.     [Other balustrading
which will not be subject to pressure from mass
crowd movement should conform to normal requirements
of Building Regulations and British Standards.


Seating


164. All seats should be securely fixed in position.
The use of tip-up seats allows more circulation
space, the automatic type being preferable.




                            56
165. The minimum area allotted to each seated person
should be as follows:


Benches/seats without arms      460 mm   wide
Seats with arms                 500 mm   wide


[These widths should beincreased   by 50 mm for
comfort].


Benches/seats without backs     610mm     deep
Seats with backs                760 mm   deep


166. To enable people to move freely between rows of
seats there should be at least 305 mm between
perpendiculars from the foremost projection of one
seat and the back of the seat in front of it - see
figure    .   The minimum 305 mm is included in the
610 mm and 760 mm depth measurement of the seating
area.


167. The number of seats in a row should not
normally exceed:


a.   14 where there is a gangway at one end only; and
b.   28 where there is a gangway at both ends.


[Seating arrangements in new stands should comply
with Approved Document B1 which supports the
Building Regulations].
CHAPTER 12


12.   TEMPORARY STANDS AND OTHER TEMPORARY STRUCTURES


168. The nature of temporary stands and other
temporary structures, whether or not covered, used
to accommodate spectators at a sports ground is
likely to vary considerably as will the materials
used in their construction.     Some may be erected for
a single event only.   Even so there is no
justification for accepting a lower standard of
safety in such structures then elsewhere within the
sports ground, and the design and construction of
temporary structures should be in accordance with
good engineering and building practice, should pay
particular regard to public safety and should
satisfy all relevant British Standards.


169. The principles of this Guide are applicable to
temporary stands and structures and particular
attention is drawn to:


Chapter 3 - General Fabric and Structural Matters
Chapter 6 - Egress
Chapter 4 - Stairways and Ramps
Chapter 11 - Fire Safety
Chapter 17 - Recommended Flow Rates


170. All temporary stands should be capable of
withstanding any load or force to which they may be
subjected and account should be taken of any
external factors such as wind forces.Failure of
any one support member or connection should not
render the structure unstable.    As far as
practicable the area around supporting frames should
be secure to prevent unauthorised access, and frames
should be so designed that they are firmly locked


                           58
into position and cannot be tampered with by
unauthorised persons.


171. Consultation with the local authority and
building authority (if different) should take place
at an early stage prior to the erection of any
temporary stand.


172. Siting.   Choice of location may be limited but
factors which need to be considered include: load-
bearing capability of the ground, its slope or
unevenness, drainage, availability of mains
services, access/egress for spectators and for
emergency vehicles, overhead power lines, and the
proximity of surrounding buildings in relation to
the risk of fire.   The condition of the site should
be regularly checked to ensure its load-bearing
capabilities have not deteriorated; settlement of
ground may cause instability and so require
repacking and re-levelling.     The site should be
prepared and maintained so as to provide an even
surface for those parts to which the public have
access.


173. Assembly/dismantling.     The assembly and
dismantling of stands should be carried out by or
under the supervision of persons experienced and
trained in the proper performance of such work and
in accordance with the manufacturers' instructions
whenever available, or in accordance with drawings
and plans made by a competent engineer.


174. Work should be carried out only where lighting
is sufficient to allow it to be safely and properly
performed and checked.   No assembly or dismantling
work should be carried out to the danger of members
of the public in the vicinity.


                          59
175. The work should be carried out in a proper
manner, using correct parts, and tools of a proper
size and design.   Care should be taken with the
handling of components to avoid damage or
distortion.


176. All components should be closely examined
during assembly and dismantling for signs of wear,
deformation or other damage, and where necessary
replaced by sound components of matching material
properties and dimensions.   Temporary repairs using
makeshift components should be avoided.


177. Care should also be given to ensure all
components are correctly aligned; they should not be
bent, distorted or otherwise altered to force a fit.


178. On completion, assembly work should be checked
with particular attention given to fastenings and
connections.


179. Tents/marquees and other such structures.
These types of structures can present special fire
safety problems and guidance is contained in the
Home Office/Scottish Office publication "Guide to
Fire Precautions in Existing Places of
Entertainment" (ISBN 0 11 340907 0   £8.50).


180. All tents should be capable of withstanding any
forces particularly wind (including uplift so
caused) and those caused by the build up of snow or
heavy rain, to which they may be subjected.
Emergency arrangements should be made for the
dismantling, either partial or total, of a tent
should conditions arise that could lead to any
collapse or distortion.   Where such work in any way
affects the stability of the tent or the safety of
members of the public, the work should not commence
until the immediate area has been cleared of all but
essential staff.


181. Supporting poles, guy ropes and stays should be
used as necessary and correctly formed, and secure
anchorages made to the ground to ensure that the
tent is stable and maintains its correct shape.


182. The stability of the main tent poles and
supporting structure should be independent of the
sheeting fabric, ie any tearing or defect occurring
in the fabric should not result in the collapse of
all or any part of the main structure.


183. Particular attention should be paid to the main
supporting poles and top braces of large tents where
they have to be raised to a considerable height.
Damage or distortion to these members could
considerably weaken the structure.    Where such
damage does occur, the members should be replaced or
repairs or modifications carried out so as to bring
them up to full working strength.


184. Where solid frames or units, eg doors, are
linked to a tent structure they should be rigidly
formed and adequately braced, and care should be
taken that they do not overstress local areas of the
tent.


185. Foundations to poles or frames should be
properly prepared and subjected to regular checks as
should wire bracing or guys, the tension of which
should be re-adjusted as necessary.
CHAPTER 13


13.   FIRE SAFETY
11. FIRE SAFETY

Safety from fire is achieved by measures which will restrict
initiation, rate of early growth and later spread of fire; provide
and protect escape routes; segregate higher fire risk areas;
provide warning (and where necessary detection) of fire; and
assist fire-fighting operations.

147. The type of accommodation which represents the greatest
hazard in the event of fire is the covered stand where spectators
sit or stand. New structures will conform to Building Regulations
requiring them to have a reasonable degree of structural fire
protection. Existing structures will vary considerably in age and
materials used in construction. The qualities of combustibility and
ability to propagate and spread fire of the materials used in
construction have an important effect on the standard of fire
precautions required to ensure reasonable safety. It may be
difficult in some cases to improve the fire resistance of an existing
structure to any significant extent but it should be done wherever
practicable even though in some cases substantial alterations may
be needed to provide reasonable protection from fire.


148. With new stands there is much more opportunity to
incorporate from the start comprehensive measures for fire safety,
considering properly the impact of each measure on the others,
 design features for new stands should include the following:
      a.   internal finishes which have low flammability;
      b.   seating, partitioning and any other fixed or removable
           contents including seat cushions which possess low
           flammability characteristics and fire risk potential and
           are limited in amount;
      c.   contents which are not capable of being            easily
           dismantled;
      d.   no inaccessible places where litter can collect;
      e.   adequate structural resistance to fire;

                              44
      f.     fire resisting separation from any spaces below or
             communicating with the stand;
      g.    as far as possible, no storerooms or other spaces
             communicating with the stand. Where this is unavoid­
             able, storerooms or other spaces communicating with
            the stand should be provided with fixed fire extinguish­
             ing systems appropriate to the fire risk posed by the
             materials to be stored or contained;
      h.    escape routes which are planned to keep people well
             clear of the smoky gases produced by a fire (which in
             general means that initial movement of people should
             be downwards);
      i.    later stages of escape routes which are incapable of
             being significantly threatened by continuing fire;
      j.    the provision of alternative, widely separated escape
             routes; and
      k.    a roof geometry which should restrict smoke and
             flame travel along the underside of the roof.



M in im is in g fire risk
149. One potential cause of fire arises from the accumulation of
waste paper, programmes, food and drink cartons etc dropped by
spectators. Such waste can be easily set alight by smokers'
materials and the resulting fire may then spread to the structure,
especially the ones that are constructed of more combustible
materials. Every effort should be made to reduce this hazard.
Accumulations of litter, for example near catering facilities, should
be cleared from the ground as quickly as possible or kept in a safe,
fire resistant container or room pending clearance.

150. All parts of buildings should be inspected before and after an
event (see also Chapter 4, paragraph 42) and any accumulation of
litter cleared away as described above. It is particularly important
to ensure that litter does not accumulate in escape routes or
under stands.

                                     45
151 . S m o k i n g s h o u l d b e d i s c o u r a g e d in s t a n d s c o n t a i n i n g
c o m b u s t i b l e or f l a m m a b l e products, either loose (eg c u s h i o n s ) or
fixed (eg seating), or in the fabric of t h e building.

1 52 . A common feature in construction of stands which is a fire
risk is. the existence of voids under the seating and under the
flooring itself. These voids can become a resting place for paper,
cartons and other combustible materials which can be ignited,
unnoticed, by carelessly discarded cigarette ends etc. Seating
arrangements should, wherever possible, be such that floor
surfaces are accessible for the removal of litter. Where voids
below flooring exist they should if practicable be excluded; for
example, where a stand is built into a natural slope the
underneath area can be filled in with concrete. Where this is not
practicable they should be completely sealed off to stop litter
accumulating in them, or be entirely open to allow easy access for
inspection and removal of combustible waste.

1 53 . Other items, such as cushions filled with cellular foams or
other synthetic materials are a fire risk because they are
combustible, and when set alight can give off large quantities of
smoke and fumes. Also, the use of large quantities of plastics in
seating should be reviewed carefully, particularly where cellular
polymers may be proposed. The fire authority should be consulted
about the fire risk in stands.

154. Cushions and other flammable materials represent in bulk a
risk of a swiftly developing fire. They should be stored in a fire-
resistant container or room well away from spectator accommodation
as should paper items such as programmes. Similarly, hazardous
materials, for example fuels (whether in containers or within fuel
tanks and machinery) fertilizers, weed killers and paints should be
kept (if at all) well away from public areas and stored in a room
which has fire resistance of at least 1 hour. Other high fire risk
areas, eg enclosed or underground car parks situated under stands,
should also have fire resistance of at least 1 hour.

1 5 5 . Where catering facilities are provided, special care should be
taken to ensure that any fuel or power supply used for cooking, for

                                       46
example LPG cylinders, is safely stored and used, in accordance
with the advice of the authority responsible for enforcement of the
Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974. Useful guidance is given in
Health and Safety Executive Guidance Notes CS4, "The Keeping of
LPG in Cylinders and Similar Containers" and CS8, "Small Scale
Storage and Display of LPG at Retail Premises".

P re v e n tio n or re ta rd a tio n .of fire g r o w t h /s p r e a d
 1 5 6 . Where, despite all precautions, a fire has started, it is vital to
ensure that the rate of growth in its early stages is restricted to
proportions which will not overwhelm the arrangements provided
for safe escape. This is best achieved by controlling the amount and
nature of the materials (especially the combustibles) in a stand,
both in terms of the contents (loose and fixed) and in those parts of
the fabric of the stand to which a fire would have access (especially
internal linings). An important additional line of defence is prompt
action by ground staff using the fire-fighting equipment available at
the ground to tackle the fire and keep it in check ("first-aid" fire­
fighting) until the fire brigade arrives. These measures are crucial
because the quicker a fire develops, the less time there is available
to escape from it. A fire should not be able to develop unnoticed
anywhere underneath or adjacent to the spectator area of the
stand, so that its spread would be likely to break through into the
spectator accommodation.

157. The spectator area in the stand should be separated from any
other adjacent circulation space or void by a construction having
fire resistance of not less than half an hour.

1 58 . Walls and ceiling l;nings within stands and ceiling linings
beneath the stand seats should have a flame spread classification
of not less than Class 1 when tested in accordance with BS 476:
Part 7.

159. Restricting the extent and speed of the spread of fire in its
later stages is also important in order to reduce the possibility of
escape time being further threatened. Most measures which
reduce the rate of fire growth in the early stages will also serve to
restrict the fire spread in the later stages. The following measures
  would mainly affect the later spread. Fpr some roof configurations
  venting systems may offer a means of reducing the spread of fire
  (including movement of flames along the roof) and hot smoky
  gases. The science of fire and smoke venting is however complex
  and advice from the fire authority should be sought on whether
  this would be advantageous in a particular case.

  1 60 . Where the roofs of buildings are so connected that smoke
y and flame could travel <e£££s±isJJy two or more sides of the playing
  area, a wide break in the roof should be made of sufficient width to
  prevent spread from one side to the other, unless the flame travel
  could be eliminated by the prevention measures mentioned above.
  >
   1 61 . Use of flammable roof materials should be avoided. Where
   they do exist they should be replaced where practicable by non­
   combustible materials or should be underdrawn with non­
   combustible board.



   Fire w a r n in g s y s te m s
   1 6 2 . All buildings in the ground (including stands) to which public
   or staff have access should be provided with an electrical fire
   warning system to alert staff. An indication of the warning and its
   location should be given to a central control point (see Chapter
   paragraph 193). The system should conform with BS 5839: Part 1
   in terms of its components, installation and maintenance. The
   central control point and, where necessary, other selected
   positions in the ground should have facilities to call the fire
   brigade and other emergency services. Stewards and other
   officials should be trained in what they should do if they discover a
   fire (see paragraphs 176-177).

    1 6 3 . The area underneath the spectator accommodation should
    have a system for detecting a developing fire. In order to give an
    early warning in an unoccupied area an automatic fire detection
    (AFD) system should be considered, conforming to BS 5839: Part 1
    in terms of its components, installation and maintenance. It should
    be connected so that any alarm will be communicated to the
    central control point.


                                    48
164. A n y fire detection equipment should be tested regularly in
accordance with the advice given in the British Standard
specification.

165. Where areas of high fire risk such as large storerooms and
enc osed or underground car parks are situated under stands,
consideration should be given to the installation of an automatic
 ire extinguishing system, eg sprinklers, instead of an AFD system,
   ere again any such system should be connected so that warning
of fire is communicated to the central control point.

E m e rg e n c y lig h tin g


E me r g e n c y l i g h t i n g   is   de"al t w i t h i n C h a p t e r   paragraphs




F ire -fig h tin g e q u ip m e n t
170. Advice should be sought from the local fire authority o n the
type, the amount and siting of fire-fighting equipment. The
succeeding paragraphs give general guidelines.
    171. In m a j o r g r o u n d s it m a y b e n e c e s s a r y to p r ov i d e a suitable
    w a t e r s u p p l y for fire fighting in the f o r m of hydrants.

    172. For "first aid” fire fighting by members of the staff, hydraulic
    hose-reels should be provided to BS 5306: Part 1. These should be
    sufficient to provide adequate protection to the whole floor area,
    and should be installed in a suitable position by entrances, exits
    and stairways.

    173. Where hose-reels are not provided, portable fire extinguishers
    should be installed in sufficient numbers to give adequate cover.
    The number and type .will depend upon the size, layout, fire
|   separation and risk in each structure. Fire extinguishers should
    conform to BS 5423 and be sited and maintained according to
    BS 5306: Part 3.

    174 Fire blankets and fire extinguishers of a type appropriate to
    the cooking facilities used should be kept in all catering facilities.

    175. It should be borne in mind when considering location of fire­
    fighting equipment that it may need to be sited so that it cannot be
    vandalised but yet is readily accessible to staff in the event of fire.



    E m e rg e n c y p ro c e d u re s and s t a f f tra in in g
    176. It is essential that plans should be made for dealing with
    emergencies, including fire. The onus to do this lies with ground
    management. Joint consultation between management, police,
    fire, ambulance and other emergency services should take place in
    order to produce agreed plans of action for all foreseeable types of
    emergency. While the public are in the ground the number of staff
    on duty should be sufficient to cover entrances, exits and other
    strategic points and to fulfil other essential duties (see Chapter 13).

          All such staff should be trained in the use of the fire-fighting
    equipment provided, and in the action they should take in the
    event of fire. This is management's responsibility but the local fire
    authority s advice should be sought on whether the content of the
    proposed training programme is adequate.

                                          50
€



            M e a n s o f escape
            178. "Means of escape” is the structural means whereby a safe
        ^   route is provided for people to travel from any point in a structure
            to a place of safety without outside assistance. In a sports ground,
            the means of escape in the event of an emergency will usually be
            the same as the normal egress routes plus any additional ''route''
            of forward escape on to the playing area. The kind of emergency
            most likely to occur at a sports ground is fire but other types of
            emergency, such as bomb • threat, may arise which might
            necessitate the evacuation of spectators from all or part of the
            spectator accommodation. It is the management's responsibility to
            ensure that all exit routes for use in an emergency are capable of
    )       being safely and effectively used at all times when the ground
            is occupied.

            179. It is vital that the emergency exit routes are sited so that
            people using them will be least affected by the fire or its products,
            for example smoke, toxic gases, heat etc. Initial travel should if
            possible be downwards. This is because in the event of fire, its
            dangerous products will travel upwards and accumulate densely at
            the highest points. Further stages of the exit routes should be so
            arranged as to take people progressively further away from the
            fire, along a route where they cannot be significantly affected by
            the fire or its products. There should be more than one emergency
            exit route from a stand or a terrace in case one becomes blocked.
            The emergency exits within any one structure should be as widely
            separated as practical planning considerations will allow, to
            minimise the risk of them all being blocked by the same cause.

            Fire p r o te c tio n fo r s ta irw a y s an d passages
            180. Where a stairway, passage or any other part of an
            emergency exit route passes up, down or through a stand or other
            building used by spectators, it should be in a fire resistant
            enclosure separated from the remainder of the stand by a
            structure having fire resistance of not less than one hour. Such
            exit routes should discharge to a place of safety in the open air
            (which may be inside or outside the ground).

            181. The surface finish of walls and ceilings of all emergency exit

                                                    51
 stairways should be of a standard corresponding to Class 0 (as
 defined in the guidance issued in connection with the Building
 Regulations 1985 for England and Wales and the Building
 Standards (Scotland) Regulations 1981-84).

 182. Any door forming part of the enclosure to a stairway should
 be self closing and have a fire resistance of not less than half an hour.

  E m e rg e n c y e v a c u a tio n tim e
  183. The emergency evacuation time is the notional time it would
  take spectators to leave their viewing positions and reach a place of
^ safety in the open air or a protected stairway or emergency exit
  route with fire resistance in accordance with paragraph 180. It is
  calculated from the spectator capacity of the accommodation (see
  Chapter 16) and the flow rate (see Chapter 17) through restricting
  parts of the exit system used for evacuation purposes.

  184. The emergency evacuation time should not be confused with
  the egress time of 8 minutes (referred to in Chapter 6, paragraph 56)
  which is the maximum time it should take spectators to enter into
  the normal exit system from their viewing positions at the end
  of play.

  185. The emergency evacuation time will depend largely on the
  fire hazard present in the accommodation in question. Any stand
  which has a potential for rapid fire spread because of its interior
  use and contents and/or the nature of its internal surfaces which
  would be exposed to fire should have an emergency evacuation
  time of no more than 2y2 minutes. An increase in this time may
   however be acceptable where the interior use and contents, and
  the nature of the internal linings, are such as to eliminate the
   possibility of rapid fire spread, and the emergency exit routes are
   not vulnerable to a fire occurring within the accommodation. In
   setting an emergency evacuation time longer than 2V2 minutes the
   advice of the fire authority should be sought.

   186. Where the playing area or perimeter track is accessible to
   spectators and is considered suitable as a place of safety,
   evacuation onto it can be taken into account in calculating the

                                        52
    emergency evacuation time. Where there is a pitch perimeter
    fence or wall it should have access points in accordance with
£   Chapter >5, paragraph 2T5 which can serve as exits and which
    can be taken into account in the calculation of the emergency
    evacuation time.

    187. Where the playing surface of a pitch is made of synthetic
    materials, advice from the fire authority should be sought to
    establish if it can be properly considered a place of safety in a fire.
    This is because it is possible that some forms of artificial turf
    might in themselves constitute a hazard in the event of fire
    because of flamespread and fumes etc caused by decomposition of
    the material as a result of heat radiation.

    188. The playing area may not be a place of safety, eg if it is
    wholly surrounded by covered accommodation with no breaks in
    the roofing (see paragraph 160) and the advice of the fire authority
    should be sought in such circumstances.

    A c c e s s fo r e m e rg e n c y ve h ic le s
    189. Adequate roads for emergency vehicles such as fire
    appliances and ambulances should be provided so that speecv and
    direct access can be obtained to all buildings within the ground;
    wherever possible these access routes should be separate from
    those used by spectators entering and leaving the ground.

    190. The local fire authority should be consulted about the width,
    clearance, height and supporting strength required of these access
    roads. Wherever possible access roads should provide for the
    parking of emergency vehicles so that exit routes used by crowds
    are not seriously obstructed.

    191. Wherever practicable and where necessary roads within %
    of a mile of the ground should be kept entirely free of parked
    vehicles so as not to delay or obstruct the access of emergency
    vehicles.




                                                     53
CHAPTER 14

14.   COMMUNICATIONS


There should be a communications system capable of
clearly relaying essential messages to all parts of
the ground in both normal circumstances and in an
emergency.


Precise requirements for communications will depend
on the sort of ground and the numbers of people that
attend there.     In general the communications system
should be determined after consultation with the
police and emergency services.      It should be
available for use, capable of coping with all
emergencies and should have an override facility.
It is ground management who should provide and
operate the necessary equipment for this purpose.


Central Control


There should be a central control room commanding a
good view of the whole ground from which the
communications system should operate.      It should
contain the facility to communicate quickly with
staff, the public and the emergency services.
Subject to paragraph       below the safety officer and
his staff should be responsible for the operation of
the communications system.


There should be inter-communication between the
central control and all turnstiles or banks of
turnstiles and all entry and exit gates used by the
public (see also Chapter     ).   Metering systems to
record all admissions should be installed at
turnstiles and, to ensure that ground capacities are
not exceeded in any section, arrangements should be
made for central control to be informed immediately
a predetermined number of spectators has been
admitted through each turnstile.


Public Address/System Warning


The public address system should be able to
communicate with individual areas outside and inside
the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
ground.


[At grounds described in paragraph       below the
system should be capable of broadcasting a
particular message to a part of the ground whilst
simultaneously broadcasting to the rest of the
ground.]   Emergency use of the system as part of the
fire warning system means that it will also need to
comply with BS 5389 Part 1 (Code of practice for
system design, installation and servicing of Fire
Detection and Alarm Systems in Buildings).


Important announcements relating to crowd safety
should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the
attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise
in the ground.   This signal, followed by the voice­
over transmission should be different to, and
distinct from, any other signals which may be in
general use on the system.     This arrangement should
be prominently displayed in every programme sold for
every event.


The public address equipment should be installed so
that broadcast messages can be heard under
reasonable conditions (including emergencies) by all
persons of normal hearing in any part of the ground
to which the public has access.     Installation should
conform to the relevant guidance contained in BS


                          64
6259 (Code of Practice for Planning and Installation
of Sound Systems).    The power supply to the system
should be such as to enable it to continue to
operate in an emergency such as fire or a failure of
the mains supply for upto 3 hours.


In the event of an emergency it is essential that
clear, accurate information is given to spectators
at the earliest possible time.   Messages should be
positive leaving those to whom they are addressed in
no doubt as to what is required of them.


Back-up Provision


Loud hailers should be available for the use of
stewards and police in directing or instructing
spectators.


Any police radio facilities available for the
maintenance of law and order should augment and not
supersede the ground communications system.


Police Control Room


Where there is a special police presence inside the
ground the police should be provided with a central
control room set aside for use by the officer in
charge.   The control may be in addition [to that
used by the ground safety officer in which case a
joint control room should be considered].      There
must be a clear, unequivocal understanding by both
police and management as to the tasks, duties and
responsibilities which will be undertaken by the
police and those which will be undertaken by the
ground management (see also Chapter .... paragraphs
     ).   There must be established lines of
communication between them.


                           65
International grounds, grounds of clubs in the
English Football League and clubs in the Premier
Division [and Division 1] of the Scottish Football
League should provide a police control room which
is:-


     (a)   well placed so as to command a good view
           of the whole pitch and the spectators
           surrounding it;


     (b)   of sufficient size for the officer in
           charge, his deputy, management
           representative and enough officers to
           operate radios, telephones and any other
           equipment.   There should be space for
           others who may need to visit the room for
           example, other senior officers,
           management, representatives of the
                                 . L.     (
           emergency services;      -      >


     (c)   properly equipped with suitable CCTV,
           radio, telephone facilities.


Where necessary the control room should be sound­
proofed against excessive noise.


There should be sufficient operators in the police
control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
received, evaluated and answered.     The radio system
should be such as to give operators in the control
room priority over, and the capacity to override,
others using the same channel.     Additional channels
should be used, where necessary, to prevent
overcrowding of the airwaves.    To complement radio
communications there should be a completely separate
system of land-lines with telephone links between
control room and key points.


Close Circuit Television


Consideration should be given to the installation of
CCTV in order to monitor turnstiles (inside and
outside the ground) ingress/egress routes, concourse
areas, terraces and any other area where there is
likely to be a crowd build-up.     CCTV should normally
be installed for this purpose at grounds used for
major events and in particular at grounds referred
to in paragraph .... above.     Before decisions are
reached analysis of each ground is necessary.     Each
part of the spectators accommodation should be
assessed for the nature and degree of risk in order
to determine whether CCTV will be of use, if so the
individual needs and whether alternative measures
can be taken which achieve equal or better results.


[Supplementary guidance on procurement of CCTV based
on research carried out by Home Office Scientific
Development Branch can be obtained from
         .3




                           67
CHAPTER 15

15.   AUXILIARY POWER

Auxiliary power should be available and be
sufficient to enable emergency lighting, the Public
Address system and other electrically powered
installations to function for at least 3 hours after
the failure of the normal supply.


General


In the event of a power failure consideration should
be given to cancellation of the event.     If the
auxiliary power supply is capable of supplying the
entire load for the ground for at least 3 hours it
may be possible to continue a fixture or event
provided it is scheduled to finish within this
period and no other emergency situation exists at
the ground.     To supply such a load a generator
rather than a central battery system is likely to be
required.     Ground management should take into
account the needs for the ground in deciding the
type of power provision and make contingency plans
for the failure of the power supply (see Chapter 2).


Auxiliary power equipment should be located in a
secure room to which the public do not have access.
The room should be of fire-resisting construction of
a standard of not less than 1 hour.


All equipment should be installed, maintained and
tested in accordance with the manufacturers
instructions and relevant British Standards.


Emergency lighting



                            68
Emergency lighting, for use in the event of a
failure of the general lighting, should be provided
in all parts of the premises accessible to the
public and along all exit routes, with exit signs
clearly illuminated.    Installation should be in
accordance with BS 5266: Part 1.    The system should
be completely separate from the general lighting
system, although a one-circuit system incorporating
staggered sub-circuits would be an acceptable
alternative.   Unless exceptionally two entirely
independent supplies can be obtained from outside
sources, the emergency circuit should be connected
to a source of power located on the premises, for
example storage batteries or a diesel generator,
with a delay of not more than 5 seconds.


The system should be capable of maintaining the
necessary level of illumination for a period of 3
hours from the time of failure of the normal supply.


The emergency lighting should operate automatically
on the failure of the main lighting.


Emergency lighting systems should be tested
regularly in accordance with BS 5266: Part 1.


Public Address System


Where the public address system is part of the fire
warning system it should conform to BS 5839 Part 1
(see Chapter 11 paragraphs       and Chapter 12
paragraphs     ).   Auxiliary power will in such
circumstances therefore be needed to ensure the
continued use of the system in the event of fire or
other emergency.
CHAPTER 16

16.   STEWARDING


Effective stewarding should prevent overcrowding in
sections of the ground, reduce the likelihood and
incidence of disorder, help disperse spectators in
such a way as to reduce crowd pressure and provide
the means to investigate, report and take early
action in an emergency.


Manning levels and stewarding requirements will vary
depending upon the size and configuration of the
ground, the nature of the event and crowd levels,      -
but there are five basic duties which stewards are
called upon to carry out.     These are:


      a)   controlling or directing members of the
           public who are entering or leaving the
           ground, to help achieve an even flow of
           people to the viewing areas and safe
           dispersal of spectators on the terraces or
           viewing slopes;


      b)   patrolling the ground to deal with any
           emergencies eg. raising alarms or
           extinguishing fires;


      c)   manning entrances, exits and other
           strategic points, especially exit doors
           and gates which are not continuously open
           whilst the ground is in use;


      d)   assisting police as appropriate or as
           requested with crowd control; and




                             70
      e)   undertaking specific duties in an
           emergency.


A more detailed check list of the kind of duties
which stewards are liable to undertake is at Annex
B.   It should be borne in mind that this is only an
example and not necessarily an exhaustive list of
duties.


Stewards should be fit, active, preferably between
the age of 18 - 55 and fully capable of carrying out
the duties allocated to them.     Every steward should
be fully appraised in writing of his duties and
responsibilities and should carry on him a general
check list of them.     Where a ground such as one used
by an association football league club has high
police presence, duties and responsibilities of
stewards should be agreed with the police and form
part of any written understanding or statement of
intent agreed with the police.     Stewards should
attend pre-match briefing and should be made aware
as necessary of the arrangements and any contingency
plans to deal with the arrival of away supporters.


Effective training and supervision should be
provided by management so that all stewards, whether
regular or casual, know not only whAT their duties
are but how to carry them out and why.    This is
especially important in emergencies when it is
essential that stewards and their supervisors are
fully aware of and practiced in the part they are to
play in the plans drawn up with the emergency
services (see Chapter       , paragraph    ).


Exercises should be carried out so as to ensure that
emergency procedures operate smoothly, and a record



                            71
kept of the duration of the exercise, details of the
instruction given and by whom.


Management should appoint a chief steward
responsible for co-ordinating responsibilities of
all stewards.   Control of stewards should be from a
central point with an efficient means to communicate
with the stewards (see also Chapter     ).


All stewards should be readily identifiable eg. by
the wearing of distinctive clothing (such as
tabards).




                          72
CHAPTER 17

17.   CROWD BEHAVIOUR


Where there is a disorderly element among the crowd
intent on violence, additional safety measures are
needed to contain and minimise the potential
disruption, to isolate quickly, identify and remove
the offenders and to prevent their re-entry on
future occasions.


Although the problem of crowd disorder at sporting
events is one which affects primarily professional
association football, other sports are not immune
from it.   Therefore, whilst the following advice is
directed mainly at those grounds where professional
association football is played, especially grounds
used by English Football League clubs, the general
principles should also be borne in mind by
management at other grounds where major spectator
sports are played.


The 'European Convention on Spectator Violence and
Misbehaviour at Sporting Events and in particular at
Football Matches'   (HMSO, Cmmd 9649), which came into
force on 1 November 1985, sets out in general terms
the measures to be taken to prevent and control
violence by spectators.    Additionally, some sports'
governing bodies have issued their own guidance on
crowd control.    For example, the Football
Association has issued a 'Memorandum to Football
League Clubs On Crowd Management' which sets out the
measures that must be taken at all League grounds,
and UEFA has issued binding instructions in their
document 'Order and Security in the Stadia'    (Third
Edition, 1985) which apply to matches in their
competitions.    The following paragraphs cover some


                           73
of the main areas that refquire the attention of
ground management.   The advice they contain is not
comprehensive and is intended to supplement rather
than replace existing instructions, codes of
practice etc.


Policing


Although the measures described elsewhere in the
Guide will help achieve reasonable safety at a
sports ground, for management to discharge its
responsibility properly, a special police presence
inside the ground may be necessary.'/ Where there is
such a presence there should be a clear, written
understanding or 'statement of intent' agreed
between the police and the ground management setting
out the functions and responsibilities of each as to
crowd safety.


Prevention—and-containment -©£ disorder (as distinct
from normal ground operations and crowd management
on the premises) will fall to the police,and^&t-As
they-*rho, .An-the—event-of- an-emergency, [must] have
the authority to take charge. 'The number and
disposition of the police must be determined by the
Chief Police Officer in whose area the ground is
located.


Ground management should give all possible
assistance to the police and provide police control
facilities within the ground (see also Chapter
).


Proper advance planning with the police is essential
to counter potential crowd disorder.    There must be
an effective liaison between club and police for
this purpose to including not just the arrangements
    inside the ground but also the escort of visiting
    supporters, their likely numbers, their separate
    entry to the ground and their departure at the end
    of the match.    There should be debriefing meetings
    as necessary to evaluate existing arrangements and
    provide the flexibility necessary to deal with
    different circumstances.


    Crowd novement


    If crowd movement on terraces is to be strictly
    controlled by their sub-division by structural
    means, such as railings or fences, in order to help
    the police contain any disorder, the greatest care
    must be taken to ensure that these sub-divisions or
    'pens' cannot be filled beyond their specified safe
    limit.   Dividing structures should comply with the
    strength requirements set out in Chapter 9.    Each
    pen must be assessed for its safe limit, the limit
    specified, recorded and arrangements made to ensure
    it is not exceeded.    Ideally each pen should be
    self-contained, serviced by its own entrance/exit,
    refreshment facilities and toilets - in keeping with
    the principles of Chapter 5 and 8.    If a pen is not
    self-contained and arrangements cannot be made to
                     (V-
    keep a^reliable/record of people occupying it, then
    either the pen must not be used or the dividing
    fences removed and the whole area controlled as a
    complete section.


    Segregation


    Home and visiting supporters at professional
f   ^association>football (league^matches may have to be
    segregated but segregation is not advocated for
    other sports where crowd disorder is not a problem.
    This should be borne in mind when considering the


                               75
division of grounds used ,for other sports as well as
association football.


Where possible a neutral or sterile zone should be
provided within a ground so that home and visiting
supporters are not physically close to each other.
The arrangements for admitting spectators into the
ground, whether by tickets purchases in advance or
through payment at the turnstiles, should be drawn
up in consultation with the police, and must be
carefully controlled to ensure as far as possible
that segregation is effective and known
troublemakers are excluded.


Segregation arrangements may also have to include
measures which deter spectators from invading the
pitch or playing area.     At the same time the
arrangements will need to provide for the police to
have effective access to the terraces in the event
of an outbreak of violence.      Moreover, since the
playing area is, in most instances, a place of
safety it has to be accessible for evacuation in an
emergency (see Chapters          paragraph     ).   Any
structural means used to deter unauthorised
encroachment onto the pitch, must allow for such
access (see also Chapter           ).


Detention and removal of trouble makers


At larger soccer grounds, particularly where there
has been a record of frequent crowd trouble, secure
detention rooms may be necessary for use by the
police.


There should be adequate vehicular access for the
unobtrusive removal of detainees (see also Chapter
, paragraphs     on access for emergency vehicles).


                            76
Refreshments


Hard containers such as glasses, bottles or cans can
make dangerous missiles and should not be used for
the sale of refreshments.        All refreshments should
be served in soft containers.


Alcohol should not be on sale for consumption on the
terraces or in the stands [at football grounds].



Note:     The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
etc) Act 1985 applies to any ground in England and
Wales used for an international association football
match or a match involving a football league club.
In Scotland the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980
applies to grounds used by clubs in the Scottish
Football League, Highland League and to the
international stadia used for association football
and Rugby Union.




                            77
CHAPTER 18

18.   PITCH PERIMETER FENCE/WALL



A pitch perimeter fence/wall may not only delineate
the playing area from the spectator accommodation
but may have to serve as a crush barrier, and in
some situations will serve as a means to discourage
or prevent access to the playing area except in an
emergency.


The type, strength and height of a pitch perimeter
fence or wall will vary according to its location
and required function.   At one extreme, at a certain
type of ground or small stadium used by very few
spectators, there may be no need for a perimeter
fence or wall at all;    or if such a wall or fence
exists it may need to consist of little more than a
rail to mark the playing area.     At the other
extreme, some major soccer stadia, may have a fence
which prevents access to the pitch in normal
circumstances (see also Chapter 14, paragraph         )
but allows for access in emergency as part of the
measures taken to prevent or contain any outbreak of
crowd disorder.   Such a fence may be limited to one
part of the ground for example, the "away supporters
end" or it might encompass other sections.


Any pitch fence or wall, whatever its height, which
delineates the spectator area from the playing area
restricts or impedes access to the pitch.    The
extent of the restriction depends upon the nature of
the fence or wall.   All pitch fences and walls must
therefore contain gates or openings (if no gates are
fitted) which allow access to the playing area or
any perimeter track in an emergency and, if the
perimeter track is used as part of the normal exit
system, in normal circumstances.     Openings should be
no less than 1.1 metres wide.     They should align
with radial gangways and be of the same width as
those gangways.    Openings or gates should be
properly stewarded, should be clearly marked and
painted a different colour from the rest of the
fence or wall.    Gates, where   fitted, should open
away from the     spectators and should be kept
unlocked.


If spectators can lean on the perimeter fence it
should be deemed a crush barrier and fulfil the
conditions of height and strength specified in
Chapter 9 although if the fence is of solid
construction its height may be more than 1.12
metres.   This    is because the pressures acting on a
person forced     against such a fence are distributed
over a large area of the body, unlike the situation
with a normal crush barrier, where the pressures are
localized.


Pitch Barrier Fences


The term pitch barrier fence in the following
paragraphs means any pitch fence or wall which
exceeds the height of a crush barrier (1.12 metres)
measured from the spectator accommodation.


Pitch barrier fences are not normally considered to
be necessary except at sports grounds used by
association football clubs especially clubs in the
English football league.    They are usually
associated with soccer terraces rather than seated
areas and (with some exceptions) are not generally
considered necessary when seated accommodation
extends to the level of the playing area.      Similarly
family or club enclosures are unlikely to require
such a fence.


Whether a pitch barrier fence is installed will
depend on individual circumstances:     for example, a
history of hostile pitch invasions or other disorder
from a certain part of the ground, the extent to
which stewarding and policing is felt to be able to
deal with any attempted encroachment of the pitch,
availability of alternative solutions, for example a
smooth surfaced wall at least 1.22 metres high
(measured from the spectator accommodation).


Where a pitch barrier fence is installed it should
not impair visibility of the playing area.        If
sightlines from a terrace are obscured congestion
may be caused - eg because spectators are unwilling
to move forward - or seated spectators may be
induced to stand up.   If such problems are not
resolved satisfactorily, consequential reductions in
capacity should result.   See Chapter 16.


The maximum height of a pitch barrier fence should
be 2.2 metres.   There should be no overhanging
sections and no spikes, barbed wire or other
obstacles installed or attached to it.


All pitch barrier fences must contain gates or
openings as described in paragraph            above.   If a
terrace is sub-divided into pens (see paragraph
t Chapter     ) each pen must have its own gate or
gates leading onto the pitch in addition to any side
exits.   [There must be sufficient pitch gates in
each pen capable of evacuating all the spectators in
each pen onto the playing area within the emergency
evacuation time set for that section of the ground
or terrace (see Chapter        , paragraphs             ).]


                          80
Where gates are fitted they should , in common with
gates on normal egress routes open outwards (ie away
from spectators).                 [Wherever possible they should be
kept unlocked.]


Whenever practicable to do so terraces should not
descend to a pitch barrier fence [see figure                           ].   A
walkway between the fence and the terrace should [if
possible] be created and reserved solely for use by
police, club and first-aid personnel.                       In order to
achieve this it may be necessary to take out of use
or remove completely one or two rows of terracing.
Any drop into the walkway would need to be protected
by continuous crush barriers in order to discourage
access to the walkway except via authorised points
(ie radial gangways).


Where this "sterile" walkway system is in use
sliding gates may be installed in the fence where
there is no crowd pressure against them.                       (Care
should be taken to ensure that any such gates
operate efficiently and that they are not
susceptible to jamming.)                       For the same reason the
fence will not need to meet the strength of a crush
barrier.


[As an additional precaution, equipment should be
provided wherever pitch barrier fencing is installed
so that, if necessary, sufficient fencing can be
removed in order to release any trapped spectators.
Trained operators should be available in order to
use the equipment.]

  O'   ^ if   V   C t-V”*.   *^ # V   X.   .




                                               81
CHAPTER 19

19.   ESTIMATION OF SAFE GROUND CAPACITY


To assess the number of spectators which can be
safely accommodated account should be taken of the
features of the individual ground, its
configuration, general condition, intended use and
any deviations from the Guide's provisions.


The previous sections of the Guide give guidelines
and safety considerations for individual features of
a ground.    This section describes a method of
calculating the number of spectators that can be
safely accommodated when taking into account
interactions between these individual features and
where there are deviations from the guidelines.      It
may be necessary to calculate various capacities if
the ground is not used for more than one activity.


The calculations should be attached to a plan of the
ground and should be available with such details as
exits, stands, terraces, stairways, passages,
kiosks, seats and barriers.      A scale of 1:200 should
be used for this purpose.     The plan should be cross
referenced and attached to the calculations.


The method assesses:


      a.    the holding capacity of a terrace or
            viewing slope (that of a seated area
            generally being determined either by the
            number of seats when it conforms to
            guidelines or an acceptable reduced
            occupancy when the guidelines can not be
            m e t ); and



                            82
     b.   the capacity of a given exit/entry route
          from a terrace or stand.


The number of people that can be safely accommodated
on a terrace or in a stand (or other covered
accommodation) is either its holding capacity, or
the capacity of the exit/entry system to be used in
normal circumstances before and at the end of an
event (assessed in accordance with paragraphs
below) or the emergency exit system whichever is the
smallest.


Holding capacity of terraces and viewing slopes


An even distribution of spectators on a terrace or
viewing slope is likely to be difficult to achieve
notwithstanding the measures described in this guide
because spectators may prefer to gather in a certain
part or parts of the viewing area.       This pattern of
crowd dispersal and any other relevant factors
should be used and taken into consideration when
assessing the safe capacity for a particular area.


In all cases the calculation of the capacity of the
standing area should take into account only those
parts of the viewing area from which the whole of
the playing area can be seen excluding gangways (ie
the "available viewing area").       If the positioning
and/or width of the gangways do not meet the
criteria of paragraphs      of Chapter 8 a
commensurate reduction must be made to the available
viewing area.


Where crush barriers conform to the specifications
in Chapter 9 and the viewing area is in good
condition (see Chapter 8        ) the maximum allowable
overall packing density is 47 person per 10 square


                           83
metres over the available viewing area.      Where the
conditions of the viewing area materially deviate
from Chapter 8 a reduction must be made in the
packing density.   There is no lower limit to this
reduction, and if a viewing area is in such poor
condition that it is unfit for use, the figure is 0.
Interpolation between these figures will be
necessary where the conditions fall between the two
extremes.


Example A


The capacity of the terrace is calculated by
multiplying the area available for standing by the
appropriate packing density.    The following formula
may be used:


     Capacity (Number of persons) * & x (0-47)
                                     10


where 'A' is the area available for standing in
square metres.


Peak viewing terrace


Barriers and pitch perimeter wall conform to the
Guide's recommendations on construction, height,
strength and spacing.


Available viewing area 76 metres x 16 metres * 1216
square metres (excluding designated gangways)


Condition and drainage of terraces good.


Dimensions:    steps 375 mm width (Guide recommends
               280 mm - 375 mm,
               see Chapter     , paragraph    )
           Z 'i t'TS
>*1L




       A




                       i4
               risers 70 nun* (Guide recommends
               75 mm - 180 mm,
               see Chapter   , paragraph      )


* Correction not possible without major
reconstruction so accepted in view of only minor
deviation of 5 mm and good condition of the
terrace:- ie fully acceptable for 47 persons per
square metres.


Capacity: 1216 x 47 * 5715
                 10
fzH   »rJ
                                                                                                                             P Y j TJ


                               i

                                                                                                                                           —      ^CX^rifcj
                                                                                                                                            Zj' nI      S



                                                                                                                                                  O   cktW

                                                                                                                                    3" ' ' Lr/vuz A
                                                                           - Wofc.
            .   I*I rvi<( f«j
                                                                                                             I*| » n < W            ^




                                                                                     fee ^jcr<rl|< ;cUoc bw-r\/tt?i   ^    fI 0«tfi.cc^P u6lo.v
                       '   a   v   u   *   C   t   A   ^   o   ^   ‘   ^
Example B (where there is material deviation from
the Guide)


Gross area for standing 76 x 16 * 1216 square
metres.


Condition of terrace: acceptable but


      a)   some unevenness caused by repair work


      b)   some cracking and rough surface in places


      c)   no gangways


Required gangway provision (see Figure      )
determined as:-


1 lateral gangway at rear leading to exit stairways:
ie 1 at 1.1 metres by 76 ■     83.6 square metres


4 radial gangways: ie 4 at 1.1 by 14.9 * 65.6 square
metres


                               Total     149.2


Available viewing area * 1216 - 149.2 * 1066.8


Packing density determined at 35 per 10 square
metres to allow for underfoot conditions.


Capacity 1066.8 x 15 « 3734
                   10



Note: Figure of 3734 is below 3960 quoted in example
E.   Therefore, any upgrading of terracing to
accommodate more than 3960 spectators would also


                          87
require installation of additional turnstiles and
improvements (if any) to entry routes).


If the crush barriers meet the height and strength
criteria set down in Chapter 9 but do not conform to
the distances laid down in Table       or the gaps
between them are greater than those described in
paragraphs     and Figure     of Chapter 9/ the
capacity of the viewing area is calculated from the
provision of crush barriers.     The total length of
crush barriers (including the pitch wall or fence if
it serves as, and meets the requirements of, a crush
barrier) should be measured.     This figure is then
multiplied by either the recommended distance
between the barriers (see Table        ) or the actual
distance whichever is the lesser.    This establishes
the notional available viewing area (see Figure
).   This area is then multiplied by the density
factor determined for that area.


Example C (Spacing and distance of crush barriers do
not conform to Chapter 9)


Area for standing 76 x 16 * 1216 square metres
Terrace steps conform to dimensions of Chapter 8:
drainage and condition good


Terrace gradient 20° (1 in 2.7)


Crush barrier configuration as in Figure


Working load of pitch wall established by test meets
the higher strength of Table 2 Chapter 9.


Crush barriers consist of 12 at 6 metres in length
plus 2 at 3 metres in length.



                            BB
Test/inspection of two barriers (see Figure       )
reveal sufficient doubts at to their integrity and
are discounted for calculation purposes.


Remaining barriers in Line A (see Figure        ) have a
safe working load (established by test) of the lower
strength of Table 2.


Barriers in Line B have a safe working load
(established by test) of the higher strength of
Table 2.


Calculation of (notional) available viewing area.


     (a)   Pitch wall: 76 metres less 4 exits at 1.1
           « 71.6 metres.   Recommended crush barrier
           distance (for higher strength) on a
           gradient of 20° * 3.4 metres (Actual
           distance from pitch wall to crush barriers
           5 metres).
           Notional available viewing area is
           therefore 71.6 x 3.4 = 243.4 square
           metres.


     (b)   Crush barriers: Line A = 4 at 6 metres
           plus 1 at 3 metres « 27 metres.
           Recommended distance between barriers (for
           lower strength) 2.3 metres (actual
           distance 8 metres).


           Notional available viewing area is
           therefore 27 x 2.3 « 62.1


           Crush barriers: Line B 6 at 6 metres ■ 1
           at 3 metres * 39 metres.    Recommended
           distance between barriers (for higher



                            89
strength) 3.4 metres.       Actual distance
behind barriers is 3 metres.


Notional available viewing area is
therefore 3 9 x 3 = 1 1 7   square metres.
                                       rt'C C O rvto^rv-Tf & *r   (•o tc a /t.u n
                            «rt«»*ei-ry ' o F      S 'T 'S "

                                                                                                        i-31LT ^



                                                                            c^<« ;


                                                   C * *V-*r»*-t^




    £          trc*^   "i
                                                                        £
£SSffl»        ft^n                                                         7 * * 0 7   L

                %cz                                                     rC'^7           '     t   e
                       pou«y>                                            ■>                 p * 36! f
                                      K
          ft



                                     Qokwo*
Total notional available viewing area:-


            243.4
              62.1
            117.0


            422.5


Density packing 47 per 10 square metres.


Capacity « 422.5 x £7 « 1986
                     10


Note:- average packing density for standing area as
a whole would therefore equate to 1986 divided by
1216 * 16.33 per 10 square metres.


Terraces or viewing slopes at older grounds not used
for major sporting fixtures and which are attended
by very few spectators may not have crush barriers
at all; or if they do their installation may be
random and not meet the specifications of Chapter
            The safe capacity in such circumstances
has to be assessed on the conditions prevailing at
the ground.    All relevant factors have to be
considered eg underfoot condition, the dispersal of
the crowd at fixtures.      The overall capacity of the
terrace will be limited and the average packing
density will be low.      One method of calculation is
taken from the pitch wall/fence (if any) discounting
the rest of the terrace.


Example D


Gross terrace/viewing area 76 x 16 * 1216 square
metres.
No pitch wall: spectator Accommodation bounded by a
rail around the pitch and does not conform to the
specification of Chapter


Allow spectators a (notional) standing area of 76
metres by, say, four terrace steps at 375 mm per
step: ie, 7.6 x 1.5 * 11.4 square metres.


Available standing area (notional) * 11.4 square
metres.


Capacity = 11.4 x 47 » 536
                  10


The number of turnstiles may, however, affect the
holding capacity of a terrace if all spectators to
be accommodated in the viewing area can not pass
through in at least 1 hour.


Exit systems


General considerations to be taken into account when
assessing the adequacy of exit systems are set out
in Chapter 6.


Example E


Available viewing area 76 metres x 16 metres = 1216
square metres.


Crush barriers and terrace conform to standards
described in Example A above.


Number of turnstiles serving the area ■ 6
Measured turnstile rate exceeds 660 per hour.
Maximum acceptable rate for calculation purposes -
660


                         93
Capacity * 660 x 6 = 3960


Exit Capacity


The capacity of an exit system can be calculated by
assessing for each element in the system (ie each
gangway, doorway, stairway, exit etc) the number of
persons who can pass the limiting point in that
element in 8 minutes (ie egress time, see Chapter
, paragraph     ).   The capacity of the emergency exit
system is the number of people who can pass through
the designated emergency exit route in the
appropriate emergency evacuation time (see Chapter 5
paragraphs      ).   The calculation is made by
multiplying the width of the element by the
appropriate flow rate in Chapter 17 by the
appropriate time.


Where an element in the exit system is less than 1
metre wide that element should be omitted from the
calculation.


[Flow restricting elements of the kind described in
Chapter 6 should be ignored for the purpose of these
calculations.]


Example F


Area of terrace 76 x 16 ■ 1216 square metres
excluding designated gangways.


Maximum potential capacity ■


1216 x 47 * 5715 (see example A).
       10




                            94
Exit capacity consists of 2 stairways in each corner
of the terrace leading to a concourse at the rear,
converging on 1 exit gate in the centre.   (See
Figure    .)


Analysis of exit capacity allowing a minimum of 8
minutes for spectators to pass through a fixed
point, using flow rates given in Chapter


[Stairways 12'-00" * 3.327 metres.   These are
divided into two channels of 1.1 metres and one
channel of 1.127 metres thereby providing 6 "unit
widths" for calculation purposes.


Each stairway capacity is therefore:-


     [width] [number of unit widths] x flow rate x 8
     minutes:=


     [3.327 divided by .550 x 8 « 1935.7 (1936)]


     [6 x 40 x 8 * 1920]


The capacity of the passage or concourse at the rear
of the terrace is measured at its narrowest points
(see Figure   ). In sector A the distance measured
is 10'-00 (3.05 metres).


Exit capacity at this point is calculated as:-


     3.05 x 60 x 8 * 2661.8 (2662)
     3.05 divided by .55 x 60 x 8 « 2661.8 (2662)


In sector B the narrowest point is measured as 4
metres.


Exit capacity at this point is calculated as:-


                           95
     4.0    divided by .55 x 60 x 8 * 3490.9 (3491)


The exit gate is measured as 16'-00 (4.88 metres)
8.87 unit widths.


The exit capacity of the gate is calculated as:-


     4.88        divided by .55 x 60 x 8 « 4258.9 (4259)


From the above calculations it can be seen that:-


     a)     capacity of exit staircases * 3872 [3840]
            (1936 [1920] x 2)


     b)     capacity of concourse * 6153 (3491 + 2662)


     c)     capacity of gateway * 4259


Terrace capacity is 3872 [3840] unless other
limiting factors apply,    if staircase capacity at
(a) is increased to more than 4259 the restricting
element in the exit system will be gateway (c).




                           96
     *




97
CHAPTER 20

20.   RECOMMENDED FLOW RATES


From stands and stairways a flow rate of 40 persons
per minute per unit of exit width (ie 550 mm) should
be used.


From terraces (including covered terraces) and the
ground generally a flow rate of 60 persons per
minute per unit of exit width should be used.


[The flow rates quoted are notional for purposes of
calculation.   They assume that movement is through
an exit-width of at least 1.1 metres (ie. a double
unit-width) and that underfoot conditions comply
with those recommended elsewhere in the Guide.        If,
in an individual case, it is evident from studies of
crowd movement at a ground that a different flow is
actually achieved from those mentioned, the actual
rate may be used for calculation purposes.


The flow rate of 60 persons per minute per unit
width is for movement off terraces where occupants
are likely to be able to move quickly across a level
surface and through wide exit gates.   Where a less
hurried departure is experienced from that
associated with football grounds at the end of a
match, the lower figure of 40 persons per minute
should be used for calculation purposes.     In any
case of doubt the lower figure should be used.]




                          98
                                                  ANNEX

TESTING AND INSPECTION OF CRUSH BARRIERS AND
HANDRAILS AND OTHER STRUCTURAL CROWD CONTROL
ELEMENTS


Objective


The objective of visual inspections and physical
testing is to ascertain the condition and strength
of the crush barriers and handrails and other
elements in order to establish that they comply with
the requirements of the Guide and that they are
adequate to carry out their required function with
an established safety factor:- ie that they will
safely withstand the pressures generated by the
movement of spectators during entry, viewing and
exiting.


Note: forces generated may vary depending upon the
event, the size and nature of the crowd and its
dispersal.   Crowds at football matches [including
rugby] who are essentially static throughout the
match, occupying accommodation at a packing density
of up to 47/10 square metres and who leave all
together at the end of the game will probably
generate greater pressure on barriers, handrails etc
than spectators at other events such as cricket or
athletics.   The criteria for strength of handrails
and barriers etc envisages the more robust nature of
spectator movement and actions at football matches.


Personnel and Equipment


The inspections and testing should be carried out by
or under the direct supervision of a competent,
suitably qualified engineer belonging to a


                          99
recognised professional institution.   The engineer
will be responsible for ensuring that the
inspections and testing are properly carried out and
that all results are accurately recorded and the
engineer must be satisfied that equipment used for
the tests is suitable for the purpose and is used in
the correct manner.   The equipment used should be
capable of a level of accuracy [+ .1 KN] and have
the potential to test at least 12 KN per metre
width.                                                ___


Records


Detailed records should be made and kept of all
observations, loadings, deflection/recovery readings
etc in respect of each structure inspected and
tested.   The record should include a standard record
sheet identifying each barrier tested and inspected,
its location (including cross-reference to the
plan), date of inspection and comments.


Inspections


All crush barriers and handrails etc should be
inspected annually taking due account of comments
recorded from previous inspections (see paragraph
above).


Any visible defects, such as corrosion, cracks,
holes, misalignment, undue distortion, missing bolts
or fittings, should be noted and its potential
effect on the integrity and strength of the
structure assessed in order to determine whether its
condition is fit for its intended purpose.


If it is considered that members or connections, due
to the nature of their construction, have hidden
defects such as corrosion, further investigation
should be made.   This may involve partial
dismantling if this can be done without detriment to
the structure itself.


Particular attention should be paid to areas where
corrosion or damage could result in a loss of
performance ie water traps.


Should inspections result in any doubt as to the
integrity and potential strength of the barrier or
handrail etc it should be tested in accordance with
the Guide or deemed to have failed.


Testing


Testing should be undertaken annually on a 25%
representative sample of crush barriers and
handrails etc throughout all parts of the ground.
Each year the sample should be different so that all
crush barriers and handrails are tested at least
once every 4 years.   The 25% sample does not include
any which, following inspection, are tested as a
result of doubts as to their integrity.


The method of physical testing should be such as to
satisfy the objective stated in paragraph      above.
The methods given below, if undertaken correctly,
achieve this.   Other testing methods may be
acceptable but should be agreed with the local
authority (see definition) prior to being undertaken
and must satisfy the stated objective.


Test Method A


For crush barriers the test is to consist of the
application of an evenly distributed force of either
6.0 KN/metre width or 4.1 KN/metre width of barrier
as mentioned in Chapter 9.


For handrails the test is to consist of the
application of an evenly distributed force of either
4.1 KN/metre width or 2.7 KN/metre width of handrail
as mentioned in Chapter 9.


The force is to be in the form of a static load
acting on the top rail of the barrier or handrail at
right angles to the longitudinal axis and applied in
about ten equal increments.


The test consists of the application of the force
f°r three consecutive periods, the full force being
maintained for 5 minutes each period.   The interval
between applications to be a short as possible, ie
to enable complete unloading and reloading only.     A
record should be kept of any deformation during the
loading periods, during the periods of maintained
loading, or during the recovery period (see above).


If on the removal of the force for the third time
the recovery of deformation is at least 75%
(measured from the position prior to the initial
loading) the barrier or handrail may be deemed to
have satisfied the loading requirements.


If this requirement is not met but the recovery is
more than 50% (measured from the original position)
then the test should be repeated.   If on retest the
recovery is at least 75% (measured from the position
prior to the second test) the barrier or handrail
may be deemed to have satisfied the loading
requirements.




                         102
If the recovery is less than 50% on the first test
or less than 75% on the retest, the barrier or
handrail shall be deemed to have failed to meet the
loading requirements.


Test Method B


The test is in two parts: Bedding In Cycle and Proof
Test.   In each case the test consists of evenly
distributed force applied in the form of a static
load acting on the top rail of the barrier or
handrail at right angles to the longitudinal axis
and applied in increments.


[Deflections                                 T~ighfr -angl oc
should be measured immediately adjacent to the point
                             L - v tw   I—       p il—■—1
of application of the force [on the handrails and at
the top of all posts.]   [Where practicable] the
deflection measuring equipment should be properly
set up on a firm part of the terrace unaffected by
any movement of the barriers.] j


Bedding In Cycle


As an initial cycle, in order to allow for the
bedding in of the test equipment and any frictional
restraints, the barrier or handrail should be loaded
upto its design service load (see Table                     Chapter
).   The bedding-in load should be applied in at
least 6 equal increments. ^Deformations should be
monitored at each increment of the load cycle.'J [The
maximum load should be applied for y(\ minutes.]
                                   * I
The barrier or handrail may be considered to have
completj(^this ga%t of the test satisfactorily if it
recovers to        of its original position.                  If the
barrier or handrail fails to achieve this level of
*    recovery it shall be considered to have failed the
    test unless there is a satisfactory explanation for
    the results.


    Proof .Cyete’&b/.


    For crush barriers the test is to consist of the
    application of an evenly distributed force of either
    6.0 KN/metre width or 4.1 KN/metre width of barrier
    as mentioned in Chapter 9.


    For handrails the test is to consist of the
    application of an evenly distributed force of either
    4.1 KN/metre width or 2.7 KN/metre width of handrail
    as mentioned in Chapter 9.


    The force should be applied in ten equal increments
    for two consecutive periods, the full force being
    maintained for 5 minutes each period.        The interval
    between applications to be as short as possible, ie
    to enable complete unloading and reloading only.          A
    record should be kept of any deformation during the
    loading periods, during the periods of maintained
    loading, or during the recovery period (see
    paragraph       above).


    If, on removal of the force for the second time the
    recovery of the deflection is at least^7S%-(as
    measured f r o m t h e original barrier position at the
    start of the,test procedure       le. yfiXor- Lu the— -
    -feeding in-oyeietT the barrier or handrail should be
    considered as having satisfied the loading
    requi rements#provided that-


         (a)    any existing cracking^_jift£oi1nation are not
                significantl^extended in the course of or
                as a^reSult of the testing and


                                104
        (b)   there is no oth^-^Sign of distress as a
              result o£--tTie test cycle.

Other


Wherever possible comparison should be made with the
performance of other crush barriers and with the
same barrier subjected to the same or similar tests
in order to establish whether there is a reduction
in overall performance which might indicate a
developing weakness requiring special attention or
more frequent testing and/or inspection than the
minimum.


If at any time during the procedure, and
notwithstanding that the barrier or handrail has
satisfied the test cycle, doubt arises for any
reason (including such matters as corrosion,
cracking of the terracing or distortion of
connections) as to the safety of the barrier or
handrail, a detailed investigation should be carried
out (see paragraphs         above).   Unless the results
of this investigation remove the doubt as to the
safety of the barrier or handrail, the barrier or
handrail, as the case may be, should be deemed to
have failed.




                             105
FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES


First aid staff and accommodation


There should be at each sports grounds at each match
or event at least one trained first aider per 1, 000
spectators.   The responsibility for securing the
attendance of first aiders lies with ground
management.


Ground operators should provide accommodation
designated for the provision of first aid to
spectators.   This should be in addition to the
club's medical room.    The recommended minimum size
of the room should be 15 square metres in cases of
ground capacity not exceeding 15,000 and 25 square
metres where the crowd capacity is in excess of that
figure.   In any event the room should be large
enough to contain the minimum of a couch - with
enough space for people to walk round; a sink
providing hot and cold water and drinking water; a
worktop; and sufficient room to store stretchers,
blankets and pillows.   Care should be taken to
ensure that the door is large enough to allow access
for a stretcher or a wheelchair.


The first aid room should contain suitable storage
for first aid materials.    The contents of the store
and any other first aid equipment should be agreed
with local medical or first aid services in the
light of likely crowd attendance.   Ground operators
should appoint someone with sole responsibility for
the equipment and materials in the first aid room
and for the upkeep of the room.


First aid rooms should have heating, lighting,
ventilation and electric sockets.   The room should


                           106
be signposted throughout the ground and located in
such a position where it is accessible to both
spectators and emergency vehicles.    A telephone line
should be installed allowing internal and external
communication.


Medical Practitioner


At matches or events where the number of spectators
is expected to exceed 2,000, the club should employ
a medical practitioner to be present and available
to deal with any medical exigency at the ground.
He/she should be present at the ground at least an
hour before the start of the match or the event and
should remain until half an hour after the end of a
match.   His/her whereabouts should be known to first
aid staff and to those in the control room who
should be able to make immediate contact with
him/her.


Ambulance provision


At least one fully equipped ambulance from or
approved by the local NHS ambulance authority should
be in attendance at all matches or events with an
anticipated crowd of 5,000 or more.   The number of
ambulances to be in attendance for matches where
larger crowds are expected should be determined
after consultation with the ambulance authority.


The provision of ambulance facilities at grounds is
a matter for ground management.   They may choose the
source of the facility provide it has been approved
by the ambulance authority.




                         107
                                                                                vj K x x iv cJ L t i * (u
                                                                              6>‘


                                   ASSOCIATION                                                      It Mr' K'L
                                                    of
                          CHIEF AMBULANCE OFFICERS                                          g \E.F A A*




                                       Itarsir AmbuLanf« Sovifc Hodoiwrtcrs
                                                  Rmf»wd Road
                                                   frf.Lwtardj
   U*SadjtefinHam !                          Khr. K infiw od BH24 2S P                       V.NJoWfc
hahkitrrkaM ivlnaStrnai                    Ttlrpfiont frnufam (010£lS96ltl                Ni m m I S«ttt6nj



      YOUR REF:FEP/90 35/35/1
      OUR REF: VNJ/VN



      Mr Alan Brown
      G2 D ivision
      Room 920
      Hone O ffice
      Queen Anne's Gate
      London
      SWlH 9AT



      Dear Mr Brown

      GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS (“GREEK GUIDE")

      F urther to your l e t t e r of 10th A pril in connection w ith the above, p lea se fin d
      enclosed our submission fo r in clu sio n fo r re p rin t of GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS
      GROUNDS.

      Yours sincerely




     V N JOLLIFFE /
     National S ecretary
      Enc
                 OJIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ("GREEN GUIDE")


Paragraph 23 page 12 line 5

       should read as follows

".fire, police and ambulance officers will help manaaepgnt"

Paragraph 29 page 14 sub paragraph x.

       should read as follows

To consult with the ambulance authority to ensure there are adequate medical
and first aid facilities, qualified ambulance personnel and first aid staff.


A new chapter 18 Titled Medical Services

Where large numbers of spectators congregate there is always the possibility
of illness or injury arising due to many factors, therefore there should be
close liaison between the police and ambulance authorities to ensure adequate
facilities are provided with suitably qualified staff.
235.

Ambulance vehicles and personnel should be provided to ensure the side and
injured are transported to further medical care as quickly as possible.
236.

Trained first aid personnel should be available to render assistance to the
spectators within the confines of the ground.
237.

Communications should be established and maintained during the event between
key medical and ambulance personnel and police control centre.
238.

A medical practitioner should be available to give treatment and assist
ambulance personnel in medical treatments.
                                                             All correspondence must be
                                                             addressed to the Chief Constable

                                                             X Department

                                                            P 0 Box 47 (S West PDO)
                                                            Chester House
                                                            Boyer Street
                                                            Manchester M16 OSD
                                                            Telephone 061 855      0
                                                            Fax 061 872 4145     2 °92

                                                            Our reference    XA1/PJH/DL
Mr Alan Brown
G2 D ivision                                                Your reference
Room 920                                                    When calling or telephoning
Home O ffice                                                please ask for
Queen Ann's Gate
LONDON                                                      Date      2 5 th June 1990
SW1H 9AT




Dear Mr Brown

GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS

F u rth er to my l e t t e r dated 11th June, 1990, on b e h alf o f the Chief
Constable concerning the re v isio n o f the Guide to S afety a t Sports
Grounds.

Please fin d enclosed a synopsis o f observations received from the Chief
Constables o f England and Wales sin ce responding to your l e t t e r i n i t i a l l y .

I t r u s t t h is l a t e submission w ill not cause too much inconvenience.
Yours sin c e re ly




       Superintendent

Enc
                           A SYNOPSIS OF OBSERVATIONS
                         CONCERNING THE GUIDE TO SAFETY
                               AT SPORTS GROUNDS




Chapter 1      INTRODUCTION

Paragraph 6    Should read - D eviations from in d iv id u a l g u id elin es are not
               perm itted as they w ill d e tr a c t from th e o v e ra ll sa fe ty o f the
               ground.



Chapter 2      MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY

Paragraph 29   I n s e r t new se c tio n s.


               (xviv)        Publish inform ation on tic k e ts which i s unambiguous,
                               simple and c le a r and i t should c o rre la te ab so lu tely
                               w ith th e inform ation provided in resp ec t o f each
                               match, both o u tsid e and in sid e th e ground. Retained
                               tic k e t stubs should contain inform ation necessary to
                               guide sp e c ta to rs once in sid e the ground and in d ic a te
                               the time by which they should have passed through
                               th e t u r n s t i l e s . Any such inform ation should
                               correspond w ith th e planned arrangements fo r
                               adm itting sp e c ta to rs to the ground.


               (xw )         Ensure      th a t   a ll   matches where   cap acity   o r near
                              capacity crowds a re expected f o r e ith e r home o r
                              v i s i t in g se c tio n s, a re designated "A ll Ticket"
                              Batches a f t e r c o n su lta tio n w ith th e P o lic e . The
                              percentages o f tic k e ts a llo c a te d to home and
                              v i s i t i n g supporters should a ls o be d e lib e ra te d a t
                              t h is tim e.


               (x w i)        Ensure th a t a l l "All T icket" matches, tic k e ts fo r
                              th a t match fo r any area o f the ground w ill be issued
                              and so ld p r io r to the d ate o f th e f ix tu r e and the
                              club s h a ll NOT issu e o r s e l l tic k e ts on the day o f
                                                 - 2-

                                    th a t match.        Maximum p u b lic ity should be given to
                                    t h is f a c t, p r io r to the match, u t i l i s i n g the media
                                    where p ra c tic a b le .


                    ( x w ii)       Consult with th e p o lic e and consider the increased
                                    use o f the e a rly o r Sunday k ic k -o ff, e sp e c ia lly fo r
                                    h ig h -ris k matches.


                    (x w iii)       N otify a t the e a r l i e s t o p p o rtu n ity ,       th e Chief of
                                    P o lic e , when a natch i s to be arranged, rearranged,
                                    can celled , o r postponed.



Chapter 5          INGRESS


New paragraph
48                 Access to more than one se c tio n o f the ground should not be
                   p o ssib le a f t e r passing through a s e t o f t u r n s t i l e s .



Chapter 8          TERRACES AND VIEWING SLOPES

Paragraph 101      (Line 7) should r e f e r to both soccer and rugby grounds.

Paragraph 105      Viewing slopes are not considered to be s u ita b le fo r fo o tb a ll
                   and rugby s ta d ia , but may be s u ita b le fo r o th e r s p o rts .



Chapter 11         FIRE SAFETY


Paragraph 169      I n s e r t 'P r io r to every event commencing o r ending during the
                   hours o f darkness, th e emergency lig h tin g s h a ll be te s te d by
                   o p eratio n .



Chapter 12         COMMUNICATIONS

Paragraph 19^(1)   In se rt     ’key p o in ts    to be considered;             tu rn s tile s ,    stew ard’s
                   c o n tro l p o in t, s e c r e ta r y 's o f f ic e , r e f e r e e ’s room, a d v e rtisin g
                   board c o n tro l, c h ie f f i r e m arshal, stadium lig h tin g c o n tro l.
                                                   - 3-

                          match doctor, c asu a lty clearance p o in ts and f i r s t aid room.
                          There should be a minimum o f two e x te rn a l telephone lin e s fo r
                          the c o n tro l rooms' .

             19 ^ (v i)   I n s e r t ’the C.C.T.V. system s h a ll be m aintained in good working
                          order to th e s a tis f a c tio n o f the p o lic e ’ .



Chapter 13                STEWARDING


Paragraph 197             I n s e r t ’id e a lly aged between 18 and 55 y e a rs ’ . Also *no person
                          s h a ll be employed as a steward u n less he/she has received
                          proper tra in in g and in s tr u c tio n ’ . The tra in in g should include:


                            (i)     Recognition o f sig n s o f d i s t r e s s and crowd dynamics in
                                    te rra c e d are a s.


                           (ii)     Emergency procedure fo r any emergency including the
                                    evacuation o f a pen, area o r stadium .


                          (iii)     A ll aspects o f stew ards' r e s p o n s ib ilitie s .

Paragraph 199             Commence paragraph w ith - 'R egular e x e rc ise s r e la tin g to the
                          above emergency procedures w ill be held during the month
                          preceding the s t a r t o f each fo o tb all/ru g b y season and
                          th e r e a f te r a t le a s t once every 3 months'.

Paragraph 199             I n s e r t a t the end o f the paragraph - 'At l e a s t 14 days' n o tic e
                          o f the in te n tio n to hold such e x e rc ise s and tr a in in g se ssio n s,
                          should be given to the P o lice Natch Commander, th e Licensing
                          A uthority and F ire and Ambulance S erv ices,       to enable
                          re p re se n ta tiv e s to a t t e n d '.



Chapter 15                PITCH PERIMETER FENCE/WALL


Paragraph 215             I n s e r t a t Line 11 - 'Each gate in the perim eter fence which
                          a ffo rd s access to the p itc h should be manned by a steward when
                          the pen o r enclosure i s o c c u p ie d '.
                                             -   4   -




Paragraph 215      Add to the end o f the paragraph - ’A ll g ates to the p itc h
                   should be kept f u lly open during the p erio d when sp e c ta to rs are
                   in the pens o r enclo sures, whenever the P o lice Match Commander
                   f e e ls th a t t h is can be sa fe ly done.    Whether they be f u lly
                   open, p a r t i a l l y open o r closed, they should be kept unlocked
                   throughout the period when th e pens o r enclosures are occupied.

Annex B - STEWARDING should a lso include:


                   1.   The m onitoring o f th e crowd throughout the ground fo r sig ns
                        o f d is tr e s s and overcrowding in te rra c e d areas and the
                        n o tif ic a tio n o f such, to the n e a re st p o lic e o f f ic e r who can
                        a u th o rise access onto the p itc h in an emergency.


                   2.   Maintenance of crowd segregation and th e m onitoring o f the
                        movement o f sp e c ta to rs between areas o f the ground to
                        ensure c a p a c itie s a re not exceeded.


                   3-   Control      o f t u r n s t i l e s , gates and e x its including the
                        clo su re   o f t u r n s t i l e s when the cap acity f o r a p a r tic u la r
                        area i s    about to be reached. The P o lice Match Commander
                        may a lso    au th o rise the clo su re o f the t u r n s t i l e s .


                   4.   The d iv e rtin g of sp e c ta to rs to o th er areas o f the stadium
                        when the capacity fo r th a t area i s about to be reached.
                        (The P o lice Match Commander may a ls o a u th o rise the
                        d iv ersio n of s p e c ta to r s ) .


                   5«   Manning o f a l l e x its inclu din g each perim eter fence gate.

                   6.   The sa fe evacuation o f sp e c ta to rs from any area in the
                        stadium or the whole o f the stadium should the need a ris e .

                   7*   Prevention o f p itc h invasion.


                   8.   Manning     of    parking        areas   to   ensure      a ll     approaches,
                        emergency e x its are kept c le a r and                th a t    v eh icles   are
                        c o rre c tly parked in club c ar parks.
                                                 -   5   -




                         9-   Use o f the emergency c u ttin g equipment a t th e d ire c tio n of
                              the p o lic e .

                         1 0 . A ssistin g th e p o lic e to id e n tify sp e c ta to rs who are banned
                              from the ground by th e clu b, those persons who do not
                              possess tic k e ts a t "All T icket" matches or persons in
                              possession o f forged tic k e ts .


                         11. Deeding w ith breaches o f ground re g u la tio n s .


                         The p o lic e should a s s i s t stewards with th ese task s a t          the
                         d is c re tio n o f the P o lice Commander.



A dditional P o in ts:


                         D iffe re n tia tio n i s necessary between the requirements fo r
                         various s ta d ia , fo r example, the implementation o f se a tin g .
                         There should a lso be a d if f e r e n tia tio n of mandatory elements
                         from the lim its o f f l e x i b i l i t y fo r d isc re tio n a ry elem ents.


                         Any recommendations o r d ire c tio n s should include a referen ce to
                         rele v a n t b u ild in g o r o th e r re g u la tio n s .


                         The maximum lim it of 660 persons per hour as a n o tio n al flow
                         r a te per t u r n s t i l e in Recommendation 10 Lord J u s tic e T aylor’s
                         Report and Chapter 5, paragraph 47 o f the ’Green Guide’ should
                         include a fig u re o f 500 as a median u nless the c e r tif y in g
                         a u th o rity approves to the co n trary up to th e proposed upper
                         lim it o f 660 persons per hour.
                                                              All correspondence must be
                                                              addressed to the Chief Constable

                                                              X Department

   ^                    i                                     P 0 Box 47 <S West PDO)
                                                              Chester House
                    /                                        Boyer Street
, * * [ ] 11 Y |>                                            Manchester M16 OSD
                                                              Telephone 061 855
                                                              Fax 061 872 4145    2892

                                                              Our reference XA1/PJH/DL
       Mr Alan Brown
       G2 D ivision                                          Your reference
       Room 920                                              When calling or telephoning
       Home O ffice                                          please ask for
       Queen Ann's Gate
       LONDON                                                Date                    jggo
       SW1H 9AT




       Dear Mr Brown

       GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS (GREEN GUIDE)

       The Chief Constable has asked me to rep ly to your l e t t e r dated 10th A p ril,
       1990, concerning the re v isio n o f the Guide to S afety a t Sports Grounds
       (Green Guide).

       Enclosed i s synopsis of observations received from the Chief Constables of
       England and Wales in response to your req u est which confirms the d e ta ils
       conveyed in a telephone conversation between In sp ecto r Hammond and Mr.
       Mold.

       Yours sin c e re ly




                Superintendent
                                  A SYNOPSIS OF OBSERVATIONS
                                CONCERNING THE GUIDE TO SAFETY
                                        AT SPORTS GROUNDS




A ll the recommendations contained in Lord J u s tic e T a y lo r's Fined Report which
add to o r amend the c u rren t 'Guide to Safety a t Sports Grounds' should be
incorporated in to the rev ised e d itio n . In clu sio n o f th e recommendations o f the
Technical Working P arty (Appendix 3 o f th e Fined Report) are edso recommended
fo r c o n sid era tio n , to g eth er with The Engineering Appraised o f Sports Grounds by
the I n s t i t u t e o f S tructured Engineers.



CHAPTER 1


Paragraphs 5 and 6


The guide should apply to a minimum standard fo r edl sp o rts s ta d ia and not
p rim arily fo o tb a ll s ta d ia .


A sep arate se c tio n should be a llo tte d to fo o tb a ll s ta d ia .


Any d ev iatio n s from minimum standards should be su b je c t to approval of Advisory
Groups.



CHAPTER 2


To include Role o f Local A uthority as the enforcement agency fo r Safety a t
Sports Ground Act 1975 e t c . , le g is la tio n in re sp e c t o f designated grounds and
reg u lated sta n d s.


Paragraph 23


Ground Management re s p o n s ib ility fo r sp e c ta to r sa fe ty i s   in urgent need of
s c r u tin is in g and re v isio n in wake of Hillsborough.


Statement o f I n te n t has been drawn up and care needs to be taken in r e - d r a f t to
ensure o v e ra ll re s p o n s ib ility fo r sa fe ty o f p u blic in sid e the ground continues
to be re s te d in those who stag e the event and adm inister the ground.
                                                 -2 -

       I H|1l   ~ 1 f   I)




Needs to emphasise the sa fe ty o f f ic e r should have no o th er commitments when a
stadium i s                in use, which would d e tr a c t th a t person from h is /h e r
r e s p o n s i b i li t i e s .


The Safety O fficer Bust wear apparel which re a d ily i d e n t i f ie s him to persons
using the stadium, e .g . Tabard or Arm-band.


The job d e sc rip tio n should a ls o be included in an annex to th e guide.



CHAPTER ^


A dditional paragraph to include the lo c a l a u th o rity and p o lic e o u st be informed
o f the e re c tio n and placement o f new and proposed s tr u c tu r e s , temporary or
permanent.



CHAPTER 4


Paragraph 42


To include:


ensuring a l l in g re s s, e g re ss, emergency e x its and ro u tes are no t o b stru cted by
permanent o r temporary s tru c tu re s and b u ild in g s, e . g . , mobile c a te rin g v e h ic le s.



CHAPTER 5


Guidance i s req u ired fo r t u r n s t i l e la y -o u t and advice on maximising flows
through t u r n s t i l e s , e .g ., requirem ents fo r exact money. No r e s t r i c ti o n s before
tu rn s tile s .

Paragraph 5


Should apply to a l l grounds - being necessary to ensure ground c a p a c itie s are
not exceeded.
                                                   -   3   -




^    hapter_6


    To include:


    Design c r i t e r i a requ ired to ensure s u f f ic ie n t egress p o in ts from stoats to place
    o f sa fe ty .


    To ensure th e c o n stru ctio n o f a moat does no t disadvantage the p o lic e and
    stewards by way o f d if f e r e n t observation le v e ls from th e sp e c ta to rs a t egress
    p o in ts fo r m aintaining c o n tro l.


    Advice on th e i n s t a l l a t i o n o f electro-m agnetic locks on e x it g ates from c e n tra l
    c o n tr o l.



    CHAPTERS 8 AND 16


    1)    The e x te n t to which ' free -flo w ' a t sp o rts grounds a ff e c ts the b a sis of
          c a lc u la tin g safe cap acity should be considered in d e ta i l:


          a)    The re la tio n s h ip between covered and uncovered p a rts o f the ground in
                adverse weather co n d itio n s.


          b)    Movement throughout the game, e sp e c ia lly a t h a lf-tim e .


    2)    Use o f playing su rface fo r non-sporting ev en ts, e . g . , pop con certs.
          Methods o f fre e flow and c a lc u la tio n o f s p e c ta to r d e n s itie s .



    CHAPTER 16


    Paragraph 224 should r e f e r to Local A uthority fo r c a lc u la tin g sa fe capacity
    le v e ls , n o t the Ground management.
                                               -   4   -




          10

Paragraph 124


   (i)       Should inclu de, the se a ts should be o f such durable s ty le and m aterial
             and fixed in manner th a t they cannot be re a d ily removed and used as a
             weapon o r m is sile .


 (ii)        Areas o f se a tin g should be spaced            as   to   a ffo rd   access   w ithout
             hindrance to the emergency se rv ic e s.



Paragraph 1^1


E xternal fa c to rs such as wind forces are only b r i e f l y re fe rre d to in th is
s e c tio n , fo r temporary stands and s tru c tu r e s .


I t would a s s i s t i f a sa fe wind force lim it fo r s tru c tu re s could be s p e c ifie d fo r
the c o n stru ctio n o f stand ro o fin g and the sa fe ty o f sp e c ta to rs .


Also, a sp e c ifie d wind force fo r co nsideration to be given to postponement o f an
event o r evacuation o f a stadium.



CHAPTER 12


INCLUSION OF GROUND REGULATIONS

Paragraph 19^


Minimum s p e c if ic a tio n should be suggested which would accommodate equipment and
personnel necessary to e ff e c tiv e ly manage and monitor crowd s a fe ty and con tro l
in both normal circum stances and in th e event o f an emergency.             I t should
in co rp o rate Recommendation 43 o f Lord J u s tic e T a y lo r's F in al Report.

Paragraph 194


To include:


Must r e f e r to a l l designated sp o rts grounds.
                                                 -   5   -




   ( i)    To read to complement radio communications, th e re should be a completely
           se p ara te system o f land lin e s with telephone lin k s between the p o lice
           co n tro l room and key p o in ts a t the stadium.


 (ii)     There should be a v a ila b le in the p o lic e co n tro l room, the record o f any
           e le c tro n ic or »echanical counting o f numbers a t t u r n s t il e s o r o f numbers
           adm itted to any area of th e ground.


(iii)     A p u blic address system to communicate w ith in d iv id u a l areas in s id e and
           o u tsid e the ground, with groups o f areas o r w ith th e whole ground.
           Im portant announcements should be preceded by a lo c a l sig n a l to catch
           the a tte n tio n o f the crowd, d e sp ite high le v e l o f noise in the ground.
           This arrangement should be prominently ad v ertised on every programme
           so ld fo r every match.


           Adding the word 'independently' a f t e r 'ad d ressin g messages to each major
           se c tio n o f the g ro u n d '.


           A dditionally


  (i)     A new paragraph to include:


          A plan o f the stadium should be published in every programme fo r every
          match, in d ic a tin g a l l the emergency e x it s , eg ress ro u tes and e x its
          a v a ila b le fo r use during the course o f an event.


 (ii)     There should be a s u ita b le room a v a ila b le fo r the b r ie f in g o f a l l p o lice
          o f f ic e r s and stewards p r io r to the commencement o f an event.


(iii)     The power supply to the Control Room should be such as to enable i t to
           continue to op erate in an emergency o r a f a ilu r e o f power.


  (v)     There should be a command channel reserved so le ly fo r the P olice
           Commander to communicate with h is se n io r o f f ic e r s round the ground.


 (vi)     There should be a v a ila b le in the p o lic e co n tro l room the r e s u lts o f a l l
          closed c i r c u i t te le v is io n m onitoring o u tsid e and in sid e the ground.        It
          should be so in s ta lle d as to enable crowd d e n s itie s o u tsid e the ground,
          w ithin concourse areas and in pens and o th e r standing a re a s, to be
          monitored befo re, throughout and a t the end o f an event.
                                                     -   6   -




^MATTER 13


 Wearing o f flu o resc e n t ja c k e ts o f d if f e r e n t colours denoting stew ards, f i r e
 m arshals, inclu din g the emergency se rv ic e s, i . e . , P o lic e , F ire , Ambulance,
 should be s tip u la te d .

 Paragraph 197


 Should sp e cify physical f itn e s s , s u i t a b i l i t y and c a p a b ility .

 Annex B


 To include stewards being conversant with Club Ground R egulations and the
 enforcement of same.



 CHAPTER Ik


 Should a lso r e f e r to ad vising clubs to a d v e rtise in programmes and on n o tic e s
 the tr a n s fe r r in g from one se c tio n to another w ithin the stadium i s p ro h ib ite d .

 Paragraph 210


 Should read:


 At a l l designated sp o rts grounds and o th er s ta d ia , p a r tic u la r ly where th ere has
 been a record o f frequent crowd tro u b le , secure d e te n tio n rooms must be
 a v a ila b le fo r use by the p o lic e .
                                                   -   7   -




         15.

Advice on type o f perim eter fencing.

To include:


S u itab le and s u f f ic ie n t c u ttin g equipment should be a v a ila b le fo r immediate use
where th ere are perim eter fences to perm it th e removal o f enough fencing to
re le a s e numbers o f sp e c ta to rs i f necessary. An employee o f th e stadium should
be tra in e d in the use o f the equipment.               The d ecisio n to use th e c u ttin g
equipment should be a d ecisio n o f the P o lice Stadium Commander.

Paragraph 215


I t would be h e lp fu l to d istin g u is h between a fence o r wall which serves to
se p ara te the p laying area from sp e c ta to r accommodation and, a perim eter fence
which a c ts as a b a r r ie r to discourage access to the playing area.



NEW CHAPTER TO INCLUDE:


Emergency Services


  i)     A c h ie f p o lic e   o f f ic e r   should l i a i s e   with   the management o f     each
         designated sp o rts s ta d ia and lo c a l a u th o rity in re sp e c t o f the sa fe ty
         and co n tro l o f crowds.


 ii)     The p o lic e , f i r e , ambulance and stewards employed in the s ta d ia should
         wear d is tin c tiv e ja c k e ts/ta b a rd s with a colour code th a t id e n t i f ie s each
         se rv ic e .
                                                           ° ^ jvded


                              THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIM ITED
Lytham St Annes, Lancashire, FY8 I |G Telephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                           Secretary |. D. Dent




5/8100                                                                                                          30th May, 1990.




A. Brown, E sq.,
92 D ivision,
Rocxn 920,
Heme O ffice,
Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON,
SW1H 9AT.


Dear Mr. Brown,

        Thank you f o r your l e t t e r of 10th A p ril.

       Please fin d enclosed our comments and suggestions on the re v isio n of
th e Green Guide. These rep resen t f i r s t thoughts on th e su b ject and we would
value th e opportunity to see and content on th e d r a f t of th e rev ised Guide
in due course.


                                                    Yours sin c e re ly




                                                          S ecretary .
Enclosure.




              All correspondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
                         THE FOOTBALL LEftGUE LIMITED

          COMEMTS AMD SUGGESTIONS ON THE REVISION OF THE GREEN GUIDE

The Green Guide

      In the joint FA/FL submission to Taylor, we reccrrmended that certain
parts of the Green Guide should be made mandatory. The Technical Working
Party set up by Lord Justice Taylor saw serious difficulties in giving the
Green Guide legal force, but reccrrmended that a much higher degree of
standardisation than presently prevails should be sought in practice.
Despite this, perhaps we should still be pressing for the Guide to carry
mare weight than it does at present. It is highly desirable, frcm a club's
point of view, that whatever guidance is put out carries sufficient detail
and information for the club's professional advisers to be able to perform
their functions without the problems of interpretation that axe currently
experienced. Where there are variations, examples of best practice should
be included in the Guide.

      We feel that, in order to give the Guide greater emphasis, a new title
for the Guide should be considered. We would suggest 'Advice on the Safety
and Control of Spectators at Sporting Events'.

      Where we speak about individual responsibilities in the Guide, these
should be clearly defined. This is an area where we consider the
recommended letter of intent should have proninence and maybe the Guide
should contain a specimen letter of intent. In the light of the fact that
there still appears to be no model for a safety certificate and bearing in
mind the introduction of the Football Licensing Authority, it is considered
that a model safety certificate should be included in the Guide.

      Appreciating the fact that the League and FA have accepted Lord
Justice Taylor's reccrrmendation to establish an Advisory Design Council, it
is considered that the Government should also make available the expert
advice that they have within their own departments and offer this in the
Guide.

S eating/Standing

      Whilst accepting the safety factor of seats, a seated area is still no
guarantee for good behaviour and is more difficult to police. People
standing can move away frcm troublemakers; people in seats cannot.

      The Football League, vrould favour the retention of a percentage of
safely-constructed standing areas at grounds. We feel that rather than
having to achieve all-seater status, clubs should have to meet a given
percentage of seats within their ground. This point was made in the FA/FL
submission to Lord Justice Taylor.

      We understand that new monitoring equipment is now available to
measure the stress applied to crush barriers at matches. We would like to
see further evidence on the capabilities of this monitoring equipment.

Seating

      Any section in the new Green Guide on seating should contain firm
guidance on design and construction.

                                    - 1 -
Capacities

      This has already been commented upon by Lord Justice Taylor in his
Final Report, but we feel that any section dealing with capacities should be
clearly written and unequivocable. We have already experienced various
interpretations since the publication of the final Taylor Report and this is
an area that is crucial to the whole subject of crowd safety and control.

      We note the view expressed by Taylor's Technical Working Party that
the lawsr packing density figure of 2.7/m^ should be abolished. We feel it
should be made clear, however, that if a terraced area does not meet the
higher figure, then it does not automatically mean that the area's capacity
should be 0. We feel that this point should be clarified in the revised
Green Guide.

      We note that clubs have new got to be able to exit people onto the
pitch in an emergency as quickly as people would leave the ground under
normal circumstances. We feel that the emergency exit arrangements should
include sideways exit frcm the terraces (where this is possible) as well as
going forwards onto the pitch.

Separation o f viewing a re a s and p itc h

      If it is acknowledged that the preservation of the playing area is an
Important aspect of ground safety and crow3     control, then we feel that the
Guide should say so and the Guide should equally giveguidance on the types
of measures that should be taken, again to ensure standardisation throughout
the country.

Crush Barriers

      The Guide must contain advice on the siting of crush barriers that
cannot be miscontrued and this should not be related to the average numbers
of spectators, but the maximum numbers likely to be in any area.

Stairways and ranps

      We feel it is important to emphasise the difference between stairways
and ramps on stands as opposed to stairways     and rampsleading up to stands.
We note that this point is picked up in the     TechnicalWorking Party Report.

Ingress

      As turnstiles will open If hours prior to kick-off, we feel that If
hours should be the timescale against which the maximum notional flow-rate
of turnstile admissions should be measured. We also feel that a higher
maximum notional flcw-rate should be allowed for all-ticket matches, as
speed of entry is always quicker vfoen there is no cash changing hands. We
would suggest a figure of 750 as a higher notional flow-rate.

Egress

      We note that the Technical Working Party reccrrmends that, where
reservoir areas cannot be rsnoved frcm egress routes, a lower density of 35-
40 persons per 10 sq. metres be substituted for the current figure. We feel
that clarification is needed on the removal of reservoir areas and on why
there should be a further lower figure.

                                         - 2-
Medical Facilities

      It is our opinion that the Guide should contain minimum standards of
first aid facilities; it being appreciated that these are already
incorporated in the majority of safety certificates. In an attempt to
standardise this situation the League has set up a Medical Working Party who
are currently looking at this issue.


                                                             30th May, 1990.
        _ Cyrvgor                                               The Sporty
        Chwcircieon                                             Council For
                                                                  Walci
CadeirYdd/Chairman: John H. ftjwell OBE MC                       Gerddi Sophia /Sophia Gardens.
Cyfarwyddwr/Director: Linford Tatham                             CaerdydO/Cardiff CF1 9SW.
                                                                 9 0222 397571
Ein Cyf/Our Ref                              Eich CyfAour Ref    Dyddiad/Date



         SCW9/18/A                                                              18 May 1990

        Mr Alan Brown
        G2 Division
        Room 920
        Home Office
        Queen Anne's Gate
        LONDON
        SW1H 9AT


        Dear Mr Brown

        GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS (»GREEN GUIDE*)

        Thank you for your letter of 10 April 1990.

        At this stage it seems appropriate to confine comments to matters
        of general principle and to review details on receipt of your
        draft.

        In submitting evidence to Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry the Sports
        Council for Wales discussed the role of the Green Guide and
        recommended it be expanded to embrace other relevant sports
        facilities and pressed for its advice to be mandatory.        Lord
        Justice Taylor thought local discretion overrode that argument. A
        local   authority may impose Green Guide advice as a provision of
        its Safety Certificate, indicating whether compliance is to be
        absolute or discretionary. Taylor recommended that the inclusion
        of some of the Green Guide provision in the Safety Certificate be
        obligatory.

        Lord Justice Taylor noted:

        "Such   flexibility is obviously highly desirable in relation to
        some    aspects of the guidance.       Butflexibility  can become
        degraded.    Where a local authority has chosen to incorporate the
        criteria of the Green Guide into a Safety Certificate there has
        been scope for considerable deviation from provisions which ought
        to command standard adherence. Thus, for example, at Hillsborough
        where the Safety Certificate required compliance with certain
        Green   Guide recommendations anda departure was shown to have
        occurred,   the defence was that the Guide expressly provided for
        flexibility so that a deviation from its provisions was a matter
        of legitimate discretion."

                                                                                contd/.
-   2   -



18 May 1990

Mr Alan Brown



The Sports Council for Vales agrees wholeheartedly with this
analysis of the problem but would respectfully disagree with the
solution recommended. While there remains a ready defence for
non-compliance the risk of complacency will remain with it.   If
compromise is required on this issue it might be appropriate for
local authorities to obtain written consent from the Football
Licensing Authority for any deviation from the Green Guide. This
would provide the flexibility desired by Lord Justice Taylor
without weakening safeguards.

I hope these comments are of assistance to you.

Yours sincerely




senior Planning Officer
 Royal Institute of British Architects 66 Portland Place London W1N 4AD ® 071-580 5533
 MJV/S/1625/BCC                                 30 May 1990                  ext 4245
 Your ref : FEP/90 35/35/1




 A Brown Esq
 Room 920
 G2 Division
 Home Office
 Queen Anne's Gate
 London SW1H 9AT




 Guide to safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide)

 I write with further reference to your letter dated 10 April, and
 my acknowledgement of the 3 May in respect of the above matter.

 The Institute's Building Control Committee, Chairman Mr Sydney E Bell,
 met on the 22 May and considered the request contained in your letter
 for constructive comment on matters they would like to see addressed
 in the revision of the Green Guide.   I attach for the Division's
 consideration a copy of the relevent minutes of the Committee's
 meeting, which it is hoped will be of assistance.

 We look forward to receiving a copy of the draft revised Guide in
 due course, and if in the intervening time it is thought that we may
 assist the Division further then pleae do not hesitate to get in touch
 with me.




Secretary]
Building Itontrol Committee




Fax: 071-255 1541   Telex: 262433 MONREF 6 quoting ref 2931           P rinted on recycled paper
         Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide)

 5.01    The Committee noted the Home Office's invitation for comments, in the
         light of Lord Justice Taylor's final report on the inquiry into the
         Hillsborough Stadium Disaster which recommended that the content of
         the Green Guide be reviewed, to assist the Department in preparing a
         revised Guide and which would be made available to interested consultees
         prior to publication latter this year.   The Committee recognised
         that the subject matter concerned concentrationsof people, and where
         they were accomodated in grandstands - buildings for people.

 5.02    Dr Marchant welcomed the opportunity to consider the content of the
         Guide, declaring his interest by being concerned with the four Ibrox
         stands.

5.03     It was noted that the Guide provided guidance to ground management,
         local authorities and technical specialists on measures for improving
         spectator safety at existing grounds. It set, para 7, minimum
         standards which new grounds would be expected to meet, although the
         scope offered by new design work should lead to better standards than
         can be achieved at grounds already built.   The Guide had developed out
         of the Wheatley Report on Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds, 1972. Football
         stadia were covered.

5.11    Egress was considered to be a significant factor. Earagraph 56 reported
        research indicated that when it took more than seven minutes to vacate
        a defined area of terraced spectator accomodation, the crowd flow tended
        to become turbulent.   In those conditions the rate of flow might be
        reduced and individuals could loose control of their own movements.   The
        Guide recommended that exits from each area of spectator accomodation
        should be so designed that all spectators could leave that area, and if
        desired, pass into a free flowing exit route system in eight minutes or
        less.

5.12    The Committee believed more guidance should be given thereon. The movement
        of people should be further considered and help given on the effect of
        obstacles - changes in direction - on the flow of people.   It would be
        helpful for designers, and others, to have reassurance that the period of
        eight minutes, rather than seven minutes, remained justifiable, with
        the research source given as a footnote.

5.21    The Committee remains concerned that there should be adequate control
        into the ground. It recognises that greater problems may arise in
        inner city situations where because of restricted space around the
        ground there is a tendency for bunching of people to occour, sometimes
        on a massive scale,, and that the police will have greater difficulties
        in crowd control, and need to sort out those with and without tickets.
        It therefore needs to be recognised that facilities for control at the
        turnstiles need to be considered in relationship to the possible external
        controls.

5.22    The Committee consider greater guidance should be given on the arrangement
        of terraces, which may well be with us at least until the close of the
        century.   Fourth division clubs may face the greatest problems in meeting
        the recommendations of the final report, but as the report states, para
               e safety °* spectators cannot be left to depend upon the
        affluence of the club.   It is considered from a safety point of view that
        long thin terraces are preferable, segregated horizontally, to arrangements
        where many tiers are incorporated in one enclosure.   But the Guide eives
        little guidance thereon.
  5.23    The Committee noted paragraphs 161 - 172 of the final report concerning
          the maximum density allowable on terraces.   Therein attention is called
          to the behaviour of people when excited, if they sway to and fro then
         there is a tendency for a person to occupy more space - especially at
         the perimeter of a group - and if one end of the area is a better
         viewing point than another.    The Guide sets a m a x im um density of 5 4
         people per 10 square metres, a figure which as demonstrated can under
         some circumstances be a high density.    The report calls into question
         paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Guide wherein a packing density of between
         54 and 27 persons per 10 square metres, depending upon the condition
         of the terrace or slope is given.    Whilst the final report calls for a
              ^^ction in density, it also calls into question the retention of
         the lower, 27, figure considering it could be a dangerous suggestion.
         The Committee recommends that the Home Office should review the content
         of the Guide, give clearer guidance, and in doing so take note of the
         Practices adopted in other European Countries which are referred to in
         the final report.
 5.31    The Committee considered that in recommendation 50 of the final report,
         concerning the possibility of early kick-off, especially for high-risk
         matches, (or playing on Sunday)the significance was not clear.    It was
         xmportant m the case of high-risk matches to give consideration to where
         to hold it, what alternative neutral venues were possible, and alternatively
         whether there were advantages in playing the match in the evening.
         Clearly a wide range of matters should be taken into consideration,
         especially if the clubs grounds in question were located in town centres.
5.41     The Committee noted the reference in the final report to the strength
         of crush barriers, and the guidance given thereon in the Guide. It is
         considered that the guidance should be more clearly expressed, and that
         it should extend to recommendations for periodic re-inspections and test
         to determine that the barriers were still satisfactory after a period of
         use and exposure to the climatoic elements.   Advice on methods of test
         should be given.

5.51     The Secretary was asked to communicate the Committee's views to the
         Home Office.




Building Control Committee
Royal Institute of British Architects
22 May 1990
                                                                     MJV/S/BCC
FAX NO 0 8 1 -5 7 9 -6 8 7 2                            LONDON DISTRICT
                                                     SURVEYORS ASSOCIATION
Mr A la n Brown
G2 D i v i s i o n Room 920
Home O f f i c e
Q ueen A n n e 's G a te
London SW1H 9AT


                                                                                                                             DIRECT
Y our R e f                   My R e f                        D a te              P le a s e a sk f o r                      LINE
                              LDSA.8                        2 7 .4 .9 0           P S Joh nso n                       0 8 1 -8 4 0 -4 7 9 3



D e a r Mr Brown

GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ('GREEN GUIDE')
I r e f e r t o o u r r e c e n t t e l e p h o n e c o n v e r s a t i o n an d y o u r l e t t e r o f 1 0 th
A p r i l 1990.

I c a n now c o n f ir m t h a t t h e A s s o c i a t i o n h a s n o m in a te d
o f L ondon B o ro ug h o f Richm ond u p o n Thames t o p a r t i c i p a t e                                                   in     th e
a b o v e w o r k in g p a r t y .

P le a s e n o tif y                        d i r e c t o f t h e r e l e v a n t m e e tin g d a t e s .                               H is
a d d r e s s : i s C i v i c C e n t r e , 4 4 , Y ork S t r e e t , T w ickenham , TW1 3BZ.

I h a v e b e e n a s k e d by t h e A s s o c i a t i o n 's W o rk ing P a r t y o n S a f e t y o f
S p o r t s G ro un ds t o d raw y o u r a t t e n t i o n t o t h e f o l l o w i n g i te m s w h ic h
i t i s c o n s i d e r e d s h o u l d b e a d d r e s s e d d u r i n g t h e r e v ie w :

1.       EMERGENCY LIGHTING -                            SPECTATOR VIEWING AREAS
             I t i s f e l t t h a t t h e minimum l e v e l o f i l l u m i n a n c e p r o v i d e d by
             e m e rg e n c y l i g h t i n g i n c o v e r e d s p e c t a t o r v i e w in g a r e a s s h o u ld
             be in e x c e ss o f th e              'n o r m a l ' s t a n d a r d u s e d f o r e x i t r o u t e s .
             P a q r a g r a p h 166 o f t h e "G re en G u id e " r e f e r s t o B S .5 2 6 6 : P a r t 1
             o n l y and c o n t a i n s no a d d i t i o n a l com m entry o r a d v i c e i n r e s p e c t
             o f t h e s e a r e a s w h ic h , i n t h e e v e n t o f f a i l u r e o f b r i g h t
             f l o o d l i g h t s , m ig h t n o t b e a d e q u a t e l y s e r v e d by t h e low l e v e l
             o f i l l u m i n a t i o n p r o v i d e d by a n e m e rg en c y l i g h t i n g             sy s te m
             m e e tin g BS c r i t e r i a f o r a u d i t o r i a , e t c .


C o n t' d




                        President. KJ. Mullins, P.P.IA.S,F.IA.S,M.I.B.C,PO Box 52. Civic Centre, Infield, SN1 3XD,
                    Hon. Secretary;- P.S. Johnson. A.M.C.^,M.IJLS, Civic Centre, 14-16 Uxbridge Road. London WS 2TH
          The A s s o c i a t i o n 's M e c h a n ic a l a n d E l e c t r i c a l S u b -C o m m itte e a r e
          t o p r e p a r e a p a p e r o n t h i s s u b j e c t an d I w i l l , o f c o u r s e ,
          f o r w a r d a copy o f t h i s i n d ue c o u r s e .                 I n t h e m e a n tim e , I
          w o u ld r e q u e s t t h a t t h e i s s u e o f l e v e l s o f i l l u m i n a n c e o f
          e m e rg e n c y l i g h t i n g t o s p e c t a t o r v ie w in g a r e a s b e a d d r e s s e d i n
          t h e f o r th c o m in g r e v ie w o f t h e G u id e an d w o u ld w elcom e t h e
          o p p o r t u n i t y t o c o n t r i b u t e f u r t h e r s h o u l d you f e e l t h a t t h i s
          m ig h t b e u s e f u l .

2.        FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY - SAFETY CERTIFICATE
          Members            of    th e   A s s o c i a t i o n 's S a fe ty       of     S p o rts   G rounds
          C o m m ittee h a v e c o n s i d e r e d t h e p r o d u c t i o n o f g u id a n c e i n t h e
          form o f a "m odel c e r t i f i c t e " w i t h a v ie w t o a c h i e v i n g a d e g r e e
          o f u n i f o r m i t y i n t h e c o n t e n t o f C e r t i f i c a t e s i s s u e d i n L ondon.
          Such a n o b j e c t i v e w o u ld c l e a r l y              re q u ire       th e use       of  a
          s u b s ta n tia l p ro p o rtio n o f th e re s o u rc e s a v a ila b le to th e
          C o m m ittee and i t o c c u r s t o me t h a t t h i s m ig h t anyway b e a
          d u p l i c a t i o n o f w o rk t h a t i s t o b e c a r r i e d o u t by t h e F .L .A .

          I w o u ld b e p l e a s e d t h e r e f o r e i f you c o u ld c o n f ir m w h e t h e r o r
          n o t i t i s y o u r i n t e n t i o n t h a t t h e F .L .A . w i l l p r o d u c e a "m odel
          c e rtific a te "        o r o t h e r s i m i l a r d ocu m en t f o r i n d i v i d u a l L o c a l
          A u t h o r i t i e s t o u s e i n c o n n e c t i o n w i t h g ro u n d s d e s i g n a t e d u n d e r
          t h e 1975 A c t.

I n o r d e r t h a t t h e A s s o c i a t i o n c a n p r o g r e s s t h e i s s u e o f g u id a n c e t o
member a u t h o r i t i e s a n e a r l y i n d i c a t i o n o f y o u r i n t e n t i o n s i n r e s p e c t
of     (2 ) a b o v e w o u ld b e g r e a t l y a p p r e c i a t e d .

Y ours s i n c e r e l y



Hon. S e c r e t a r y
                                                                                                                    BUILDING CONTROL
                                                                                                                    Mr L M Handley
                                                                                                                    Extension: 7346



                                                                                              Our r e f :           BC/IMH/CW/SSG
                                                LONDON DISTRICT                               Your r e f : FEP/90 35/35/1
                                             SURVEYORS ASSOCIATION
                                                                                              25th June 1990


Epr the a tte n tio n o f Mr A Brown

F ire and Emergency Planning Department
The Home O ffice
Queen Anne's Gate
London    SW1H 9AT


Dear Mr Brown,

Review of the Green Guide

I thank you fo r your l e t t e r o f 12th June 1990 and confirm th a t I s h a ll be
atten d in g the meeting on 2nd Ju ly 1990.

I t i s noted th a t you wrote to various in te r e s te d p a r tie s as long ago as 10th
A pril 1990 asking fo r suggestions to improve and update the p resen t Green
Guide but re g re t to say th a t I cannot tra c e the r e c e ip t o f your l e t t e r by the
LDSA.

In the hope th a t i t i s not yet too la te I a tta c h a schedule of items which
might be put before the working p a rty fo r co n sid eratio n .
Yours sin c e re ly




L M Handlev



Please re p ly to :

Convenor, Sports Grounds Committee
c/o London Borough of Richmond
Civic Centre, 44 York S tre e t
Twickenham, Middlesex, TW1 3BZ

WP0809S




           P re sid en t- ICJ. Mullins. P .P .tA .S .FJA .S . M.LB.C. PO Bo* 52. Civic C entre. Enfield. EN1 3X0.
       Mon. S ecretary- P.S. Johnson. A.R.t.C.C.M.i.A.S.Civic Centre. 1*-16 U xbridge Ro»d. London W 5 2TH
            Schedule of Items for Green Guide Revlev




Reference                                    g


                The guide i s inconvenient to use and could be b e tte r
                presen ted i f published in s im ila r siz e and format to
                the Approved Documents supporting the Building
                Regulations 1985.

                More use should be made o f drawings and diagrams to
                i l l u s t r a t e the te x t. This could a lso serve to reduce
                the need fo r lengthy w ritte n explanation and could
                p resen t the recommendations in an e a rly understood
                manner.

                The guide i s su rp risin g ly s i l e n t on the f a c i l i t i e s to
                be provided to ensure adequate f i r s t a id
                arrangements. The term "advanced f i r s t aid" a lso
                needs an a u th o ra ta tiv e d e fin itio n .

                A ty p ic a l sa fe ty c e r t i f i c a t e should be incorporated as
                an appendix to the guide. I f i t i s not f e l t p o ssib le
                to provide th is then a t le a s t a l i s t o f standard
                clauses could.be provided to cover such items as
                ro u tin e s tr u c tu r a l surveys, e le c t r i c a l i n s ta lla tio n s
                and te s tin g e t c . .

                The guide should provide a c le a re r in d ic a tio n o f those
                clauses thought in -ap p ro p riate fo r the assessment of
                "Regulated Stands".

                An index should be provided.

                An appendix should be provided in d ic a tin g the re le v a n t
                le g is la tio n a p p liab le to sp o rts grounds w ith a resume
                o f i t s purpose and content.
Chapter 5       The flow r a te through t u r n s t i l e should now be reduced
Cl. 47          to 660 persons per hour b ut i t i s suggested t h is ra te
                could be increased where sp e c ta to rs are only
                presen tin g tic k e ts f o r checking and money i s not
                changing hands.

Chapter 7      The dimensions o f step s should equate w ith Building
Cl. 73         R egulations. Hie guide accepts r i s e r s as high as
               190mm whereas Approved Document K s tip u la te s 180mm as
                the maximum acceptable.
Reference                          Comments


C ls . 1-22 and   Confusion s t i l l e x is ts as to the d iffere n ce between
183/188           the normal evacuation time and the emergency
                  evacuation time. I t i s suggested th a t an emergency
                  evacuation time o f 5 minutes should never be exceeded
                  in any circumstances and th a t g re a te r emphasis should
                  be placed on the need to agree times o f between 2.5
                  and 5 minutes w ith the app ro priate F ire A uthority.
Cl. 127           Radial gangways are not r e s t r i c t e d as to t h e i r length
                  between landings. I t has been suggested th a t th ere
                  should be no more than 16 r i s e r s to a f l i g h t as the
                  Approved Document K recommends fo r stairw ay s. This
                  may be u nn ecessarily harsh in those s itu a tio n s where
                  the slope o f the te rra c in g i s shallow. This has
                  fundamental im plications fo r the b a sic design of
                  stands because the in tro d u c tio n o f a landing breaks
                  the lin e o f slope o f the stand.
Cl. 130           The Chapter r e la tin g to stariw ays and ramps i s 7 - not
                  4.
Cl. 162           The type o f " e le c tr ic a l f i r e warning system to a l e r t
                  s ta f f " needs c la r if i c a t i o n . Does i t mean a f u l l
                  blooded f i r e alarm system or something more demure
                  which would not a g ita te sp ectato rs?
Cl. 166           I t has been suggested th a t the le v e ls o f lig h tin g
                  complying w ith BS 5266 : P a rt 1 may be too low when a
                  sudden f a ilu r e of the flo o d lig h ts might plunge the
                  ground in to sem i-darkness. Spectators eyesig ht would
                  no t be able to acclim atize quickly enough to the
                  changed circum stances. The Mechanical and E le c tr ic a l
                  Committee of the LDSA i s preparing a re p o rt on the
                  su b je ct which w ill be subm itted fo r co n sid eratio n as
                  soon as i t i s a v a ila b le .
Cl. 194111        Reference needs to be made to the "warning tone" to be
                  used before public sa fe ty announcements.

                  Reference needs to be made to the s i t i n g o f the
                  emergency telephones a t s tr a te g ic p o in ts o f the ground
                  in accordance w ith the recommendations in L J Taylors
                  F inal Report.
Chapter 13        Should L J Taylors remarks re the age and a b i l i t y of
Stewardlng        Stewards be included in the guide?

                  Should i t not be made c le a r th a t the Senior P olice
                  O fficer has the power to cancel the game or a t le a s t
                  to delay "Kick Off" fo r reasons o f safety?

                  Reference should be made to the need f o r ,a w ritte n
                  statem ent o f in te n t between Management and P o lice .
    Reference                        Comments

    Chapter 16       The number o f people who can be sa fe ly accommodated i s
                     now also c o n tro lle d by the number who can gain access
                     to an area through the t u r n s t il e s e t c . , w ith in a
                     p e rio d o f one hour. The guide should r e f l e c t th is
                     a d d itio n a l condition.
    C ls. 221, 222   The fig u re s req u ire re v is io n in the l ig h t o f L J
                     T a y lo r's Final Report.

                     The guide does no t address the problem o f providing
                     access and f a c i l i t i e s fo r d isab led sp e c ta to rs .




WP0810S
                                    The A ll England
                          Lawn Tennis & Croquet Club Wimbledon
                                            C hurch Road W im b le d o n
                                                London S W 1 9 5A E
                                             Telephone 01-944 1066
                                            Telex 265180 a / b A E L T C
                                             Facsimile 01-947 8752




C JG /L C



31st May 1990


Mi Alan Brown
G2 D ivision
Room 920
Honie O ffice
Queen Anne's Gate
London
SWlH 9AT                                                                    Sent by Fax

Dear Mr Brown

Guide to Safety a t Sports Grounds ('Green Guide')

The Lawn Tennis A ssociation received a l e t t e r from you dated 10th A pril on th e
above su b je c t.      A copy of your l e t t e r was posted on to us a t The A ll England
Lawn Tennis Club as they suggested th a t we, as o rg an isers of The Wimbledon
Championships, may wish to make comments regarding the Green Guide as you have
requested.            I would th e re fo re lik e to mention th e following p o in ts fo r
c o n sid era tio n :

i)          In the time a v a ila b le and due to th e proxim ity of our Championships, we
             have been unable to study th e Green Guide in d e ta i l b u t, even i f we had
             done so, I am sure we would fin d l i t t l e f a u l t with i t .

ii)         Our main p o in t, however, i s th a t i t should be emphasised th a t th e Green
            Guide i s only a guide, a lb e it an important one, and th a t oth er
            so lu tio n s to sa fe ty problems may be a v a ila b le with proper consideration
            in d iffe rin g s itu a tio n s .

iii)        We do not b eliev e th a t th e Green Guide should apply equally to a l l
            sp o rts and/or venues.     For example, th e re sure many aspects of The
            Championships, Wimbledon, which are q u ite d iff e re n t from oth er major
            sp o rtin g events and perhaps t h i s p o in t should be c l a r i f i e d in a
            preamble.

iv)         I s i t c o rre c t th a t the r e s p o n s ib ility fo r sa fe ty a t a n a tio n a l event
            l i e s with a Local A uthority, or should i t be th e re s p o n sib lity of the
            Home O ffice, who might be more c o n siste n t in t h e i r in te r p r e ta tio n of the
            Green Guide?

                                                                                             Cont' d . . .


                                 Chairman] A H C urry C h ief Executive C J Gorringe
#
    v)       There i s l i t t l e or no mention of te rro rism in the Guide.       Should t h i s
             not be covered in discussing evacuation procedures as i t may well be
             d if f e r e n t from evacuating in th e event of f i r e or crowd disturbance? In
             th e event of a bomb or te rro rism , should t h i s be a m atter fo r the Home
             O ffice with t h e i r g re a te r degree of experience than the Local
             Authority?

    I hope these comments w ill be seen in a c o n stru ctiv e l ig h t.
    Yours sin c e re ly




    Chief Executive



          Mr J Ja^es, The Lawn Tennis A ssociation
t,lv
