                                                                     Incident Report
                      HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

               RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                      Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ



                An investigation of the turnstiles at the
                Leppings Lane entrance to the stadium


                                  by

                              G A C Games BA
                                   and
                              D Waterhouse BSc(Eng) CEng MIMechE FIMEMME

                                               IR/L/ME/89/33




                                             Issue authorised by: Dr A Jones

                                             Date: 26 January 1990

Distribution

The Court of Inquiry (5 copies)
ACC J MervynJones West Midlands Police
Mr D C T Eves
Mr A Barrell        TD
Mr P G Jones        TD
Mr M S Nattrass     FAID Area 14
Mr J P Giltrow      HFS (N)
Mr M R Stephenson   NE FCG
Mr M Fountain       TD3
Mr M James          TD3
Mr C J Pertee       NE FCG
Mr J B Hibbs        NE FCG
Dr J McQuaid
Dr A Jones
Dr J H Foley
Dr C E Nicholson                       TO RLSD/DIAS STAFF ONLY
Mr P F Heyes                           NOT TO BE COMMUNICATED OUTSIDE
Mr I R Price                           RLSD WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF
Mr G Norton                            THE AUTHORISING OFFICER
Authors
RPS                                                       SMR/343/235/01
Library (2)
Registry File                                             $80.02.OTH.814
CONTENTS

i   INTRODUCTION

2   THE SCOPE OF THE INVESTIGATION

    INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECT OF A HORIZONTAL FORCE ON THE ’GATES’ OF
    TURNSTILES SERVING THE WEST TERRACE
    3.1 Turnstiles in the group A to G
    3.2 Method of testing

4   INVESTIGATION OF THE ACCURACY OF THE SYSTEM FOR COUNTING AND RECORDING
    THE NUMBER OF ADMISSIONS THROUGH THE TURNSTILES
    4.1 The counting and recording system
         4.1.1 The counting device on the turnstiles
         4.1.2 The recording and display system
    4.2 Assessment of the accuracy of the counting and recording of admissions
         through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane
         4.2.1 Method of assessment

5   THE AVERAGE ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS OF THE TURNSTILES

6   DISCUSSION OF THE RESULTS OF THE INVESTIGATION
    6.1 The effect of a horizontal force on the ’gate’ of a turnstile
    6.2 The accuracy of the system for counting and recording admissions
         through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane
    6.3 Average admission requirements of the turnstiles

    SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
    7.1 The effect of a horizontal force on the ’gates’ of turnstiles serving
         the West Terrace
    7.2 The accuracy of the system for counting and recording admissions
         through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane
    7.3 Average admission requirements of the turnstiles
i     INTRODUCTION

As part of the investigation by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) into the
incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s Hillsborough stadium on
15 April 1989, Mr G A C Games, a Senior Scientific Officer, and
Mr D Waterhouse, a Principal Scientific Officer, of HSE’s Research and
Laboratory Services Division (RLSD) visited Hillsborough stadium on 24 April,
25 April and 28 April 1989. They investigated aspects of the turnstiles,
particularly those giving access to the terraces at the Leppings Lane end of
the ground.


2     THE SCOPE OF THE INVESTIGATION

We examined a drawing labelled "Eastwood & Partners - Drawing No 8945/IA" that
Dr Nicholson had received from Eastwood & Partners on 24 April 1989. This
drawing had the title "Sheffield Wednesday F.C. PLC Hillsborough, Ground
Layout 1987" and was dated 16/4/87. The drawing showed the number of persons
(capacity) allocated to each designated zone of the stadium and showed the
location and designation of turnstiles around the perimeter of the stadium. In
this report the term ’West terraces’ is used as the collective name for
the terraced zones at the West, or Leppings Lane end, of the stadium.

The drawing showed two groups of turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the
stadium. It appeared that group A to G could be used for admissions to the
West terraces and the West Stand, and that some of group i to 16 could be used
for admissions to the North Stand and some for admissions to the west terraces
and the West Stand.

Our investigation was divided into three parts:

i)     tests to assess the difficulty experienced by an operator in releasing
       the rotary ’gate’ of a turnstile when a horizontal force was applied to
       to one of its ’wings’ (or ’paddles’);

ii)    tests to assess the accuracy of the computerized system for counting and
       recording the number of persons admitted through the turnstiles in
       Leppings Lane;

iii) calculation of the average number of persons to be admitted through each
     of the turnstiles if all zones of the stadium were filled to their
     designated maximum capacity, i.e. calculation of the average admission
     requirement of the turnstiles.

We were assisted by other staff of RLSD working under our supervision and to
our instructions. Our tests to assess the effect of a horizontal force on the
’gate’ of a turnstile were observed by officers of the West Midlands Police.
Our investigation of the accuracy of the computerized system for counting and
recording admissions through the turnstiles was supervised by Detective Chief
Inspector Tope of the West Midlands Police.




                                        -i-
3     INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECT OF A HORIZONTAL FORCE ON THE ’GATES’
      OF TURNSTILES SERVING THE WEST TERRACES

3.1     TURNSTILES IN THE GROUP A TO G

We examined all the turnstiles in the group A to G° Turnstiles C to G appeared
to be of the same type, but turnstiles A and B were of a different pattern and
were slightly different from each other. However, the principle of operation
of all the turnstiles in group A to G appeared to be the same,

Fig i shows a view of a typical turnstile in group A to G. Each turnstile had
four equally spaced ’wings’ on its ’gate’, which was attached to a spindle. It
was apparent that a quarter-revolution of the spindle was intended to admit
one person when the pedal of a pivoted locking lever, shown in Fig 2, was
depressed by an operator. A counter-weight on this lever normally caused its
inner end to engage with one of four teeth on the lower rachet of a dual cam
assembly attached to the base of the spindle, as shown in Fig 3. Depression of
the pedal raised the inner end of the lever, allowing the spindle to rotate
until the upper cam drove the inner end of the locking lever back down into
engagement with the next tooth of the lower rachet. The cam/rachet mechanism
locked the spindle after each quarter-revolution of the ’gate’, the operator
having to depress the pedal of the locking lever each time that he wished to
admit a person. The rachet on the upper part of the dual cam assembly
prevented the ’gate’ from being rotated in the reverse direction.

Our examination of the turnstiles caused us to suspect that a person pushing,
or being pushed, against a ’wing’ of a turnstile might cause the operator to
have difficulty in depressing the pedal to release the ’gate’ It was our
opinion that difficulties in releasing the ’gate’ might reduce the flow
through a turnstile to below the maximum notional rate of 750 persons/hour
that was suggested in the Home Office/Scottish Office publication "Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds" (H M Stationery Office: 1986).

On 24 April 1989 we conducted tests on the turnstiles designated B and C to
investigate the relationship between the horizontal force applied to a ’wing’
of a turnstile and the force required on the pedal of the locking lever to
release its ’gate’.

3.2     METHOD OF TESTING

Fig 4 shows how a horizontal force was applied to the mid-span of a ’wing’ of
a turnstile by means of a baulk of timber, a nylon sling, a tensile loadcell
and a ’pull-lift’ rachet-hoist apparatus. The loadcell, connected between the
sling and the ’pull-lift’, measured the force applied to the ’wing’ of the
turnstile on a digital display unit. We calibrated this display unit before
making the tests by suspending standard test weights from the loadcell.

We used the ’pull-lift’ to apply a force to a ’wing’ of the turnstile and then
gently placed standard test weights on the pedal of the pivoted locking lever,
as shown in Fig 5, until the ’gate’ was released. This procedure was repeated
with increasing forces applied to the ’wing’. The results obtained from the
tests are shown in the graphs of Fig 6.




                                           -2-
4     INVESTIGATION OF THE ACCURACY OF THE SYSTEM FOR COUNTING
      AND RECORDING THE NUMBER OF ADMISSIONS THROUGH THE TURNSTILES

On 25 April 1989 we visited Hillsborough stadium, accompanied by Detective
Chief Inspector Tope of the West Midlands Police. We discussed the system used
for counting and recording the number of persons passing through the
turnstiles with Mr R J Houldsworth of Abbey Systems Ltd, whose company
maintained and operated the computerized system for Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club. On 28 April 1989 we conducted limited tests to assess the
accuracy of the recording system on the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.

4.1    THE COUNTING AND RECORDING SYSTEM

The counting and recording system was described to us by Mr Houldsworth.

4.1.1 The counting device on the turnstile

An electrical switch was attached to each of the turnstiles serving the
stadium, and signal cables connected each switch to a signal conditioning unit
housed in a control room beneath the South Stand. Each quarter-revolution of a
turnstile was intended to cause its switch to close and re-open, transmitting
an electrical pulse to the signal conditioning unit.

Mr Houldsworth said that he was in the process of modifying an earlier design
that had used a roller-plunger micro-switch on each turnstile to provide the
pulse signals. The intention of this system had been for the plunger of the
micro-switch to be depressed as it was traversed sequentially by each of the
four horizontal lugs of a cruciform cast metal boss that connected the upper
tubular arms of the four ’wings’ to the spindle of a turnstile. However, the
micro-switch was prone to mis-counts arising from the cast surface of the lugs
and the vertical ’float’ of the spindle in its bearings, and the position of
the micro-switches required frequent adjustment.

The reliability of the pulse generation had been improved on more modern
turnstiles serving other zones of the stadium by enclosing the micro-switches
within the upper mounting of the spindle, but this modification had not been
possible with the older turnstiles in Leppings Lane.

The roller-plunger micro-switches on the turnstiles in Leppings Lane were
being replaced by more robust switches that were operated by ’rat-tail’ spring
probes. The compliant probe on this type of switch was deflected horizontally
by the vertical tube of each ’wing’ as the ’gate’ rotated, and the correct
generation of pulses did not depend on a relatively precise positioning of the
switch. However, the new switches had not yet been fitted on all the
turnstiles in group A to G; the new switches that had been installed on this
group were attached to temporary mountings, permanent installation awaiting
the end of the season.

4.1.2 The recording and display system

The pulse counts obtained from the switch on a turnstile were received by a
storage register which was dedicated to that turnstile and formed part of the
signal conditioning unit. The storage registers were scanned continuously and
the counts transmitted to the central processor of a micro-computer. The
programming of the micro-computer enabled its visual display unit (VDU) to

                                         -3-
display a list identifying each turnstile and showing the number of admissions
through it, i.e. the number of pulses transmitted from the turnstile. The
count of the number of admissions through each turnstile was incremented
continuously and the admissions through the groups of turnstiles allocated to
the zones of the stadium were displayed as accumulating totals.

The system was therefore designed to count the total number of admissions
through each turnstile and to provide a record of the accumulating total
admissions to each zone of the stadium, i.e. Spion Kop, North Stand, West
Stand, West terraces, etc. Financial information corresponding to the
admission price at each turnstile was also displayed.

The rated maximum capacity of each zone of the stadium was displayed on the
VDU. A warning was provided, by means of flashing inverse contrast on the
display, when the capacity of each zone was within 1,000 persons of its
maximum designated capacity.

The micro-computer system did not have tbackingt storage in the form of disc
or magnetic tape. Long term storage was confined to obtaining a copy of the
display on the VDU from a printer, although the display on the screen was
retained in the memory of the computer until a command was typed from the VDU
to clear this part of the memory. There were no facilities at present to
undertake any further processing of the data held in the central storage of
the computer.

Mr Houldsworth said that on 15 April, when he realised that a serious incident
had occurred on the West terraces, he had printed three copies of the display
on the VDU. Apart from the relatively few turns of the tgates~ made by HSE~s
staff whilst examining turnstiles A to G, the data in the computer memory and
displayed on the VDU was the data that he had copied on 15 April.

4.2   ASSESSMENT OF THE ACCURACY OF THE COUNTING AND RECORDING OF ADMISSIONS
      THROUGH THE TURNSTILES IN LEPPINGS LANE

We assessed the accuracy of the system for counting and recording admissions
through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane. We concentrated the assessment on
turnstiles designated A to G because they were labelled both "Standing Only"
and "Leppings Lane Standing".

However, we made some assessment of the accuracy of the counting system on the
turnstiles in group 9 to 16 because, although they were labelled "West Stand",
they might have provided access to the West terraces.

4.2.1 Method of assessment

Detective Chief Inspector Tope monitored turnstiles A to G whilst we observed
Mr Houldsworth take a copy from the printer of the accumulated admissions
displayed on the VDU. The control room was then locked and we accompanied
Mr Houldsworth whilst he simulated 50 admissions through each turnstile in
group A to G by rotating each ~gate~ through 50 quarter-turns, at a speed
corresponding to approximately 2.25 sec/admission (1600 admissions/hour).
Detective Chief Inspector Tope then monitored turnstiles A to G again whilst
we returned to the control room with Mr Houldsworth and observed him take
another copy from the printer of the display on the VDU.

                                       -4-
A similar procedure was used to check the accuracy of the counting and
recording system of turnstiles 9 to 16, but each ’gate’ in this group was
rotated through only i0 quarter-turns.

We then returned to the turnstiles in group A to G and repeated the first
test, rotating each ’gate’ through 50 quarter-turns

Table i shows the results of our investigation of the accuracy of the counting
and recording system on turnstiles A to G and 9 to 16.


5   THE AVERAGE ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS OF THE TURNSTILES
The number of persons (capacity) allocated to each zone of the stadium and the
location and designation of the turnstiles were shown on Eastwood & Partners
Drawing No 8945/IA, dated 16/4/87. The zones and their capacities are shown in
Columns i and 2 of Table 2.

On 28 April 1989 we walked around the outside of the perimeter of the stadium
and observed any labels on the entrances to the turnstiles that indicated the
zones they served.

A printed record of the admissions to the stadium, made by Mr Houldsworth on
the afternoon of 15 April 1989, was delivered to Dr Nicholson on 24 May 1989
by Detective Constable Phillips of the West Midlands Police. We examined a
copy of this record, in conjunction with Eastwood & Partners Drawing No 8945/IA
and our observations of the labels on the turnstiles, to assist us in deducing
how turnstiles were allocated to zones of the stadium on 15 April 1989.

We deduced that the turnstiles were allocated to zones as shown in Column 3 of
Table 2, the number of turnstiles allocated being shown in Column 4. The
capacity of each zone was divided by the number of turnstiles allocated to it,
giving their average admission requirements (persons/turnstile) as shown in
Column 5.


6 DISCUSSION OF THE RESULTS OF THE INVESTIGATION

6.1 THE EFFECT OF A HORIZONTAL FORCE ON THE ’GATE’ OF A TURNSTILE

The relationship between the force applied to the ’wing’ of a turnstile and
the force required to depress its release pedal showed considerable ’scatter’
Some variation between individual tests might be attributable to differences
in the position at which the horizontal forces were applied to a ’wing’
Furthermore, we could not ensure that test weights were always placed on the
pedal at exactly the same distance from the pivot of the locking lever, and we
would have preferred to have applied smaller increments of weight to the
pedal. However, a frictional force had to be overcome when depressing the
pedal to release the ’gate’, and it is our opinion that the ’scatter’ was
principally attributable to the inherent variability of the coefficient of
friction between unlubricated metallic surfaces.

Fig 6 suggests that, typically, a pedal force - 0.56 x ’wing’ force would be
required to release turnstile B, and that a pedal force = 1.56 x ’wing’ force
would be required to release turnstile C, i.e. turnstile C required a force on

                                        -5-
its pedal that typically was 2.8 times greater than that for turnstile B. We
had observed that turnstiles A and B appeared to differ in detail from
turnstiles C to G.

An operator weighing 750 N (169 ibf or approximately 12 stones) might have
difficulty in releasing the ’gate’ of turnstile B if a force exceeding 1340 N
(301 ibf) was applied to a ’wing’, because he might have to exert a force of
more than his weight on the pedal to release the ’gate’. The same operator
would probably have difficulty in releasing the ’gate’ of turnstile C if a
force of 480 N (108 ibf) was applied to a ’wing’. It is our opinion that
turnstiles A and B would be likely to behave in a similar manner and that
turnstile C was representative of those in the group C to G.

Variations about the predicted average force required on the pedal ranged
between approximately plus 70~ and minus 44~ for turnstile B, and between
approximately plus 55~ and minus 36~ for turnstile C. The stated relationships
provide only approximate indications of the forces that might be needed to
release turnstiles in the group A to G.

6.2   THE ACCURACY OF THE SYSTEM FOR COUNTING AND RECORDING ADMISSIONS THROUGH
      THE TURNSTILES IN LEPPINGS LANE

Table i shows that the first set of 50 quarter-turns of turnstiles A to G
caused turnstile E to record six more ’admissions’ than we had counted, and
turnstile G to record one less ’admission’ than we had counted.

The second set of 50 quarter-turns of turnstiles A to G caused turnstile E to
record the correct number of ’admissions’ and turnstile G to record three
fewer ’admissions’ than we had counted. Turnstile C recorded three more
’admissions’ than we had counted, but we were interrupted during the counting
and it is our opinion that the discrepancy was probably attributable to this
interruption.

We inspected turnstile E and concluded that the discrepancy obtained during
the first 50 quarter-turns arose from vertical upward ’float’ of the spindle
in its bearings and the position of the roller-plunger micro-switch. The
combined effect was that the micro-switch occasionally appeared to be actuated
spuriously by protrusions on the cast surfaces of the lugs of the upper
cruciform boss that connected the ’gate’ to the spindle. The error only
appeared during the first set of 50 quarter-turns and we concluded that it
was likely to have occurred during the first few ’admissions’ after a period
of inaction. It is our opinion that the error would not persist throughout a
period of continuous operation.

Turnstile G recorded fewer ’admissions’ than we had counted during both sets
of 50 quarter-turns. We observed that the lugs of the upper cruciform boss on
turnstile G only just made contact with the roller on the plunger of its
micro-switch. We concluded that this uncertain contact caused turnstile G to
record less than the correct number of ’admissions’. It is our opinion that
this under-recording was likely to persist throughout a period of continuous
operation and that the number of admissions recorded by turnstile G was likely
to be less than the correct value.

Turnstile 14 recorded one more ’admission’ than we had counted whilst making
the i0 quarter-turns on turnstiles 9 to 16. However, we suspected that this

                                       -6-
discrepancy arose because the ’gate’ of turnstile 14 was in a mid-travel
position when the test commenced. Our tests therefore suggested that
turnstiles 9 to 16 would provide an accurate record of the number of persons
admitted through them.

We concluded that the computerized system would be likely to record the total
number of admissions through group A to F of the turnstiles with an accuracy
that was within 1%. In a test turnstile G recorded 6% less than the correct
number of admissions, but we concluded that the uncertainty in the operation of
its micro-switch might cause the under-recording to be more severe than this.

We concluded that the turnstiles in group 9 to 16 would record the correct
number of admissions.

6.3   AVERAGE ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS OF THE TURNSTILES

Table 2 shows that the stadium’s maximum capacity of 54,324 persons was served
by 83 turnstiles on 15 April 1989, and that 45% (24,447 persons) of the
stadium’s capacity were to be admitted from Leppings Lane, where 28% (23) of
the turnstiles in use were sited.

Table 2 has been arranged in descending order of the average number of
admissions required from each group of turnstiles serving the different zones
of the stadium. The highest admission requirement was 1,443 persons/turnstile
for the West terraces, followed by 988 persons/turnstile for the North Stand
Seating and by 744 persons/turnstile for the West Stand Seating. The admission
requirement of the turnstiles for the West terraces was therefore almost 3.5
times greater than that for the South Stand Uncovered Seating (the lowest
admission requirement) and approximately 2.9 times greater than that for Spion
Kop, the other terrace zone.

Six groups of turnstiles served the stadium and the three groups with the
highest admission requirements were sited in Leppings Lane. The overall
average admission requirement of the 23 turnstiles in Leppings Lane was
1063 persons/turnstile.

The other overall average admission requirements were 500 persons/turnstile
for the turnstiles in Penistone Road and 493 persons/turnstile for those in
the Concourse behind the South Stand. The overall average admission
requirement of the turnstiles in Leppings Lane was therefore approximately
twice that of the turnstiles sited elsewhere around the perimeter of the
stadium.

We have therefore concluded that, if a maximum capacity crowd was to be
admitted, the longest delays would be likely to be experienced by persons
required to enter the stadium through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane;
particularly long delays would be likely to be experienced by those with
tickets for the West terraces. We would therefore expect larger crowds to form
outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane than at other places of entry to the
stadium.




                                       -7-
7     SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

7.1    THE EFFECT OF A HORIZONTAL FORCE ON THE ’GATES’ OF TURNSTILES SERVING
       THE WEST TERRACES

7.1.1 Our tests suggested that, typically, the force needed on the pedal of a
turnstile to release its ’gate’ was 0.56 x the force on a ’wing’ for
turnstiles A and B, and 1.56 x the force on a ’wing’ for turnstiles C to G.
Variations of up to 70% were obtained in the force required to depress the
pedal and these relationships should serve only as an indication of the forces
that might be needed to release the turnstiles serving the West terraces.

7.1.2 A turnstile operator weighing 750 N (169 ibf or approximately
12 stones) or less might have difficulty in releasing the ’gate’ of turnstiles
A or B if the horizontal force applied to a ’wing’ was 1340 N (301 ibf) or
more, because he might have to exert a force of more than his weight on the
pedal to release the ’gate’. The same operator might have difficulty in
releasing the ’gate’ of a turnstile in the group C to G if a horizontal force
of 480 N (108 ibf) or more was applied to a ’wing’

7.1.3 It is our opinion that the ease with which an operator could depress
the pedal would affect the time taken for a person to be admitted. Therefore a
thrust exceeding 480 N (108 ibf) that was imposed by a crowd on a person at
the ’gate’ of a turnstile would be likely decrease the flow of persons through
the group of turnstiles A to G.

7.2    THE ACCURACY OF THE SYSTEM FOR COUNTING AND RECORDING ADMISSIONS THROUGH
       THE TURNSTILES IN LEPPINGS LANE

7.2.1 Our tests suggested that turnstiles A, B, C, D, and F would record the
correct number of admissions. It is our opinion that the error obtained during
the first test on turnstile E would be unlikely to persist during a period of
continuous operation. In our opinion turnstiles A to F, as a group, would
record the number of admissions within an accuracy of approximately 1%.

7.2.2 Our tests indicated that a persistent error was likely to occur in the
counting system of turnstile G. During a period of continuous operation this
turnstile could repeatedly fail to count some admissions, and the recorded
admissions could be significantly less than the correct number. We concluded
that the error in counting at turnstile G was probably attributable to
uncertainty of contact between the roller of the micro-switch and the four
lugs on the upper cruciform boss of the ’gate’.

7.2.3 Our tests suggested that turnstiles in the group 9 to 16 would record
the correct number of admissions.

7.3    AVERAGE ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS OF THE TURNSTILES

7.3.1 We have concluded that on 15 April 1989 the spectators were intended to
enter the stadium through 83 turnstiles, of which 23 (28%) were sited in
Leppings Lane. If the stadium was to be filled to its maximum capacity of
54,324 persons then 45% (24,447 persons) of this capacity would be admitted
from Leppings Lane, through 28% of the turnstiles serving the stadium.



                                        -8-
7.3.2 The turnstiles serving the West terraces had the highest average
admission requirement (1,443 persons/turnstile) of any group of turnstiles
serving the stadium. It was almost 3.5 times the lowest average admission
requirement of 413 persons/turnstile for the South Stand Uncovered Seating,
and was approximately 2.9 times the average admission requirement of
500 persons/turnstile for Spion Kop, the other terrace zone.

7.3.3 Six groups of turnstiles served the stadium. The three groups of
turnstiles with the highest average admission requirements were sited in
Leppings Lane; i.e. West terraces (1,443 persons/turnstile), North Stand
(988 persons/turnstile) and West Stand (744 persons/turnstile).

7.3.4 The average admission requirement of the 23 turnstiles in Leppings Lane
was approximately twice that of the 42 turnstiles in Penistone Road and that
of the 18 turnstiles in the Concourse behind the South Stand. It is our
opinion that larger crowds would form in Leppings Lane than in the other
entrance areas to the stadium when it was to be filled to its maximum
capacity.

7.3.5 It is our opinion that, when the stadium was to be filled to its
maximum capacity, the longest delays in admission would be be experienced by
persons required to enter through the turnstiles in Leppings Lane, and that
those with tickets for the West terraces would experience the most severe
delays.




                                      -9-
Table i Results obtained from the counting and recording system
         on the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the stadium

’Gates’ rotated at approximately 2.25 sec/quarter-turn (1600 admissions/hour)

Turnstile        Computer record    Quarter-turns      Comments
designation      Initial Final      Counted Recorded

A   (rat-tail)   1062     1112     50       50
B   (rat-tail)   1017     1067     50       50
C   (plunger)    1301     1351     50       50
D   (plunger)    1272     1322     50       50
E   (plunger)     976     1032     50       56   spindle ’float’; switch position
F   (rat-tail)   1066     1116     50       50
G   (plunger)     612      661     50       49

Total A to G 7306         7661     350     355



9                 634     644      i0      i0
i0                582     592      i0      i0
ii                754     764      i0      i0
12                609     619      i0      i0
13                784     794      i0      i0
14                755     766      i0      ii    starting position of ’gate’
15                836     846      i0      i0
16                665     675      i0      i0

Total 9 to 16 5619       5700      80      81



A   (rat-tail)   1112    1162      50      50
B   (rat-tail)   1067    1117      50      50
C   (plunger)    1351    1404      50      53    counting interrupted
D   (plunger)    1322    1372      50      50
E   (plunger)    1032    1082      50      50
F   (rat-tail)   1116    1166      50      50
G   (plunger)     661     708      50      47

Total A to G     7661    8011      350     350
Table 2 Admission requirements of the turnstiles serving the
         zones of the stadium

Zone                *Capacity    Turnstile          Number of       Average persons
                     (persons)   designation        turnstiles      per turnstile

West Terrace         i0,i00      A to G              7              1,443 }
                                                                            }
North Stand             9,882    i to 8          i0                   988 } Leppings
Seating                          9 and i0                                 } Lane
                                                                            }
West Stand              4,465    ii to 16                             744 }
Seating                                                                     }
South Stand             5,567    23 to 32        i0                   557 } Concourse
Covered Seating

Spion Kop            21,000      37 to 78           42                500 } Penist’n Rd

South Stand             3,310    19 to 22                             414 } Concourse
Uncovered Seating                33 to 36


TOTAL               54,324                       83                   655


* Taken from Eastwood & Partners Drawing No 8945/IA, dated 16/4/87


Admissions from Leppings Lane      24,447
                                            x i00 = 45%
Admissions to stadium              54,324


Turnstiles in Leppings Lane        23
                                 = -- x i00 = 28%
Turnstiles serving stadium         83


                                                 24,447
Leppings Lane average admission requirement    = ------- = 1063 persons/turnstile
                                                   23

                                                  21,000
Penistone Road average admission requirement                     500 persons/turnstile
                                                         42

                                                  8,877
Concourse average admission requirement                       493 persons/turnstile
                                                     18
           89O4-O97/46A
                             Fig.1 -A typical turnstile serving the West Terrace,
                                           viewed from the exit




           8904-097/83
                             Fig.2 - Pivoted locking lever; the release pedal is
                          depressed to allow the spindle of the turnstile to rotate


CROWN COPYRIGHT
            8904-097/84
                                Fig.3 - Dual cam assembly on the lower end of
                                           the spindle of a turnstile




                            i




            8904-106/5
                          Fig.4 - The equipment used to apply a horizontal, known,
                                      force to the ’wing’ of a turnstile


CROWN COPYRIGHT
            8904-106/10
                          Fig.5 - Standard test weights applied to the release pedal
                                  of the pivoted locking lever of a turnstile




CROWN COPYRIGHT
