                                                        f         '2 5   FEB   ifff
     11

+                                                  SME/74/024
                                                   SME/19 6/2 9 2/016




    Dr Derrick, SGPD C
                         MD A1
                                                            ^£)                ft dud
    FOOTBALL STADIA ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL

    Please find, attached a copy of the Report of the Football League's
    Medical Working Party, produced under the auspices of their Taylor
    Implementation Committee following the Hillsborough disaster. This
    has been forwarded to me in my capacity as a member of the above
    Committee, and was circulated to Football Clubs in November of last
    year (covering letter also attached).

    You may wish to circulate this to others in HSE who will find it of
    interest.




    C E NICHOLSON
    Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1
    RLSD, Sheffield
    20 February 1991



          CC             Or
                                  t h e f o o t b a l l le a g u e lim ite d
 Lytham St. Annes. Lancashire. FY8 I|G . T e le p h o n e 0253 72942 1 .1 6 16 x 6 7 6 7 5. Fax 0253 72478o.                Secretary I. D D e nt




5/8740                                                                                                                 22nd November, 1990


Dear Secretary,

                                 First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances

     Recannendations 64 to 69 in the Final Report by Lord Justice Taylor deal
with First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances. To help clubs address these
points, the Football League's Honorary Consultant- Medical Advisor, Mr. R. Myles
Gibson, FRCS, established a working party in order to obtain best medical advice
and I now enclose a copy of the working party's report.

     The Management Carmittee asks you to consider this report and to determine,
together with your club doctor, what action needs to be taken at your ground.

     The Management Committee would like to draw the following points to your
attention:-

paragraphs 16-21                  Club Doctors taking on the role of the Crowd Doctor must be
                                  trained and competent in Inrnediate Medical Care and they
                                  might find a refresher course of the type suggested in
                                  paragraphs 18-20 helpful in this regard.

                                 Where a Club Doctor does take on the role of the Crowd
                                 Doctor, his first priority must be to the crowd and he
                                 should, therefore, be satisfied that adequate alternative
                                 arrangements have been made for looking after the players.

paragraph 22                     Crowd Doctors should liaise with the local Ambulance Service
                                 who might arrange to provide certain items of equipment.

paragraph 26                     It is very important that the Crowd Doctor should familiarise
                                 himself with the local Accident and Etnergency Department's
                                 major incident plan and the local authority's emergency plan.

paragraph 42                     The Management Committee envisages that the inspectoral role
                                 should be performed by the Football Licensing Authority and/
                                 or the local authority's Advisory Group.

                                 The Management Committee hopes that Myles Gibson will also be
                                 visiting grounds as part of his continuing involvement with
                                 the Football League and that clubs will afford him their
                                 usual hospitality.




              All correspo ndence to be ad d ressed to The Secretary Registered Office as a b o v e Registered in England    12
the                  CcT ittee is appreciative of the time and effort put in by
quidTto^ub^      M    S   9-         ^   hopeS that      reP°rt will be a useful
Medical Facilities and' S l a S l s ! ayl0r recanKndations concerning First Aid,

                                 Yours sincerely,




                                    SECRETARY.
TOE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED


        REPORT OF

THE MEDICAL WORKING PARTY
                   THE GENERAL INFIRMARY A T LEEDS
                        GREAT GEORGE STREET
 1R                        LEEDS LSI 3EX
                                Telephone: 0532-432799
                                Ditrrl Line 0532-
                                                                                     W

                                                 Kiiquiries to:
 Mr Ian Stott
                                                                   0007
 Football League Management Committee            Kxtension:
 The Football League Limited
 Lytham St Annes                                 O n r re f:       RMG/JH
 Lancashire
 FY8 1JG                                         Your ref:


                                                 ,>a,e:            1 October 1990_
                                                               ♦




 Dear Mr Stott

 I have pleasure in submitting to you the report of the Working Group reviewing
medical arrangements at Football League grounds following the recommendations
of Lord Justice Taylor e a rlie r this year. I believe we have been particularly
lucky to have the ready and helpful advice of the most distinguished people in
the fie ld of Immediate Medical Care and I believe my report is a balanced one
which puts in place the advice on good medical practice, the requirements to
meet the Taylor report and the a b ility of the League Clubs to provide.

 I hope the Football League w ill fee) able to accept the report and I would hope
that thereafter we could plan i t 's distribution to the Football League Clubs,
followed by publication in the Medical Journals to inform the many doctors who
have been enquiring about the position following Taylor and who w ill welcome
clear guidance. I w ill be happy to help you in this regard to find the most
suitable means of informing the medical profession and at the same time ensuring
The Football League maintains leadership in this fie ld and receives the credit
i t deserves for in itiatin g the study.

With kind rega-rds and best wishes.       Yours sincerely.




R MYLES GIBSON E.R.D. M.D. T.D. M.S.c. F.I.C .S .
               F.R.C.S. ( ENG). F.R.C.S. (ED).
Consultant Neurological Surgeon
Honorary Consultant Medical Adviser to the Football League


cc Mr C Whalley




                           l.ccds W estern Health Authority
                         University o f Leeds School o f M edicine
    *

*

#                               THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
                             REPORT OF THE MEDICAL WORKING PARTY


        TERMS OF REFERENCE AND APPOINTMENT TO THE WORKING PARTY


        1.    Following the publication of the Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor,
             Mr. R. Myles Gibson, FRCS, Honorary Consultant Medical Advisor to The
             Football League, was asked to make recarmendations to the League on
             the implementation of the spirit and the letter of Lord Justice
             Taylor's reccrnnendations concerning first aid, medical facilities and
             ambulances (recaimendations 64 to 69).


        2.   Mr. Gibson felt that as well as considering the requirements of The
             Football League in respect of the Taylor Report, the task required the
             best medical advice fran distinguished practitioners in the fields of
             Accident and Emergency Medicine and Inmediate Medical Care.
             Invitations to join the Medical Working Party were therefore extended
             to:-


             Dr. Howard Baderman, B.Sc., F.R.C.P.
              (Consultant in Charge, Accident and Snergency Department, University
             College Hospital, London and Consultant Advisor to the Department of
             Health on Accident and Snergency Medicine)


             Dr. Judith M. Fisher, M.B.,B.S., F.R.C.G.P.,
             (Chairman, British Association for Imnediate Care and General Medical
             Practitioner)


             Colonel Ian R. Haywood, F.R.C.S.
             (Professor of Military Surgery, Royal Army Medical College, London and
             Consultant Surgeon)


             Dr. E. Brian Lewis, M.A., F.F.A.R.C.S.
             (Surgeon-in-Chief, St. John Ambulance and Consultant Anaesthetist)




                                                -1-
*




#                                           -2-


          Lt. Gen. Sir Cameron Moffat, K.B.E., F.R.C.S.
          (Chief Medical Advisor, British Red Cross Society and late Surgeon-
          General to the Armed Forces)


          It was also agreed to invite representatives of the ambulance service
          on to the working party, in order to ensure the complete
          representation of the emergency medical services.   The following
          representatives were duly nominated by their respective professional
          associations.


          Don Page, J.P., F.A.S.I.
          (Regional Ambulance Officers Group)


          Gordon P. Turnbull, F.A.S.I., F.B.I.M.
          (Association of Chief Ambulance Officers)


          The representation on the working party thus gave a comprehensive
          overview of the medical profession's standards in Immediate Medical
          Care and disaster medicine.


          Chris Whalley of The Football League acted as Secretary to the working
          party.


    3.    Copies of the Taylor Report were circulated to members of the working
         party and the first meeting was held on 4th April, 1990.    At this
          first meeting the background to the establishment of the working party
         was outlined to members and the Taylor recarmendations in relation to
         medical matters were addressed.   Further meetings were then held on
          18th April, 2nd May, 30th May, 13th June and 4th July, 1990.


    RBOOMENDATION 64 - There should be at each sports ground at each match at
    least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators.   The club should have
    the responsibility for securing such attendance.
4.   The working party agreed that the definition of a trained first aider
      should be scmeone who holds the Standard Certificate in First Aid
      issued by St. John Ambulance and the British Red Cross Society.       The
      latest syllabus for the Standard Certificate is shown at Appendix A.


5.   The ratio of 1 first aider for every 1,000 spectators was agreed, with
      the proviso that there should be a minimum of 3 first aiders at any
      one match.     local knowledge to be used to determine any extra
      attendance of first aiders for certain matches, such as local derby
      matches etc.


6.   The working party felt it right that the responsibility for securing
      the attendance of first aiders should lie with the football club.


RBOCMffiNDATION 65 - There shculd be at each designated sports ground one or
more first aid roans.    The number of such roans and the equipment to be
maintained within them shculd be specified by the local authority after
taking professional medical advice and shculd be made a requirement of every
Safety Certificate.


7.   The working party felt that at least one first aid roan should be
     provided to the satisfaction of the local authority and subject to the
     following minimum standard.


8.   The roan should be readily available at all times when a specified
     event is being undertaken and should not normally be used for any
     purpose other than the rendering of first aid.     The roan should be
     positioned as near as possible, taking into account the location and
     laycut of the establishment, to a point of access for transport to
     hospital and with easy access frcm all parts of the sports ground.
     The roan should be clearly identified as a first aid roan, its
     location publicised, and the route(s) to it clearly signposted.
The roan should be of minimum area 300 sq.ft. and of a regular shape.
The door should be of sufficient width to allow a stretcher plus
attendants to be admitted, bearing din mind the possibility of
stretcher access fran a corridor.     The rocm ideally should have
provision to treat 3 patients simultaneously with adequate provision
for privacy.     The roan should be provided with a stainless steel
sink, work surface, wash-hand basin, adequate drainage and supplies
of hot and cold drinking water, soap and hand drying facilities.
Hypochlorite disinfectant should also be provided, effective against
H.I.V., Hepatitis B, etc., for cleaning of blood and body fluids.
Recaimended concentrations for use are 10,090 ppm to deal with
spillages;     1,000 ppm for general washing purposes.


The roan should be a designated 'no-smoking1 area, be effectively
ventilated, lighted, heated and maintained and it should be provided
with at least 6 x 13 amp. socket outlets.     All surfaces should be
hard, impervious and easy to clean.     The roan should be kept clean and
veil maintained and adequate provision made for the disposal at the
end of each event of waste and refuse including clinical and 'sharp'
waste.   The roan should be in close proximity to a watercloset and
private waiting area provided with chairs.     The roan should be
provided with effective means of caimunication to and fran the central
control point and the emergency services.     In most stadia the
appropriate means will be by telephone link with an exclusive external
line.


Paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 contain the ideal recaimendations for a first
aid roan.    The working party recognises that clubs may have made
provision following the Football League's letter to clubs dated 10th
July, 1989 (copy shown at Appendix B).     In such cases, future ground
developments must take into account the ideal recaimendations
contained in paragraphs 8, 9 and 10.
                                        -5-



12.   The working party recommends for club first aid roans a medical first
      aid pack along the lines advised by the Scottish Football
      Association's Medical Caimittee.        The contents of this first aid pack
      are as follows:-


      50 x Gauze swabs 7.5 x 7.5c.m. 12 ply 5 per pack (Sterile)
      50 x Cotton Wool Balls Hospital Qual. Large - 5 per pack (Sterile)
      50 x Gallipots 60ml (sterile)
      50 x Sterile Forceps
      12 x HIBIDIL Sachets
       3 x Saline for eye irregation sterile 300ml, „r
       6 x Crepe bandage 5cm
       6 x Crepe bandage 7.5cm
       1 x 100 latex gloves large
       1 x 2.5cm Hypoallergenic adhesive tape
      12 x Eyepads (first aid pack) sterile                              ■
      24 x W.O.W. bandage 5cm
      24 x W.O.W. bandage 7.5cm
      24 x W.O.W. bandage 10cm
      12 x First Aid Dressings - (12 x 4 sizes)
       1 x Tube gauze (suitable for fingers)shortest       lengthavailable
       1 x Tube gauze (suitable for anklesand        knees) shortest length
           available
       2 x Elastic adhesive dressings (composite pack mixed sizes)
       1 x 25 Triangular bandages (not calico, but non-woven disposable)
       1 x Safety Pins (pack)
       1 x Box Large Paper Tissues


      The cost of such a first aid pack should be approximately £220 net of
      V.A.T.


      The need for the Crowd Doctor to check and maintain the club's first
      aid roan equipment is stressed,     (see also paragraph 24).


13.   Where there is more than one hospital locally, there should be
      displayed in the First Aid Room a list of the 'receiving hospitals'.
                                      -6-



14.   The working party stresses the importance of first aid posts being
      sited around the ground and the need for proper signposting.    This
      would help with public awareness of the presence of first aiders.      The
      working party reccmnends that the location of the club's first aid
      facilities should be shown in the match programme.


15.   In making these recarmendations the working party was conscious of,
      and appreciative of, the existing arrangements at clubs, the liaison
      with the'voluntary first aid organisations and the statutory ambulance
      service and the many improvements that had been effected post
      Hillsborough.


REJCXM1ENDAII0N 66(a) - At every match where the number of spectators is
expected to exceed 2,000, the club should employ a medical practitioner to
be present and available to deal with any medical exigency at the ground.
He shculd be trained and carpetent in advanced first aid.    He should be
present at the grcund at least an hour before kick-off and should remain
until half an hour after the end of the match.   His whereabouts should be
known to those in the police control roan and he should be inmediately
contactable.


16.   The working party recognised that the Club Doctor was primarily in
      attendance at matches to look cifter the players.   It was felt that
      there should be a further doctor in attendance to handle any medical
      emergency at the ground.   For the sake of convenience we call this
      second doctor the "Crowd Doctor".


17.   Recognising the difficulty that this might cause clubs with low
      attendances, the working party feels that at a match where the number
      of spectators is not expected to exceed 3,000, the role of the Crowd
      Doctor may be taken on by the Club Doctor, providing the latter is
      trained and competent in Inmediate Medical Care (see paragraph 18) and
      on the strict understanding that his first priority is to the crowd.
                                        -7-




18.   The Crowd Doctor should possess skills in communication and carmand
      and control as well as medical skills and he should be not more than
      70 years of age.   Doctors having taken relevant courses would be
      preferred; doctors without such certification should attend a special
      day course in Irrcnediate Medical Care for medical practitioners.


19.   For this purpose, the format of the BASICS one-day course was accepted
      subject to the deletion of the sessions on water-related emergencies
      and paediatric emergencies and to the inclusion of a special session
      to cover inter-service liaison, ccnmunications, major incident
      management and the delegation of duties to voluntary first aid
      workers.   (The format of the BASICS course is shown at Appendix 'C').


20.   This day course should be mounted by the Football Association Medical
      Committee with the assistance of BASICS, the Ambulance Service, the
      St. John Ambulance and the British Red Cross Society.   The Chairman of
      this working party has made contact with the Football Association
      Medical Caimittee, whose chairman has expressed willingness for the
      Football Association Medical Ccmtiittee to undertake this task through
      its medical/education activity.


21.   Recertification or reattendance on course is regarded as necessary
      every 5 years.   The ideal long-term objective is for Crowd Doctors to
      possess the Diploma in Inmediate Medical Care.
                                         -8-




22.   The Crowd Doctor should have available to him the following equipment
      at the ground


      Airway Management
      Oxygen powered ventilator                                             1

      Bag valve mask and 2 masks - adult/child with oxygen reservoir
      Guedel Airway - 1 of each size         2-5                            4
      Sphygmomanometer                                                   1

      Stethoscope                                                        1

      Vitalograph aspirator                                              1

      14G suction catheter                                               2
      Snaller gauge suction catheter for children                        1
      Yankauer suction catheter                                          1
      Nebulizer with independent power (? footpump variety)              1
      Laerdal face mask with oxygen port                                 2


      Intubation
      Catheter mount, tubing and appropriate connector                      1
      KY jelly                                                              1

      Magill forceps                                                        1

      Spencer Wells 5" forceps                                              1
      1" bandage roll                                                       1

      20 ml syringe marked "INTUBATION"                                     1
      Laryngoscope handle    LARGE AND STANDARD                        1 each
      Adult blade                                                           1

      Child blade                                                           1
      Batteries and bulbs for the above                                     2
      ET tubes precut 5irm, 6irm, 7 irm, 7 . 5 m                            7
                        8itm, 8.Sim, 9.irm
      ET tube 2.5irm in sterile bag                                         2
      Plastic gloves pair                                                   3
      Introducer                                                        1
      Nasopharyngeal tubes (Portex 100/210)                                 2
#                                          -9-



          Infusion
          Giving sets + 1 with a burette                                3
          Syringes - 3 x 20ml, 5 x 10ml, 5 x 5ml, 10 x 2ml              23
          Hypodermic needles - 10 each 25g, 23g, 21g                    30
          Intravenous cannulae - e.g. Venflon                           10 assorted
          Haemaccel 500ml                                                   2
          Hartmanns Solution 500ml                                          2
          Armlock splint                                                    1

          Adhesive tape - 1 each 1",   2", 3"                               3
          Blood sample bottles - 2 each cross match + haemoglobin           4
          Scissors                                                          1

          Antiseptic wipes                                                  6
          Sharps mini-bin                                                   1

          Hepsal 5 mis                                                      2


          Chest Drainage                                            r
          Chest drainage set e.g. Portex Kit                                    1
          Ampules 1% lignocaine 5mls                                            2
          Spencer Wells forceps 5"                                              2


          Drugs

    C + P *Morphine or Diamorphine 30mg 2ml ampules
    C + P *Pethidine lOOmg ampules
           Entonox with administration set
     ' P *Narcan
       P *Adrenalin 1:10,000
       P Atropine lmg
       P *Lignocaine
          Dextrose 50%
       P *Glucagon
       P *Frusemide 160mg/10ml
       P *Ventolin
       P *Atrovent Nebules
       P *IV Hydrocortisone
          Piriton
                                     -10-



    Paracetamol
P    *Diazepam
    Soluble Aspirin
    C = controlled drug; P = prescription-only drug (see paragraph 23)


    Miscellaneous


    Triangular bandages                                                   2
    Inflatable/box splints                                                2
    Steri strip dressings                                                10
    Roll of clingfilm                                                     1
    Burns sheet                                                           1

    Field dressings                                                       2
    Multi purpose velcro fastening strap set (6)                          1
    Cervical collar (stiffneck) pack of 6                                 6
    Tie on labels or triage cards                                        50
    Patient ID bracelets adult/child sizes                                6
    Red ID bracelets for allergies                                        6
    Melonin/granuflex dressings                                           6
    Mini-trach II tracheostany set (or cricothyrotany kit)                1
    Monitor/defibrillator OR                                              1
    Semi automatic defibrillator, charger, recorder                       1
    Box of BM or Dextrostix                                              1
    Oxygen cylinders    D size                                            2
    Entonox cylinders D size                                              2
    Tabard 'DOCTOR'                                                       1
    Tabard 'MEDICAL INCIDENT OFFICER'                                     1
    Portable headlamp, e.g. Petzel                                       1


    Books
    National Formulary or MIMMS
    Disaster Plan for Stadium
    DHA Major Incident Plan
                                     -11-



23.   Most of the above equipment should be contained in light carrying
      cases and stored in a safe place at the ground between matches.     A
      trolley should be available to enable the equipment to be quickly and
      easily transported to the First Aid Roan on match days.     The Crowd
      Doctor should ensure that the arrangements for storing the equipment
      between matches are to his satisfaction.    Crowd Doctors should keep
      certain items of equipment such as the defibrillator (if this has not
      been supplied by the local Ambulance Service - see next paragraph)
      and/or certain drugs with them rather than leave than in storage at
      the ground.   The working party recaimends that the Crowd Doctor should
      be responsible for the asterisked drugs listed in paragraph 22.      Those
      doctors who are not ordinarily in possession of controlled drugs may
      need to make special arrangements.


24.   The Crowd Doctor must ensure that the equipment is checked and
      maintained.   It is suggested that the local Ambulance Service could
      assist by providing and maintaining the more complex items of
      equipment, such as the defibrillator.   The Crowd Doctor should liaise
      with the Ambulance Service on this point.


25.   The working party feels that the Crowd Doctor should remain at the
      ground for a minimum of half an hour after the end of the match. If
      his attendance is required for a longer period, he must remain until
      his work is done.


26.   The Crowd Doctor should familiarise himself with the local Accident
      and Emergency Department's major incident plan and the local
      authority's emergency plan.


27.   It is recormended that a full record of all medical incidents at the
      ground for each event should be made by the Crcwd Doctor.    He should
      make an annual return to the co-ordinating officer in the local health
      authority (respecting patient confidentiality).   The Crowd Doctor
      should give an abstract of these records to the club,   making sure
      that patients' names have been deleted to maintain confidentiality,
      and the club should make an annual return to the Football League.
                                         -12-




      There should be a supply of NCL referral forms available to the Crowd
      Doctor, so that he can hand a chit to the patient if hospitalisation
      or further medical attention is required and retain
      one himself.   For this purpose the working party recommends the
      standard A S H form used by the local ambulance services.   An example
      of this form is shown at Appendix D.


28.   The Chairman of this working party has been contacted by the
      appropriate British Medical Association cormittee on the subject of
      remuneration for Crowd Doctors. The British Medical Association has
      asked to be kept informed of the outcome of this working party's
      report in order that appropriate remuneration for Crowd Doctors can be
      recomnended.


RECOMMENDATION 66(b) - At any match where a number of spectators is not
expected to exceed 2,000, the club should make arrangements to enable a
medical practitioner to be summoned imnediately to tteal with any mprl-iral
exigency at the ground.    He shculd be trained and competent in advanced
first aid.   The arrangements made shculd be known to those in the police
control room.


29.   In such cases, the Crowd Doctor must be able to get to the ground
      within 10 minutes.    If this is not practicable for geographical or
      traffic reasons, he must be on call in the ground.


RECOMMENDATION 67 - At least one fully equipped ambulance fran or approved
by the appriopriate ambulance authority should be in attendance at all
matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.
RECOMMENDATION 68 - The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches
where larger crowds are expected shculd be specified by the local authority
after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
requirement of the Safety Certificate.
                                       -13-




30.   The working party agrees that dedicated ambulances are required for
      each match with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more; the number of
      ambulances at each ground to be determined locally - this will depend
      on the size and geography of each individual ground.     The working
      party would recormend that for matches with an expected crowd of 5,000
      or more, there should be a minimum of 1 ambulance approved by the
      appropriate ambulance authority and 1 voluntary service ambulance in
      attendance.
31.   The statutory ambulance(s) will only leave the ground if the patient
      needs urmediate hospitalisation and no other vehicle is available.     If
      the statutory ambulance does leave the ground, the Ambulance Service
      ccmnunications officer present should immediately order a replacement
      ambulance.     The working party would suggest, however, that the
      voluntary service ambulance (St. John Ambulance/British Red Cross
      Society) could be used to good effect to transport peqple to hospital.
      Again, these arrangements should be determined locally.        \


32.   The equipment carried on the statutory ambulance includes the
      following:-


      2 stretcher trolleys - both multi-posture
      piped oxygen to both stretcher trolleys
      defibrillator
      paramedic kit
      axnbu bag
      resuscitation equipment
      analgesic drugs
      blankets
      b u m sheets
      first aid dressings
      carrying chair
      orthopaedic stretcher
      cervical collars
      splintage variety (i.e. inflatable, box, spinal)
      radio comnunications
      aspirator
                                          -14-



      carry sheets
      maternity pack


RECXM1ENDATICN 69 - A "major incident equipment vehicle", designed and
equipped to deal with up to 50 casualties, should be deployed in addition to
other ambulance attendance at a match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is
expected.


33.   The working party agreed with this recaimendation, but felt that there
      could be problems in certain areas of the country if there was more
      than one match with a 25,000+ attendance taking place on the same day
      or if such a match clashed with other large attendance events in the
      area.


GENERAL



34.   It is reccmnended that a liaison meeting be held once a year at every
      club immediately before the start of each season.      In attendance at
      this meeting should be the following:-


      the Club Doctor
      the Crowd Doctor(s)
      the nominated liaison officer of    the local Ambulance Service
      the nominated liaisonofficer of     the local police
      the nominated liaison officer of    the local Fire Service
      the liaison officer of the voluntary first aid organisation
                               (St. John Ambulance/British Red Cross
                                   Society)
      the Accident and Emergency Consultant from the local hospital
                               (or his nominated deputy)
      the Club Secretary or Stadium Manager
      a representative of that branch of the local authority that issues the
      club's safety certificate.
                                       -15-



35.   At this meeting the club's fixtures for the forthcoming season can be
      notified to all parties.     Any subsequent fixture alterations should be
      circulated by the club at the appropriate time;      the Ambulance Service
      should be responsible for notifying any fixture changes to the
      Accident and Emergency Consultant.      It would be helpful, at the
      liaison meeting, if the local police could identify any 'high-profile'
      matches.   This would enable the local Accident and Emergency
      Department to be pre-warned.


36.   At every match there should be a meeting one hour before kick-off
      involving the following:-


      the Police Ground Ccntnander
      the Crowd Doctor
      the Senior Ambulance Officer
      the liaison officer of the voluntary first aid organisation -
      (St. John Ambulance/British Red Cross Society)
      the Stadium Manager or the club's Safety Officer


      Following this meeting the name of the Crowd Doctor in attendance
      should be relayed to the local Accident and Emergency Department by
      the Ambulance Service, who should also confirm that the arrangements
      are in hand at the ground.


37.   The working party recommends that this report, which has been compiled
      with football grounds in mind, should be considered by other sporting
      bodies for implementation in venues under their jurisdiction.


AUTOPSY REPORTS FRCM HILLSBOROUGH


38.   The working party required a presentation on the autopsy reports from
      Hillsborough and the lessons to be learned.     A full presentation was
      received from the pathologist involved.     Clinical recommendations to
      doctors may follow in due course.
                                     -16-



WEMBI£Y STAD3XM


39.   Wembley Stadium has been visited and the arrangements for accidents
      and medical emergencies inspected by the Chairman and Secretary to
      this working party , who were very inpressed by what they saw.    These
      arrangements include 2 (or more if necessary) crowd doctors on site
      and a full-time nurse practitioner, together with up to 120 trained
      first aiders, 80 of whan may be registered nurses.    There are 4
      quadrant-sited medical roans and there will be this year 5 dedicated
      and equipped ambulances.   On-site training is a continuous process.


40.   Briefing and debriefing before/after each major event is a routine
      procedure.   The working party recarmends this practice for grounds
      that regularly receive large attendances.


ONGOING ROLE OF THIS WORKING PARTY


41.   The recannendations of this working party, if accepted by the Football
      League Management Committee, will need to be comprehensively and
      tactfully presented to the clubs.


42.   If and when these recaimendations   are in place, it is further
      reconmended that a system for the inspection of medical arrangements
      at grounds be implemented.   It is felt that clubs should be
      accountable to The Football League and this working party is prepared
      to carry out inspections and make reports to the League.


43.   The working party would also wish to see an annual exercise carried
      out, at a different ground each year, whereby a major incident is
      simulated and the staff, first aiders, emergency services etc. are
      tested.   This could be a desk-top exercise or a more extensive and
      expensive option.   Additionally, it would enable technological
      advances and advances in medical procedures to be introduced and
      ensure a regular upgrading of practice.
It is also felt that in future years this ccrrmittee should identify
key people and recarmend their recruitment to ensure continuity and
progress in this important field of medical practice.
                       LIST OF APPENDICES




Appendix A   The latest syllabus for the Standard Certificate in First
             Aid (see paragraph 4)


Appendix B   Football League letter to clubs dated 10th July, 1989
             (see paragraph 11)


Appendix C   Details of the BASICS one-day course in Irrmediate Medical
             Care for medical practitioners (see paragraph 19)


Appendix D   The standard A S H form used by local ambulance service
             (see paragraph 27)
                                                                    FIRST AID

2.4   STANDARD FIRST AID COURSE

      Aim


      undertaking               1? t0 Provide Gaining for BRCS Members
      officlallv ann    i   duties and for other persons. The course is
      HMith    5 JPProved for those working as "First Aiders" under the
      Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations 1981.

      2*4.1   Certification

              A Standard First Aid        Certificate will   be issued   to the
              successful candidate.

      2*4.2   Duration of Course

              Four days or equivalent.   Twenty-six periods of instruction
              plus two periods for the examination.      The whole course
              should not extend beyond 14 weeks.

      2.4.3   Textbooks

              First Aid - The Joint First Aid Manual, 1982

      2.4.4   Qualifications of Examiners, Lecturers and Instructors

              a)   Lecturers

                   Medical Practitioner
                   Registered Nurse Tutor (RNT)
                   Registered Clinical Nurse Teacher (RCNT)
                   Occupational Health Nurse (OHNC)
                   Accident and Emergency Department Sister
                   BRCS Approved Lecturer

              b)   Instructors

                   Registered General Nurse RGN - (SRN)
                   Registered Mental Nurse or RegisteredPsychiatricNurse
                   (RMN) or (RPN) (see para 1.19 a)).

                   BRCS Instructor in First Aid
                   Other persons exempted from the First Aid Instructors'
                   Course. See para 1.26 (b) - (e).

              c)   Examiners

                   Medical Practitioner

                   The Medical Practitioner is in overall charge of a team
                   drawn from 2.4.4 (a) and (b) aboveand      will have the
                   final decision in all cases.

                   An Examining Team member may not examine any person whom
                   he has lectured or instructed on that course.




                                 FA - 7                            Sept 1987
FIRST AID


            2*4.5    Role of the Medical Lecturer


                               3 Ued^ al Lecturer is required for periods 3 and 11
                     Medical O f f i c e r i Peri°df as may be decided by the Branch
                     Officer.                 consultation with the Branch Training

            2.4.6    Attendance

                     The contents of the programme must be fully      covered before
                     any candidate is submitted for examination.

            2.4.7    Course Programme

                     The Standard First Aid Programme is given below. Detailed
                     Guidance Notes on the programme are shown in the Training
                     Guide to Adult First Aid Courses issued 1985 (Supply
                     Department Ref No. 1535).

        2.4.8       Renewal

                    a)   A Refresher Course of one day or longer followed by
                         successful re-examination   is required  before re­
                         certification or renewal.     A Refresher First Aid
                         Certificate will be issued.

                    b)   The minimum interval between examinations is twelve
                         months.    This may be waived to gain a Demonstrators
                         Voucher orInstructors Certificate. (See 1.13 (a)  and
                         (b) of this Section).

        2*^.9       Standard First     Aid Course Programme

                    Complying with     the Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations
                    1981

                    Periods                Day One

                    1)   09.00-09.15      Course Administration

                         09.15—10.05      FIRST AID — scope and aims
                                           FILM — "EMERGENCY" (first       part)    or
                                           similar
                                           Incident Management
                                           Priorities
                                           Delegation and Communication

                    2)   10.10-11.00      FILM - "EMERGENCY" (second part)
                                           DIAGNOSIS -    history,   symptoms      and
                                           signs
                                           EXAMINATION
                                           TREATMENT
                                           DISPOSAL
                                           RECOVERY POSITION
                                           Class practice of the above




                                        FA - 8                            Sept 1987
                                               FIRST AID

 11.00-11.15    Coffee

 11.15-12.05    FILM - "AS I LIVE AND BREATHE"
                (first part) or similar
                RESPIRATION AND    CIRCULATION    -   the
                heart/lung/tissue connection
                ASPHYXIA -    general -    drowning and
                electrocution
                RESUSCITATION        -         artificial
                ventilation/chest            compression
                (principles only)

 12.10-13.00   FILM - ''AS I LIVE AND BREATHE" (second
               part)
               THE OPEN AIRWAY
               RESUSCITATION        —       artificial
               ventilation/chest
               compression(demonstration)
               Class practice of the above

13.00-14.00    Lunch •

14.00-14.50    FILM - "BLOOD LOSS AND SHOCK" (first
               part)
               BLOOD CIRCULATION and the HEART function
               BLEEDING - external/internal
               SHOCK
               CONTROL OF BLEEDING AND REDUCTION OF
               SHOCK (principles only)

14.55-15.45    FILM - "BLOOD   LOSS AND SHOCK" (middle
               part)
               DRESSING - manufactured,    made-up and
               improvised
               CONTROL OF BLEEDING,     BY PRESSURE -
               direct/indirect
               CLASS practice of the above (including
               shock)

15.45-16.00    Tea

16.00-16.45    FIRST AID BOXES - contents and use
               HYGIENE - in handling/dressing of MINOR
               wounds
               Class practice of the above

               FILM - "BLOOD LOSS AND      SHOCK"   (last
               part)
               SPECIAL FORMS OF BLEEDING

16.45— 17.00   RECAPITULATION and home study guidance
FIRST AID


            Periods               Day Two

                  09.00-09.15     REVISION of previous day's work

            8)    09.15-10.05     BURNS/SCALDS
                                  CORROSIVE     INJURY       -      chemical
                                  contamination

            9)    10.10-11.00     COVER BANDAGES - demonstration of uses
                                  IMMOBILISATION — use of slings
                                  Class practice of the above

                  11.00-11.15     Coffee

            10)   11.15-12.05     RECOGNITION OF MINOR ILLNESS
                                  TAKING   OF   PULSE,    TEMPERATURE    AND
                                  RESPIRATION
                                  Class practice of the above

            11)   12.10-13.00     THE BRAIN AND THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
                                  UNCONCIOUSNESS
                                  HEAD INJURY - concussion/compression

                  13.00-14.00     Lunch

            12)   14.00-14.50     MAJOR ILLNESS — Diabetes and fits
                                  BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS - hysteria etc.
                                  HEART ATTACKS
                                  Class    practice     of      positioning
                                  casualties with heart and respiratory
                                  conditions,    revision    of    Recovery
                                  Position

            13)   14.55-15.45     POISONING, GASSING AND SMOKE INHALATION
                                  RESCUE TECHNIQUES
                                  MANUAL   METHODS   OF    RESUSCITATION -
                                  demonstration         of           HOLGER
                                  NIELSEN/SILVESTER
                                  Class practice of the above

                  15.45-16.00     Tea

            14)   16.00-16.45     FILM - "CPR FOR CITIZENS" (last part) or
                                  similar
                                  Class practice of relief of CHOKING
                                  Revision of RESUSCITATION

                  16.45-17.00     RECAPITULATION and study guidance




                                FA - 10                          Sept 1987
                                                       FIRST AID
 Periods                 Day Three

        09.00-09.15      REVISION of previous day's work

 15)    09.15-10.15      FILM — "BONES CAN BREAK" (first part)
                         FRACTURES/(DISLOCATIONS)
                         FILM — "BONES CAN BREAK" (second part)
                         DEMONSTRATIONS OF TREATMENT FOR LOWER
                         FRACTURES
                         - SHIN (ANKLE)/THIGH
                         - PELVIS
                         Class practice of the above

 16)    10.15-11.00     FILM - "BONES CAN BREAK" (last part) -
                        SPINE
                        DEMONSTRATION   OF   IMMOBILISATION BY
                        SPLINTS
                        - SHINS, THIGHS (shown only)
                        - KNEE
                        - FOOT
                        - NECK
                        Class practice of the above

       11.00-11,15      Coffee

17)    11.15-12,05      DEMONSTRATION OF TREATMENTS FOR UPPER
                        FRACTURES
                        - SKULL AND JAW/CHEEK/NOSE
                        FILM - "BONES CAN BREAK" (third part)
                        - ARMS/RIBS/BREASTBONE
                        Class demonstration of the above
                        Class practice of the above

18)    12.05-13.00      DEMONSTRATION OF TREATMENTS FOR UPPER
                        FRACTURES
                        - HAND/FINGERS,    SHOULDER BLADE/COLLAR
                        BONE, RIBS (complicated)
                        Class practice of the above

       13.00-14.00      Lunch

19)    14.00-14.50      SPRAINS
                        STRAINS
                        Demonstration of bandaging of JOINTS and
                        MUSCLES
                        - ARM/LEG
                        - KNEES/ELBOW
                        - ANKLE/WRIST
                        Class practice of the above

20)    14.55-15.45      TRANSPORTATION/HANDLING OF THE INJURED
                        DEMONSTRATION   OF SEATS,     LIFTS AND
                        CARRIES
                        Class practice of the above




                      FA - 11                         Sept 1987
FIRST AID


                    15.45-16.00      Tea

             21)     16.00-16.45     FILM - "HANDLE HIM WITH CARE" or similar
                                      SPECIAL FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION/HANDLING
                                      - SPINE ETC
                                      - STRETCHERS
                                      Class practice of the above

                    16.45-17.00      RECAPITULATION and studyguidance

            Periods                  Day Four

                   09.00-09.15      REVISION of previous day's work

            22)     09.15-10.05     MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONS
                                     EYE INJURIES - examination andtreatment
                                     Class practice of the above

            23)     10-10-11.00     RECORDS    AND   REPORTING     - simple
                                     procedures
                                     class practice of the above
                                     REVISION OF INCIDENT MANAGEMENT
                                    FILM - "YOU CAN SAVE LIVES" (last part)
                                    or similar

                   11.00-11.15      Coffee

            24)    11.15-12.05      SIMULATED INCIDENT(S)
                                     Class practice of MANAGEMENT/RECORDING
                                     DEBRIEFING, of above activity

            25)    12.10—13.00      REVISION OF COURSE — General
                                     Class practice of treatments

                   13.00-14.00      Lunch

            26)    14.00-14.40      REVISION OF LIFE-SAVERS
                                    Class practice of the above

                   14.40-14.45      EXAM PREPARATION

                   14.45-15.00      Tea

                   15.00-17.00      EXAMINATION - THEORY - RESUSCITATION
                                    - PRACTICAL




                                  FA - 12                           Sept 1987
                                                                             rT B A t>
                                                                               ^NDED ^


                                        T H E F O O T B A L L L E A G U E LIM ITED
U c h a m St \n n e s . Lancashire. FY8 II G . T e l e p h o n e 0253 T2«421. T elex ? 7o 7 '. r' a \ . ) 2 ' >            72i:r'.o        s e c re ta r ,   2



5/5918                                                                                                      10th July, 1989


TO ALL CLUBS


Dear Secretary,

                                                     First Aid Facilities at Grounds

      Following the tragic events at Hillsborough, consideration has been given
to the subject of first aid facilities at grounds.

      It is recognised that clubs would need a   fully-equippedcasualty ward to
cope with a major disaster. This is clearly not feasible, so what has been looked
at is what can reasonably be provided.

      The Management Committee consider that clubs should follow the r
recommended guidelines given below. It should be stressed, however, that these
should be seen as minimum requirements.

a)      First Aid Room

      Each club should have a designated First Aid Room, in addition to the club's
medical room. The First Aid Room should contain at least two beds, a sink, a
work-top and a curtain to give the necessary privacy. The room should be
supplied with power, light, water and a direct line telephone. There must be
ready access for emergency vehicles.

b)      Medical Equipment

     The First Aid Room should have a well-stocked cabinet containing antiseptics,
analgesic, bandages etc. Management should designate one person as being
responsible for stocking the cabinet and for the general up-keep of the First
Aid Room.

        Stretchers, a carrying chair, blankets and oxygen should be available.

c)      Medical Staff

      It is recognised that the club doctor's attendance a t matches is primarily
for attention to players. It is felt, therefore, that there should be at least one
extra qualified person in attendance at matches.




                                                                                                               Continued/ 2



                   M l c o rresp o n d en c e to b e ad d re s s e d to The Secretary R e gis tered   js j b o v e Regis tered m f w a n d h»oI -
 10th July, 1989


TO ALL CLUBS




d)   Ambulance

      At least one fully-equipped ambulance should be in attendance at all matches
with an expected attendance of 5,000*. The ambulance should be equipped with
defibrillators and resuscitative equipment and be manned by personnel trained
in their use.

     Clubs should be able to hire such an ambulance with two paramedics for
around £90 per match.

e)   First Aid Personnel

         first-aiders serving at grounds should be fully trained and experienced.
At the start of each season, clubs should be furnished with a complete list of
trained first-aiders by the organisation providing their first aid service: such list
to be regularly updated.

      There should be a minimum of three first-aiders for up to 1,000 spectators,
with one additional first-aider for every 1,000 spectators above the first 1,000,
up to a total of 10,000 spectators. Thereafter an additional first-aider for every
additional 2,000 spectators.

      Clubs will be asked to detail their first aid facilities and their emergency
procedures in a revised local plan; separate instructions on this will follow shortly.
If you have any queries, please speak to Chris Whalley or Jack Crawford.

                                   Yours ^yncerely,




                                    SECRETARY.
                                British Association for Immediate
                                                  President: The Rt. Hon. The Earl of Elgin & Kincardine, KT


REGISTERED CHARITY No: 276054



                                                  TRAINING COMMITTEE
                  PROPOSED ONE DAY COURSE IN IMMEDIATE CARE FOR MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS


      08.45             . COFFEE AND REGISTRATION

      09.00                INTRODUCTION - AN OVERVIEW OF PRE HOSPITAL CARE

     09.15                Interservice liaison, communications, major incident management,
                          documentation and functions of Medical Incident Officer, scene
                          and patient assessment.      (To be expanded for Crowd Doctor).

     10.15                Medical Emergencies      - Identification
                          Cardiac emergency

     11.15                Coffee

     11.30                Pain
      to
     15.00                Shock
     (with
     break                Head
     for
     lunch)
                          Crush and Blast

                          Thoracic

                          Abdominal

                          Spinal and orthopaedics

                          Bums

                         Water related emergencies                   ) (But to be replaced
                                                                     ) by "The Role and
                          Paediatric                                 ) Skills of the First
                                                                        Aider")
     15.00 to



     15.30 to            Skills stations on Advanced Cardiac Life Support
     18.00                                  Airway management
                                                Splintage

     18.00 to
     lrt V)              Questions and discussion


              7 Black Horse Lane, Ipswich, Suffolk IP1 2EF.   Telephone: (0473) 218407        Facsimile (0473)
                                                  Chief Executive: Mr. R. Bailey
      a w r r U L * AMQULANUC SERVICE
                                                                                                                                                     INJURY ASSESSMENT'PRIORITY
                                                                         Patient Report Form
                                                                                                                                                     Critical/Immediate                 r
      Crew                   | Dr.
                                                          I * " -                       ------------                                                 Seriout/Urgent                     LJ
      Data                                                                                                   r       i
*                                                 Call Time                                                                                          Moderate/Delayed
                                                                                                             1     j
      Location                                    Arrival Time                                                                                       Minor
•
                                                  Depart Tima                                            Surname                              Foreneme                                  MIf
     Hospital                                     Arrival Time                                           d.o.b.                    Address
      TYPE OP INCIDENT R T A D                Horn# □                W orfcsD                   Organised Sport □            Leisure □       Other (Specify) □
     If RTA:          Driver (_|        Front/Rear Passenger □                                      Pedestrian □                         M otor -cyclist □                  Cyclist □
     Seatbelts?
                       Y esD         N oP    Not known □                         Vomited?            Y e tP        No □      Alcohol?       Yes □       No □         Not known □
     Cfaih helm8t? Y m D N o D               Not known □                         Ko'd                Ye, □         No □      Trapped?       Ye, □      No □          How Ion,?
     OBSERVATIONS       Time                 1)                2)                  3)
     Appearance Pallid                            o                      □                      □
                Cyanosed                          n                      D                      □
    Blood L ou Slight                             □                  □                          □
               Moderate                           □
                                                  □                  □                          □
               Severe                                                □                          □
    Bloo<j
    Pressure

    Bum.Bur                                  t              ii                    ir— i
    Respiratory: Rate                                                                                         nuuaiffi
                                             a        i    c         n             1                |
                  Fitting                                                                                     C#       Closed Fracture
    ££iS                                        □                    □                      □
                  Spontaneous                 4D                                                              0#       Open Fracture
    ix *                                                             □                      □
    Opening       To voice                    3D                                                              B        Burn (shade area)
                                                                     □                      □
                  To pain                     2D                     □                      □                 F        Foreign body
                  Nil                         1 □                    □                      □                 L        Laceration
    Basi          Orientatad                  5 0                                                             A        Abrasion
                                                                     □                      □
    Verbal        Confused                    4 □                    □                      □
    Response      Inappropriate               3 0                    □                      □
                  Incomprehensibly            2 □                    □                      □
                  Nil                         1 □                    □                      □
    Motor         Obeys command               6 □                    □                      □
    Response      Localises pain              5D                     □                      □
                  Withdrawal (pain)           4 0                    □                      □
                  Flexion (pain)              3D                     □                      □
                  Extension (pain)            2D                     □                      □
                  Nil                         1 □                    □                      □
    Pupils       React R                       □                     □                                       Bowel Sounds
                                                                                            □
                 M>rX) L                        □                    a                      □                □P re s e n t
    1 X       Constricted             Site R 1----- !
    2 O       Normal                         t—■ 1               □                      □                    □A b w n t
    a O       Dilated
    ACTION TAKEN
                                            L LJ
                                                    Dose/Volume
                                                                 □                  n   Tima            COMMENTS:
    IV Fluids           □   N. Saline
                        □   Hartman*
                        □   Haemaceel
    Other (specify)     □
    Analgesia/          □   Entonox
    Drugs (specify)     □                                                                               Win ed                        Dr.                       Nurse
                        □                                                                               Craw
    Cardiac            □    ECM                                                                         HOSPITAL FOLLOW UP                          Hospital No.
    Arrest             □    Defib.
                                                                                                        Diagnosis A/E                                   A/E No.
    Airway             □ Airway              □    Oxygen                     □     Sucker
                       E Ventilated          □    Intubated                  □     Mini Trac            Disposal               DOA □           ADM G           OP   (“ 1    Home   12
    Splints            □    Cx Collar        □ Hines                         □    Box                   Died                   Dat«                          Time
                       □    Frac Straps      D Inflatable                    □    Traction              Trauma Scoro Time 1)                           21                  3!
    «


    %




/
