                                                      DCI (ENG)^
                                                    1 - AUG 1990
                                                     TECH. DIV.



C E Nicholson                                 Technology Division
Safety Engineering Laboratory 1              Room 436 Magdalen Ho
RLSD Sheffield                                HSE Bootle

                                               1 August 1990

HOME OFFICE - REVISION OF GREEN GUIDE ON SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


As discussed by telephone today, Mr Jones passed your letter of
the 3 July (with the revised Green Guide) to             who asked
me to reply to Mr Jones.

It now seems that we are very pressed for time and I have agreed
with Mr Jones that I will pass mv comments directly to you. The
intended consultation with            of TD over the fire matters
in the Guide will have to wait to the public consultation stage.

As I pointed out,            is on holiday at the present time and
I have had to comment on the text without the benefit of his
advice.  I have not been involved in any meetings nor seen the
draft or the original document before - so my comments are rather
"off the top of my head".

Nevertheless I have made some comments on 87 of the 107 pages of
the draft, and hope that some of them may be of value.  I feel the
document lacks clarity - especially over the fundamental question
of who is in charge and when that circumstance might change and
under what circumstances.  It is repetitious, and the Chapter on
"Communications" is the worst and would benefit from a_x^-write.




                                      c. c.               TD3
                           This minute only1 jyla r o u n t a

Head of Group
[{1 1
                                                                        Reference




                                  DC! (E N G IN E E R IN G )
               Dr C E Nicholson                                  cc:   Dr B§jn^ick, SGPD C3
               DD/SEL5                in          1330                      Jones, TD
               Sheffield
                              T E C H N O L O G Y D IV IS IO N
                                                                       Mr F Lindsay, APAU
                               FlLEKo: ^            A                  Mr H Cavanagh, POD (Area 18)
                                                                 .J
               HOME OFFICE - REVISION OF THE 'GEEEN GUIDE1 ON SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


               1)   Thank you for sending me this "First Aid" section for comment.
                    Clearly the policy comment will come from__________ HPD/D.

               2)   However, I can perhaps add a few related thoughts:

                    (a)   Do we have any idea of the average accident and ill
                          health rate/10,000 attendees at a football match or
                          any large public gathering ?

                    (b)   If we haven't got these statistics, perhaps we should
                          get them (via an extramural research programme) ?

                    (c)   How do the number of cases of ill-health vary with
                          temperature, type of event (horse-riding v. soccer etc),
                          density and type of accommodation, access to alcohol ?

                    (d)   Should (or do) the first-aid rooms have accident books ?
                          If they do, have we looked at them ?

               3)   If we had this sort of information we could give informed guidance.
                    This draft suggests a room "large enough to contain the minima
                     of a couch".

                    It seems such a room (with one couch) certainly is an inadequate
                    provision at a large first-division match.

               4)   Clearly the present guidance will go out. Should we commission
                     some research concerning accident and ill health rates at public
                     sports gatherings (if this information is not available) ? We
                     in HPD/E would be happy to help.




               HPD/E
               5 July 1990




CODE   18-77
J O tt V A .
     xv^'             r
      T*! . ro-J" ^
                                       -safr
              U     N    I V   E   R   S    I T Y        O       F     S U     R     R   E Y
                                                                                                              ■k
t             Guildford Surrey GU2 5XH
              Departm ent o f Psychology
                                              Telephone (0483) 571281
                                              Direct Line (0483) 50917®
                                                                                   Telex 859331
                                                                                   Fax 0483 32813
                                                                                                     ^2- a
              David Canter, Head of Department and Professor of Psychology                           OCT ms
              Harry McGurk, Professor of Developmental Psychology
                                                                                             fit 0*
                                                                                                <K        W
 2nd October 1989                                  Cc       S.
                                                                               ij*                   (1^1 Re.
Mr R M Whallcy
Secretary to the Inquiry
Inquiry into the Hillsborough
Stadium Disaster
50 Queen Annc‘s Gate                                    „    K*.     Q4<jl)C
London SW1H 9AT

Dear Mr Whalley,

Further to your request of 20th September 1989, enclosed are some notes on the issues
as I see them in relation to Crowd Behaviour. I have deliberately been as succinct as
possible, given the amount of documents you will be reading. I hope my notes are not
too cryptic as a consequence.

If you require any further assistance do let me know, but as you will see I do think
that this is an enormous topic with very little scientific information to draw upon.

Yours sincerely,



Professor David Canter
Head of Department

Encl.




                                             1
4




                     HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY




                          Comments on Crowd Behaviour from
                          Professor David Canter
                          University of Surrey




    LACK OF RESEARCH

     1. Despite the distressing regularity of major inquiries into aspects of crowd safety and
    control throughout this century there has been remarkably little systematic, scientific
    -tudy of crowds and how to control them effectively. What knowledge does exist tends
    to be ad hoc personal experience of police officers.

    2. The few studies that have been carried out tend to have focused on limited issues in
    haste for major inquiries, (e.g. the work of Scicon following the Ibrox Disaster Inquiry,
    the work of Canter et al for the Popplewell Inquiry).

    3. Clearly, then, a significant issue is to encourage the support of wide ranging studies
    of crowd behaviour by competent behavioural scientists.


    WHAT IS KNOWN

    4. Such studies can build upon the following areas in which there is some systematic
    knowledge.

           a)    Flow rates can be predicted in general terms.

          b)     Basic maximum capacities can be established as a consequence of
                 assumptions about flow rates, but the densities used as calculations are for
                 extreme circumstances not for the normal conditions.

          c)     Although often ignored, there is a general understanding of the difficulties
                 that disabled people experience in crowds and how to design for these
                 people.

          d)     There is some preliminary understanding of how to communicate with
                 large crowds and of the processes that are likely to make crowds difficult
                 to control.




                                               1
#
         MATTERS REQUIRING URGENT CONSIDERATION

         5. Differential Ingress and Egress

         Current calculations usually take the capacity divided by exit unit widths in order to
         calculate crowd flows. This assumes people divide themselves evenly between available
         exits or entrances. They do not.

         6. Differential Densities

        Variations in crowd density are likely to be a natural product of various sociol-
        psychological processes. This should be planned for in capacity calculations and crowd
        management procedures.

    *       Crowd Characteristics

        The large differences between types of crowd needs to be systematised and allowed for,
        overtly, in management and planning. This will have direct implications for flow rates
        and densities.

        8. Waiting Times

        The Scicon study on crowd waiting in enclosed areas and possible turbulence, is by
        their own admission ambiguous and flawed. Yet it guides many regulations. The
        control of slow moving, static or waiting crowds needs urgent analysis.

        9. Communication with Crowds

        A set of clear guidelines on the most effective way to communicate with crowds under
        various circumstances need to be established. This should not be left to "common
        sense and the personal style of the person who happens to be near a microphone, for
        example. Who should communicate, when, where and how all needs to be set down
        for varying circumstances.

        10. Information Systems

        The maintenance of consistency across all forms of communication and signposting is
        already indicated in your interim recommendations (e.g. recommendation nos. 22, 23
        and 24). What is involved in establishing a comprehensive consistency now needs to
        be elaborated.

        11. Training for Crowd Management

        Procedures need to be established as to the best ways to train police, club management,
        stewards etc to recognise and act on appropriate crowd cues. I have already had police
        forces in touch with me asking for help for example, in relation to recommendation 6,
        in recognition of crowd densities and dynamics.



                                                   2
  12. Public Expectations and Attitudes

 As considered in our book "Football in its Place", which has been sent to you, a focal
 issue is the expectations that members of a crowd have about a public event. The role
 of the police and club management in this are crucial. At present most actions support
 a fortress attitude with expectations of anti-social behaviour. If there is not to be a
 need for another inquiry in a few year's time this attitudinal/educational issue must be
 addressed directly.



 BRIEF RESUME OF PROFESSOR CANTER

Professor David Canter is Professor of Psychology and Head of the Department of
  sychology at the University of Surrey. He is internationally known for his work in
^ nvironmental Psychology and his studies of human behaviour in fires and emergencies.

kHe is Fellow of the British Psychological Society and the American Psychological
 Association and the British Institute of Management. He is the founding editor of the
 Journal of Environmental Psychology.

He carried out a series of studies on major fires and other small domestic fires, for
m^n>^ / ef r,s ^or  Fire Research Station. As a result of this work produced a book,
Pu? ! s^ by Wiley in 1980 entitled "Fires and Human Behaviour". He has also
published a number of papers on this topic and given many presentations at national
and international conferences on the topic.

He was appointed as a technical adviser to the Popplewell Inquiry into Crowd Safety at
bports Grounds and the King's Cross Inquiry.

He had produced 14 books and over 100 articles in technical and learned journals.




                                          3
11 &


       4
                                               TD3/5A



                  H/TD3B                  cc                          H /T D 3
                                               I              TD 3B




                           HILLSBOROUGH
Reference your telecon message of 12.10.89         about HSE input to the
revision of the Green Guide.   I had spoken        to Dr A Jones, D/SEL
on 10.10.89 about this when he advised me          that Dr Nicholson had
been invited by the Inquiry team to join a         working party for this
purpose (see copy of letter attached).

It is too late to revise our representation on the Inquiry/WG but
I   impressed on Dr Jones the need for proper briefing of
Dr Nicholson at each significant stage.       In this respect I
suggested that Dr Nicholson runs briefing meetings at appropriate
intervals which would include

          TD3 (
          FAID-ttnt. NIG (H Cavanaqh)
          SPD/D3 Policy (|        \
No doubt Dr Nicholson will be in touch on this requirement in the
near future since I understand that the Inquiry/WG has a somewhat
ambitious meeting schedule.      Please cooperate as required to
ensure that TD views are known and considered.




pp P G JONES
DCI(ENG)/TD

17 October 1989
                                             T E L E PH O N cM E SS.


F or th e a tte n tio n o f:

Caller's nam e:

Firm o r organisation

Address        ....................




T elephone n u m b e r ...................... ,A.......................................... 4 E xt

Particulars of message

 0^/..                                                                        --ivryvAiJ^_.. 9 ^ . A n . .
^y^.'/Vv4fer^. .jp.S                                                                          .&j_. .-^r^A .
^ s A - il .9 -v x ..                                  pjfc. A |? ^ * r £ > . jl^ V iavvvvd p ,, .                          .

                                                                  (Xaa/Sl

 .€>                                  ..^ky&Jb. ,.^s£V. .OJh .
                          .|La_.                                                      ,tfsfc .QkvA                          .

^ - V . . H v c? ^ k s iA /9 > . ^ y s t ' .’ . . ."TT.-b                                           rsftJ C .

IL loliLl                                  <w^ ^uv,da^ °-t                                                      f< £. lU x s^ o
A ction tak en an d /o r to be tak en (e.g. phone back)




                                          S ignature        ......................... t). r S A ^ v L .Q i^ .............

                                                o       . .......................
                                               T im e      ..................................( 9 . ’.   9: 9. 9^     .



CS3/2
i/ h °
                                                 DSEL 14.4


                                           ccs   Dr Nicholson
                                                 Dr McQuaid




HILLSBOROUGH

I confirm what we agreed by telephone today that Dr Nicholson
will convene a briefing meeting with T           (TD),
Mr H Cavanagh (Ent.NIG) and           (SPD D3) in preparation
for the first meeting of Lord Justice Taylor's Technical
Working Party on the Green Guide.

I enclose correspondence relating to the formation of the
Technical Working Party for your information.




ALAN JONES
D/SEL
RLSD Sheffield                                    DCI (ENGINEERING)
10 October 1989                                      12 QCT 1989 lA v°
                                                 TECHNOLOGY DIVISION

Encs.                                            FILE No:
IIw
                                                   T b jO P P £ o   M ix
                  RECEIVED IN THE OFFICE OF
                       THE DIRECT"                                         o
                        12 OCT 1339
Dr Linda Derrick
spd 3            TECHNOLOGY DIVISION
                                              DSEL 14.4

                                              Dr   J   McQuaid, RLSD
                                              Mr   D   J Hodgkins, SPD
                                              Mr   P   G Jones, TD
                                              Mr   F   Lindsay, APAU
                                                            ■   Ent.NIG
                                              Mr   h   uavanagn, Ent.NIG



                                              Mr A c Barrell, TD
                                              Mr A J Linehan, CIO


                                              Dr C E Nicholson, SEL


HILLSBOROUGH

Your minute of 2 6 September and vour minute to Mr P G Jones
dated 19 September.

I suggest that Dr Nicholson (DD/SEL1) joins the working group
that you propose and I would be grateful if you would contact
him directly concerning arrangements for the pre-meeting in
mid-October.

A separate development that I discussed today with
SPD D3, is that Dr Nicholson is to sit on a small technical
working party on the Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds. This
working party has been convened by Lord Justice Taylor as part
of the Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry Part II.   (The terms of
reference of the Working Party are attached.)

In addition to what you propose in your draft terms of
reference, the HSE Working Group will usefully provide Dr
Nicholson with information from other parts of HSE relevant to
the Taylor Technical Working Party. Unfortunately, however,
Lord Justice Taylor's Working Party has arranged to meet on 18
October and as an interim measure, and after consultation with
TD, I have arranged for Dr Nicholson to be briefed for this
first meeting by representatives of TD, the Entertainments NIG
and, in your absence,             has also agreed to join the
meeting.

Subsequent meetings of the Taylor Working Party are arranged for
the 2, 7 and 28 November.




ALAN JONES
Director/SEL
RLSD Sheffield
10 October 1989

Enc.
TERMS OF REFERENCE



     To review technical aspects of the Guide to Safety at
     Sports Grounds;   identify areas needing clarification
     or amendment;   and recommend accordingly.




MEMBERSHIP

Professor Leonard Maunder OBE (Chairman)
Assessor to the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry

M G T Dickson Esq BA MS CEng MIStructE
Buro Happold - on behalf of the Institution of Structural
Engineers

L N Bush Esq FRICS CEng MIStructE FIAS
City Building Surveyor, City of Liverpool

Dr C E Nicholson PhD CEng MIM
Deputy Director, Research and Laboratory Services Division,
Health and Safety Executive

B A Stickley Esq CEng FIStructE
Directorate of Works
Home Office

W H Carter Esq
George Corderoy & Co
Quantity Surveyors - on behalf of the Football Association

J Sweet Esq (Secretary)
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
i/ h
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               T h e Rt Hon Lord j u s i i c e Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            v iQutren Anne > Gait




Dr C E Nicholson PhD CEng MIM
Deputy Director
Research & Laboratory Services Division
Health and Safety Executive
Broad Lane
SHEFFIELD
S3 7HQ
                                                2 6 September 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY PART II
TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY ON THE GREEN GUIDE


I am very pleased that you are able to accept Lord Justice
Taylor's invitation to sit on a small technical working party on
the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.  The terms of reference
and membership of the working party are attached.

The Chairman of the working party is Professor Leonard Maunder,
one of Lord Justice Taylor's Assessors on the Hillsborough
Stadium Disaster Inquiry.

The Secretary is Jonathan Sweet, my assistant as Secretary to the
Inquiry.  He will be contacting you shortly about the date for
the first meeting of the working party.

                                          0Uaj
                                                                  /



                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
TERMS OF REFERENCE



     To review technical aspects of the Guide to Safety at
     Sports Grounds;   identify areas needing clarification
     or amendment;   and recommend accordingly.




MEMBERSHIP

Professor Leonard Maunder OBE (Chairman)
Assessor to the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry

M G T Dickson Esq BA MS CEng MIStructE
Buro Happold - on behalf of the Institution of Structural
Engineers

L N Bush Esq FRICS CEng MIStructE FIAS
City Building Surveyor, City of Liverpool

Dr C E Nicholson PhD CEng MIM
Deputy Director, Research and Laboratory Services Division,
Health and Safety Executive

B A Stickley Esq CEng FIStructE
Directorate of Works
Home Office

W H Carter Esq
George Corderoy & Co
Quantity Surveyors - on behalf of the Football Association

J Sweet Esq (Secretary)
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
ih i
