                                                                              18 DEC 1389a. • i
                                                                  Reference

                                                                                 SME/196/292/016
                                                                                 SME/956/02




              Mr A D Osborne, Solicitors Office
              Mr H Cavanagh, Area Director
              Dr L Derrick, SGP                                   r~



                                                                                DCI (ENGINEERING)
                                                                                  2 1 DEC 1989 ^
                                                                              TECHNOLOGY DIVISION
                                                                              FILE No:             (V W f e j
              HUiSBCROOGH INQUIRY
              TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY CN THE GBEEX GUIDE

              I enclose a copy of the minutes of the fourth meeting of the above Working
              Party, held on 28 November 1989*

              Please let me knew if you have; any comments.




              DR C E NICHOLSON
        Pf    Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1
              KLSD, Sheffield

              18 December 1989




ODE   18-77
TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY                                   WP 89(M)4


NOTE OF A MEETING HELD IN ROOM G21 THE HOME OFFICE ABELL HOUSE ON
TUESDAY 28 NOVEMBER AT 10.30AM


Present:   Professor L Maunder        (Chairman)
           Mr N Bush
           Mr W Carter
           Mr M Dickson
           Dr C Nicholson
           Mr B Stickley
           Mr J Sweet                 (Secretary)


                                                         Action

Agenda Item 1 - Minutes of Previous Meeting


1.   The minutes of the meeting on Tuesday 7 November
were agreed.


Agenda Item 2 - Matters Arising


2. • It was agreed to defer these matters for
consideration later in the meeting.


Agenda Item 3 - Report on Visit to Utrecht


3.   Professor Maunder reported that this had been a
worthwhile and instructive visit, not least because of
the realisation that the Dutch constructors, Ballast-
Needam, were now a wholly owned subsidiary of British
Aerospace, and, with the parent company, were involved
in discussion about the possible redevelopment/
construction of a number of stadia in this country.
The majority would follow the design of Utrecht, which
accommodated 20,000 spectators, 12000 of whom were
seated but that proposed at Birmingham would, by
contrast, accommodate approximately 100,000
Negotiations with the FA on this project were at a very
early stage and the information was consequently of a
commercially sensitive nature.
4.    The actual stadium at Utrecht was impressively
laid—out, and incorporated a number of commercial
ventures which utilised the spacing under the stands•
Office accommodation occupied the corners of the
ground, and these projects combined to bring in revenue
to the club.    The stadium had been financed by the
municipal authorities, but was now being handed over to
private ownership.

5.    As to ground characteristics, the pitch was
surrounded by a concrete moat approximately 3 metres
wide and 2 metres deep, giving a clear walkway round
the ground, and providing ingress/egress for emergency
vehicles.     Although possible for fans to descend into
the moat, few did so since visibility was very
restricted.

6.    Entry to the ground was by way of wide, level
tunnels which emerged at the bottom of the terraces and
stands.     There were no turnstiles.   Once through outer
gates guarding entry to the tunnels, fans could
purchase tickets at guichets set into the walls or, if
already in possession of tickets, proceed straight to
the end of the tunnel where stewards manned double
gates opened sufficiently wide to allow fans through
one at a time.     It was here that ticket inspection took
place.

 7.   The design features of the stadium had enabled a
reduced police presence pitch—side, but it was still
necessary for a heavy police contingent to escort
 visiting fans, especially those from     high-risk    clubs,
 from the railway station to the ground.     Such fans were
 bused in under armed escort and disembarked straight
 into the tunnel leading to their section of terracing.
 A similar process operated in reverse at the end of the
 game, giving little opportunity for rival fans to
 clash.     This system was facilitated by the amount of
 space around the building which allowed coaches to draw
                                                            Action

up alongside the relevant tunnel.    It would clearly be
impracticable at many stadia in this country.


8.    Moulded, plastic seating had proved resilient and
difficult to vandalize.


9.    The Dutch government had sought recently to
introduce a national identity card scheme, but the
pilot project had been sabotaged by fans and the clubs
themselves, who remained opposed to the.idea.    Although
the government was keen to reintroduce the scheme, it
was clear that this would command little support among
many in the football fraternity.


10.   On advice from Mr Carter, it was agreed that it
was, at this stage, unnecessary to pursue any
particular points with BAe representatives in this
country.     Mr Carter undertook, however, to obtain        Cart e r

further details of the density, spacing, slope and
strength specifications required by the Dutch
authorities for stadia there.


Agenda Item 4 - Report on Meeting with Professor Canter


11.   Professor Canter believed that there was
insufficient knowledge and information on crowd
behaviour;     as a result, the figures on which many
designs and rules were made were suspect.     There was a
failure to integrate clubs more closely- into the local
community and insufficient dialogue between clubs and
their supporters.     That lack of information,recognised
by the Working Party, was a major handicap in seeking
to improve both conditions and fans' behaviour, and it
was accepted that longer-term research might be
advantageous.     It was not, however, for the Working
Party to pursue.


12.   Some research on crowd behaviour had already been
carried out.     Mr Dickson referred to a number of
                                                             Action
 published articles:    once obtained, those would be
 circulated.                                                 Swee t


 Meeting with FA /ft.


 13.    Although not an agenda item, Professor Maunder
 thought Working Party members would wish to be aware of
a number of details which had emerged at a recent
meeting with the football authorities.     Important among
these were a UEFA proposal to increase seating at
designated grounds by means of a 10% per annum
reduction in standing, a requirement that, as from
autumn 1992, all World Cup matches were to be played at
all-seater grounds, and a stipulation that as from
January 1993 all "high-risk" events, including domestic
games, were to follow suit.     Whether UEFA had the
authority to impose such a regulation on the domestic
game, was less important than this evidence of the
attitude and approach they were adopting.


14.    Some support had been expressed by the FA/FL to
the idea of making the Green Guide mandatory.    That
view was not shared by Working Party members who felt
that complete enforcement was impractical given the
enormously wide disparity between grounds and ground
conditions.    What was preferred was to make consistent
the process of certification and it was here that an
overseeing body such as the FLA might play a crucial
role.    Such a certifying authority would ensure a
degree of standardisation which many felt lacking under
the current system.


Agenda Item 2 - Matters Arising


Crush Barriers and Hand-ra-Ms


15•    Dr Nicholson and Mr Dickson tabled their paper on
the inspection and testing of crush barriers and
handrails.    It had been drafted following discussion
                                                                Act ion
  and examination of the existing literature on
 structural testing, but was only a draft and open to
 amendment.


  1 6.    Its format was welcomed by   other Working Party
 members who appreciated its concise and logical
 structure.      The figure of 75% referred to in 2(c) (The
 Bedding-in cycle) was based upon criteria set out in
 Institution of Structural Engineers1 papers and was
 accepted as a suitable figure.


 17.      There were a number of minor amendments, which it
 was agreed Messrs Dickson and Nicholson would give            Dickson /
 consideration to in advance of the next Working Party         Nicholson

 meeting.     These included a possible refinement of 2(a)
 (The Proof Test) paragraph 3, and a more explicit
 examination of the impact of reverse loading and
 sideways movement.     There was a measure of consensus
 that the actual test needed to be spelt out in greater
detail.      Similarly reference to foundations and            Dickson/
 terrace-cracking might be made more explicit.        It was   Nicholson

a^so recognised that reference to a fixed percentage in
2(d) (The Test Schedule) might prove counter-productive
and be regarded as the fixed figure to be tested. A
degree of flexibility was required;      if a particular
type of barrier failed, then all barriers of that type
would need testing.      Similarly, should there be any
discrimination within a testing cycle as to the
proportion of existing to new barriers which were to be
tested?


18.      After discussion, it was agreed that further          All   Members
comments on the paper would be submitted to the
Secretary as soon as possible for immediate
circulation.
                                                               Sweet


Inspection and Tests


**®      ’
         E* Stickley's paper (already circulated) had
raised a number of important issues, including the
current unsatisfactory nature of Chapter 4 of the Green
Guide, which needed considerable expansion.     There was
clearly a need for detailed pre-event inspection and
the proposed new paragraph sought to cover the areas
where inspection ought to take place.     It was accepted
that any post-event inspection could probably be of a
less rigorous nature, since such an inspection was a
safety, rather than detailed maintenance, check.


Turnstile Flow Rates


20.   Paragraph 6 of the minutes of the previous meeting
had recorded the Working Party view that a notional
flow rate of 500 persons per hour was more realistic
than the existing Green Guide figure of 750.     After
further discussion, it was accepted that as a general
rule the rate of ingress at a ground was to be
established by the local authority in keeping with the
provisions of the Safety Certificate, but that the
figure of 500 was to be regarded as the median for a
normal turnstile.


Reservoir Densities


21.   Paragraph 14 of the previous minutes had recorded
the Working Party view that a lower density was
required.     Professor Canter had, in his meeting with
the Inquiry, been unable to illuminate the issue
further and discussion, therefore, returned to the more
general principle of whether to allow reservoir areas
at all.     Some support emerged for recalculating flow
rates earlier in the exit route so as to obviate any
need for such areas.    After lengthy discussion, it was
agreed that if this could be done, then it should be,
but that where reservoir areas were still required,
their density should be in the region of 35-40.    All
agreed on the benefits of a proper, networked plan for
each ground, delineating all aspects of ingress/egress.
                                                               Act ion
 Handrails


 22 •   Mr Sticklev tabled a 1952 Fire Grading of
 Buildings document (attached) which laid down the
 figures on which the Green Guide had been drawn up.      It
was Agreed that a similar figure and wording be
adopted.


Terrace Step Widths


23 •    After discussion, it was accepted that whilst the
280 - 380mm range specified in paragraph 92 of the
Green Guide was reasonable, a general form of words
covering extremes outside that range was also required.
Working Party members agreed to give thought to a              All   Members
suitable form of words.     It was also agreed to
substitute the word "excessive" instead of the
reference to 180mm in the final sentence of paragraph
93.


Division of Spectator Accommodation


24.     Both Professor Maunder and Mr Sticklev had looked
again at the problems associated with terrace divisions
and sub-divisions, and Mr Carter had sought information
on the current state of League grounds.     He reported
that, at the majority of grounds, terrace areas were
related to their own, specific turnstiles (and
facilities) and that further sub-division such as had
occurred at Hillsborough was rare.     This applied
throughout the League and was not confined solely to
the larger 1st and 2nd Division clubs.     Such sub­
divisions as did exist had invariably been introduced
at the instigation of the police for security/crowd
control purposes.


25.     It was agreed, after detailed discussion, that the
Working Party would recommend the objective of a direct
   one-to-one relationship between turnstiles and
  enclosures, wherever practicable.         On the rare
  occasions when further sub-division was required, it
  was imperative that the totals to each such sub­
  division should be counted separately,         it was
  unnecessary to specify a maximum figure for terrace
  size.


  Viewing Slope Crush Ba-r-r-i »-re


  26.   After discussion, it was agreed that Mr Stickily'c
 recommendation of "two-thirds that of", replace "the
 same as" in paragraph 107 Green Guide.

 Auxiliary Light.ing


 27. Mr Dickson had obtained an invaluable document on
 this subject prepared by North Yorkshire County
 Council.  it was agreed to circulate this to all
 Working Party members (attached).


 Green Guide Chapter 1 0 - Roofed sfands with
 Accommodation


 28 ‘   Steers Bush and               paper (already
circulated) was discussed in detail, and their
recommendations accepted, with one caveat.         The view
that the strength reguirement in paragraph 128 was
excessive found widespread, but not unanimous, support.
It was agreed to record the majority view that a lower
figure might be acceptable.       There was unanimous
endorsement of the proposal for a separate Chapter in
the Guide on temporary stands and structures.          Mr s»»»f
undertook to establish whether the proposed Home
Office/Scottish Office document referred to in
paragraph 140 had ever been published.                            <

Grg.en Guide Chapter      - crowd ronf..i
  29.     There was general consensus that, as currently
  drafted, this Chapter was too negative.     Substantial
  redrafting was therefore required.     Two areas were of
  critical importance;     (i) the emphasis on sub-division
  in paragraph 206, the principles of which had already
  been discussed, and (ii) the suggestion in paragraph
  209 that access to the pitch be made as difficult as
  possible in normal circumstances.    A divergence of
 views emerged amongst Working Party members as to the
  emphasis to be placed on access, the majority favouring
 more positive wording on the availability of access to
 the pitch.


 Agenda Item 5 - Review of Capacit-i^g


 30.    Chapter 16 of the Green Guide was fundamentally
 important to safety, and considerable debate had
 already taken place as to the advisability of retaining
 the density figures currently set out in paragraph 222.
 Whilst some members remained confident that the figure
 of 54 was, if anything, too cautious, Professor Maunder
 reiterated his belief that Lord Justice Taylor would
 unlikely to recommend raising density figures.    Indeed,
given the interim recommendation to reduce terrace
capacities by 15%, there might be some criticism of a
return to that figure.     Nonetheless, Working Party
members felt strongly that, from an engineering
perspective, 54 was an acceptable, safe.figure;     it was
therefore agreed to recommend retention of that figure
to the Inquiry.


31.     Debate was equally vigorous on whether to retain
ohe lower maximum density figure of 27 specified in
paragraph 222 (b).    After much discussion the Working
Party agreed to recommend the deletion of that figure,
such deletion to be accompanied by a careful re-wording
of paragraph 223 emphasising the need to interpolate
between the maximum figure of 54 and a minimum figure
of 0.    Mr Stickle^ undertook to consider a suitable         stic
                                                                                                A ct i o n
• : : r rerwwith
             ords the
                  £or discussi°n ««»»•* meetlng,
                      inclusion of diagrams and examples.


      parallIriT r r ti0n “lth “ * " * U                »» a
      and their       °n the StrUCture °f Perimeter walls,
      be considered “ CrUSh-barrie~ ' ■»<* walls should not
"     to crush ba •    ^              U"less they - n f o ^ e d
      undertake t Z l Z r T e V Z ^ i ™ '                                                 to a t i c k l „
              ^                 aluation and drafting of
      paragraphs 225-228.

      Conunun i c a f c i n n c




     the need f o ^ 6 ”ei9ht “   ^      PiSt b~ n C a c h e d to
     thl a l n d m 7 comprehensive communications system, and
     the amendments suggested in Me stick W . „ote (already
     tr ltlT T t ^                USelf b“ ^       »    e    earlier paplr                '
     of      ? 6         y 2E9fessor Mannrler) were accepted.                    Copies
          relevant documentation on "communications" were to
     coursed              by ^     Dlgksn'3 to the secretary in due                           Dickson




,                         6 " A1^rnativp Pesjqng                          tr t-p,



    were                                   to circulate any designs which                  Sweet        '
    that a la                    "“ «*■   « —    -cognised
    that   large number of individuals would probably
    produce very similar schemes, many lacking a proper
    engineering basis.                                                ^      p


    i3S5jUtaI^                         M       M       Pa,-:-v <,.K..... n


    p r e s e ^ r f f 42^ 1121 *“ *        that he hoped to
    present his Final Report to the Home Secretary in

PartTto DXt              ^
                 there£°re ir"POrtant £“ the working
should not^eek t ^ e C°nClUSi°nS be£ore c»ristmas. It
fch* r             „              en^ g e in detailed re-drafting of
the Green Guide but should address key issues an!
principles, making general recommendations which, where
appropriate, could be followed up later by Government
departments.     Those recommendations should include,
inter alia, the following essential topics:


     i)      perimeter fencing.   The Working Party was not
     qualified to give an assessment on whether, in
     principle, fences should remain or be removed, but
    where they did remain, would recommend a reduction
     in height to not more than 2 metres, the removal
     of spiked or barbed wire, and the removal of
     overhangs.     The majority of members also favoured
     the existence of gaps, rather than gates, within
     the fencing, such gaps being aligned with, and of
     the same frequency a s , gangways.    Such gaps should
     be at least as wide as the gangways feeding into
     them.     Fencing in front of seating was
     unnecessary, and it might be that a moat around
     the pitch, where practicable, would be preferable.
     Physical constraints might, however, cause some
     terracing to be lost, and this would prove an
     unduly harsh financial burden on smaller clubs.


     ii)     all-seater stadia.   Earlier minutes had
     recorded the recognition of a general move (not
     only in England but abroad) towards all-seater
     stadia, and the impact of UEFA/FIFA regulations.
     Nonetheless, there was nothing inherently unsafe
     about non all-seater stadia;      if standing
     densities were low, there was little risk of
     injury;


     iii) role of FLA - inspectorate function? It was
                                       C(=
     agreed that a central repository Jro knowledge,
    whether the FLA or another forum, was essential to
     facilitate information flow between clubs,
     football bodies and other organisations.        Working
    Party members saw benefit, too, in having a body
    with an overview function, ensuring consistency of
'   ,                                                                Ac ti o n

              approach;    and


              iv)    radial fences.    The issues had already been
              canvassed in depth, but would need to be addressed
              in the Working Party's report to the Inquiry.


        36.   It was agreed that Professor Maunder and Mr Sweet      Maunder /
                                                                     S w eet
        would prepare a draft form of report, skeletal in
        nature but encapsulating the issues to- be referred to
        Lord Justice Taylor, for distribution prior to the next
        Working Party meeting.        If agreement as to its
        format/content could .be reached at that meeting, the
        report would be presented to the Inquiry by mid-
        December .


        Agenda Item 8 - Anv Other Business


        37.   There was no other business to report.


        Agenda Item 9 - Date and Place of Next Meeting


        38. The next meeting would take place on Wednesday 13
        December in Queen Anne's Gate commencing at 10.30am.
        Further details and Agenda would be distributed in due
        course.                                                      Swee t
                                                                                 /lU-
                                                    Relcrence                    RS*1
                                                                   SME/196/292/016
                                                                   SME/956/02




Mr A D Osborne, Solicitors Office                      cc Dr J McQuaid
Mr H Cavanagh, Area Director                              Dr A Jones
Dr L Derrick, SGP

                                                                   .'Z'


                                                                (ENGINEERING)
                                                           - 6 DEC 1389
                                                    TECHNOLOGY DIVISION
                                                    FILE No:
HUISBCKWGH INQUIRY
TECHNICS WCKKING PARTY CN THE GREEN GUIDE

Two more meetings of the above Working Party have been held since my minute to
you of 26 October 1989, and I enclose copies of the minutes taken at these
meetings on 2 November 1989 and 7 November 1989.

The next meeting is to be held on 28 November 1989? if you have any comments on
the attached minutes or on any points, please let me know as soon as possible.

At present it is hoped that the Working Party will complete its task by the
last meeting scheduled for 13 December 1989. In my opinion, it will be a
remarkable feat to achieve this, I think a further meeting or two will be
required.




DR C E NICHOLSON
Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1
RLSD, Sheffield .

20 November 1989
       f




\\C1
           9
                           - 3>i 1 1 -                          ifllfSH
                                                                      .




                                                          WP89(M)2

TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY

NOTE OF A MEETING HELD IN THE OLD COMMITTEE ROOM, REGISTRAR'S
OFFICE, UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE ON THURSDAY 2 NOVEMBER
AT 11 am


Present:     Professor L Maunder         (Chairman)
             Mr N Bush
             Dr C Nicholson
             Mr B Stickley
             Mr M Overton
             Mr J Sweet                  (Secretary)


                                                       Action

Professor Maunder welcomed Mr Overton who was
standing in for Mr Carter.     Apologies for absence
had been received from Mr Dickson.


AGENDA ITEM 1
Minutes of Previous Meeting


2.   The minutes of the previous meeting were
agreed.


AGENDA ITEM 2
Report on Visit to Nimes


3•   Professor Maunder summarised the visit to
Nimes undertaken by Lord Justice Taylor, Mr B
Johnson, Professor Maunder, Bob Whalley and
Jonathan Sweet on 20/21 October.     Some useful
information had been obtained, including a better
understanding of the close working relationship
which existed between the club and the local
authority.    The Mayor of Nimes, Mr Bousquet, was
also President of Nimes Olympique, and the multi­
millionaire owner of a very large clothing company.
The local authority had contributed some 16m Francs
of the 17m Francs which the stadium cost to build
and were closely involved in the running of the
site, which was regarded as a multi-purpose
facility intended to be in full-time use.     The
design incorporated offices as well as sports
halls, and seemed to have attracted reasonable
public support.     It was recognised in discussion
that European local authorities were far more
likely to be the owners of sites and to have a more
"hands-on" approach to the running of stadia than
their counterparts in this country.


4.   Detailed consideration was given to the
mechanism of the fencing at Nimes, which had been
installed and designed after the stadium itself,
apparently to comply with UEFA requirements.     The
mechanism was essentially a simple one, relying on
9 ravity   to pivot each gate once the first had been
released by an electro-magnetic switch.     It took
approximately 40 seconds for a 20 gate section to
open, although the on site demonstration appeared
to rely to some extent on physical assistance.        The
test loads required to satisfy the French football
authorities appeared substantially lower than those
laid down in the Green Guide (1.68 kN per metre as
opposed to 6 kN per metre) and there was concern
about the dangers of tripping should spectators be
disgorged suddenly onto the pitch.


5.   The Inquiry team had doubts both about the
long term effects of wear and friction on the gate
hinges, and, more generally, about the
transferability of the scheme to stadia in the UK.
At Nimes the fencing worked because space was
available between the fencing and the crowd, and
because it had not been tested by large crowds
pressed against it.
                                                         Action


The situation would be very different at older,
cramped stadia here.    The Working Party took note
of the Inquiry team's views.


AGENDA ITEM 3
Advice on Future Visits


6.   The Chairman sought Working Party guidance on
the issues to be raised on future visits abroad to
Utrecht, and Rome/Milan.    Concern was expressed
that visits both here and abroad had so far
concentrated on the larger clubs with newer stadia;
where possible the Inquiry team should also visit
3rd and 4th Division clubs and older stadia.      It     Professor
was agreed that this view be passed on to the            Maunder/
Inquiry team.                                            Mr Sweet

7.   After detailed discussion, the following
topics were noted as being of particular interest
on visits:


     i.    general location and approach routes;


     ii.   terms of the Safety   Certificate,
           including in particular capacity and exit
           times;


     iii. condition of the barriers - signs of
           corrosion, loose bolts etc;


     iv.   perimeter fencing;    and


     v.    the extent to which   clubs abroad met the
           terms of our Green Guide.     Working Party
           members were aware,   for example, that
           Belgium had translated the Green Guide:
           had other countries done the same?
                                                             Action


8.    It was agreed that any Working Party               Mr Bush
information on sites to be visited would be
forwarded to the Secretary as soon as possible.

AGENDA ITEM 4
Review of Structures


9*    Dr Nicholson apologised for Mr Dickson's
absence, but explained that the paper he was
tabling was a joint document, resulting from their
discussions together.    It was an attempt not so
much to suggest new ideas to be included, but to
comment generally on current wording.


10.   Chapter 4 of the Green Guide (on Inspection
and Testing) was recognised as needing further
elaboration.    It consisted currently of two pages
only and had a number of weaknesses.    The Chapter
would need to emphasise that details of the types
of testing/methodology should also be submitted to
the local authority, should perhaps also emphasise           >.
that inspection was not a rubber-stamping exercise,          •'
and should generally be more specific about setting,,
down standards on matters such as(exit signs)and        [■
intervals between testing.   The Working Party noted
that differences in the size of a club and ground,
would not reduce the need for testing, but might
reduce the time required to carry out such tests.
                                                                  *
11.   Paragraph 38 raised the whole principle of
barrier testing.   There was an argument that more
damage was done to a barrier by the actual testing
process than would otherwise occur by natural
corrosion, and that it was often possible to
condemn a barrier as unsatisfactory by visual
inspection long before it would fail under a
mechanical test.    If a barrier looked unfit, but
nonetheless met the formal test-loads, it should be
kept under review and re-tested.    The dichotomy
between the visual and mechanical approaches
suggested either that the visual criteria were too
hard, or that the mechanical test was deficient.        <


12.   In addition, there was the particular question
of whether new barriers required testing.     In        ^
discussion, comparison was drawn with i) the
procedure for assessing aircraft fatigue and ii)
with more general building regulations approaches.
It was accepted that the Inquiry would want a
Working Party view on how far uniformity of
approach should be enforced and by what methods.
It was agreed that the building regulations
approach offered a suitable framework;    the Green
Guide would indicate preferred criteria, but
departures from those criteria could be authorised
specifically by the local authority with an
explanation of the rationale underlying such
departure.    The onus would therefore be on the
individual seeking the variation to justify it in
detail, and there should be a requirement that all
supporting documentation be available.


Barriers


13.   It was also important to reach agreement on
the actual design of barriers, and their terrace
layout.    There was evidence that the 'A' frame
design resulted in people toppling over the support
stanchion if they were subject of lateral pressure
from the crowd.    Should the use of clips, which hid
corrosion, also be prohibited?     The Working Party
agreed to give further thought to such issues and
to whether the Guide would include a separate
Chapter on corrosion.


Records


14.     Paragraph 43 of the Green Guide referred to
the keeping of records but needed elaboration.
Should all such records be kept centrally by a
clearing house, thereby enabling the speedy
dissemination of information to other clubs, and
should such a clearing house be under the auspices
of the FA, the local authority, or perhaps the
Football Licensing Authority?     Mr Bush felt that,
under existing financial arrangements, local
authorities would be unwilling to take on such
work.     Currently they received no income from their
monitoring work, and very little from the issuing
of Safety Certificates.     Without some charging
mechanism, he doubted whether they would be
persuaded to do additional work.     If the work was,
however, undertaken by the Football Licensing
Authority, there was doubt as to how the position
of non-football grounds be dealt with.     It was
agreed. after detailed discussion, that the Working
Party recommend to the Inquiry a clearing house
forum, leaving the precise nature of the body to be
established by the Inquiry.


Chapter 9 - Crush Barriers and Handrails


15.     It was accepted that the introductory section
needed wholesale re-drafting to provide more
detailed guidance on materials, corrosion
resistance and corrosion traps, lateral movements
I



                                                            Action


    and the identification of the areas of likely
    corrosion.     It was agreed that such guidance did
    not need to provide specific figures, but should
    identify the areas, leaving the Inquiry to specify      Dr
    exact terms.    Further advice would be forthcoming.    Nicholson


    16.   It was essential to remember, both in relation
    to barriers and more generally, that the Guide
    applied equally to small clubs as it did to large.
    Although lax interpretation of the Guide should not
    be tolerated, there might be occasions when small
    clubs might prefer, for example, to reduce terrace
    capacity rather than condemn barriers which
    although marginally outside existing standards
    would nonetheless never be tested by large crowds.
    There was an argument for allowing a certain
    density in ideal conditions (eg a maximum of 54
    persons per 10 sq metres) but for setting a greatly
    reduced figure (eg    20 per 10 sq metres) if those
    ideal conditions were departed from.    An element of
    discretion would be removed, to be replaced by an
    automatic two-tier standard.


    17.   It was agreed that greater cross-referencing
    was needed between the sections of the Guides which
    had, especially following revision after the
    Bradford disaster, become rather disjointed.


    18.   Consideration was given to the possible need
    for a revision of barrier height, in the light of
    Dr Nicholson's understanding that both the French
    and German authorities stipulated a higher figure.
    Nonetheless, in view of the original research
    carried out in formulating the figure for optimum
    height, it was accepted that 1.1m should remain.
    It was agreed. however, that it would be helpful if
i



                                                                 Action


    the Green Guide were to incorporate a diagram^          v-
    indicating the point on the barrier from which
    measurement was to be taken.


    Spacing of Crush Barriers


    19.   Detailed consideration was given to the
    wording of paragraphs 114 and 115 of the Guide, and
    it was accepted that the figure of 60° quoted in
    paragraph 114 was somewhat arbitrary, but was
    designed to guard against undue lateral sway.     The
    figure remained acceptable.                             J-


    20.   After discussion, it was agreed to recommend
    the removal of the reference to "Other areas" in
    Table 1 of Chapter 9, since for football, it was,
    in practice, difficult to distinguish "peak" from
    "non-peak" areas.   At a big match, all areas were
    "peak" areas.


    21.   It was agreed, however, to retain the
    distinction in Table 1 between "A" and "B",
    although these figures were, in turn, to be related
    to capacity and the two-tier process outlined above
    (paragraph 16).


    22.   Table 2 in Chapter 9 was given careful
    consideration.   It was agreed that more consistent
    labelling should be adopted.   The distinction                                    \<P
    between "force" and "load" was wholly artificial                  ^
    and merely caused confusion.   The differential of           '1               *
                                                                      2,
    20% between the design load and the test load was             ^
    considered acceptable, as was the safety factor of
                                                                           0 \<
    2 referred to in paragraph 119.     It was agreed to
    round up figures to one decimal place, using the
    metric figure as the primary one.
                                                               Action

 Chapter— 15 - Pitch Perimeter Fence/Wall


 23.   The role of the perimeter fence was examined
 in some detail.   At Hillsborough, individuals were
being crushed at head height, which was clearly
unacceptable.  Such a fence could not be regarded
as a crush barrier, and where it existed,
consideration would need to be given to
construction of a proper crush barrier attached to                 , -   (P-

the^fence^ Thought ought alternatively to be given
■£o the possible need for a sterile area, or a
walkway controlled by police/stewards.      There were
obvious difficulties in converting existing
facilities some of which, like those at Newcastle
United, were positively dangerous.    Nevertheless,
the experience at Liverpool and Everton, where
safety corridors had been introduced, showed that
it was possible to do so.   There was also,
following Hillsborough, greater experience of
working without perimeter fencing at all, and this
was an aspect which needed further examination,       if      Working
fences were required, as they might be under UEFA             Party
regulations, they should be of a uniform design.             Members

24.    It was agreed that where perimeter gates or
gaps existed, they should be a minimum of 1.1 metre
wide or not less than the width of the connecting
                                                           l/\A-
gangway whichever was the larger.    Where exits onto
the pitch did exist, they should link direct to
radial gangways to facilitate speedy evacuation.
The spacing of such exits should take into account
the emergency evacuation times.
L




                                                               Action

      Annex C


      25.   This was an area needing careful scrutiny.
     The loading in paragraph 1 had been derived from
     Home Office research in 1973, and was deemed still
     to be acceptable.      Different equipment was employed
     by different engineers to apply the test, and Dr
     Nicholson favoured the four-pronged implement used
     by Dr Eastwood at Hillsborough.  It was a c c e n t s ,
     however, that other systems might be equally as
     suitable, and the suggestion that diagrams of the         Working
     type of equipment should be included was reserved         Party
     for further discussion.
                                                               Members

     26.    Consideration was given to the best method of
     preventing deficient testing, as had occurred at
     Hillsborough,   it was accepted that at least 2
     "bays" should be tested at a time, but that the
    figure of 10 equal increments in paragraph 3 of                    S . t*- V
                                                                       C

    Annex C was unnecessary;  four would probably
    suffice.    Thought should be given to the creation
    of a formula describing the worst-loading scenario,
    so that the local engineer could devise an
    alternative method provided it met those minimum
    criteria and also satisfied the local authority.
    Any test proposal would have to be authenticated
    and agreed by the authority.


    27.     Although it was accepted that recovery
    remained the best (and only practical) measurement,
    it was felt essential that misinterpretation such
    as that which had occurred at Hillsborough had to
    be avoided. Recovery of 75% was adjudged
    satisfactory but it was agreed that the Annex
    should recommend measurement not just of the level
    of deformation but more specifically of where that
    deformation occurred.     If the distribution of load
    was not uniform , it should be such as to stress
                                                               Action

 the structure at highly stressed points at least as
 severely as a uniformly distributed load.
 Measurement of all significant deflections of the       v|

 barrier under test should be taken and recorded so      ;
 as to enable a satisfactory assessment of
 structural performance overall to be made.    Subject
 to any views which Mr Dickson might have on behalf            Mr Dickson7
 of the Institution of Structural Engineers, it was
 asreed that if a barrier failed the first test, it ^
 should be deemed to fail totally, unless a valid         '1
 reason for this failure could be identified and
 corrected.                                          "


 28.   Dr Nicholson felt that specific advice was        ^
needed in paragraph 6 of    Annex C about corrosion.
It was aqreed that where    a barrier passed the
mechanical test, yet visual inspection showed
deficiencies, the engineer should be able to test
again at more frequent intervals.

AGENDA ITEM 5
Review of Flnws


29.    Mr Bush outlined his paper, explaining that
Chapter 5 of the Green Guide on ingress needed
substantial expansion, since it ought to reflect
not only the position inside the ground, but also
that obtaining outside eg the transport patterns.
The Working Party accepted that it need not be
prescriptive in tone, but should rather draw
attention to all of the factors, both inside and
outside the ground affecting ingress.
                                                           Action



 30.    It was agreed that paragraph 44 of Chapter 5
 needed expansion so as to refer specifically to:


        i)    positive counting and recording of those
              passing through, with a warning to
              turnstile operators of the need to close
              when capacity about to be reached;


        ii)   the exclusivity of turnstiles to one
              enclosure; and


       m )    very clear signposting.   "Very clear"
              might be explained as "signposting such
              that a spectator new to the ground could
              find his way quickly and safely to his
              seat/terrace".


31. Further thought needed to be given to the need
to draw together in a single chapter all the tests
and inspections to be done in the interests of
safety and to specify the relevant timescales
involved.     As an example of the type of document,
— Bush aqreed to circulate copies of one of his          Mr Bush
club's Safety Certificates which already
incorporate this.


32.    It was felt that there might be merit in
distinguishing between pre-match, routine
maintenance, and annual Safety Certificate tests,
and the Working Party therefore agreed to give
                                                         Working
further thought to the format such classification        Party
might take.
                                                         Members
                                                      Action


33.    It was also agreed that Mr Bush would minute
Lord Justice Taylor separately on his views for i)
special certification when two away clubs were
playing at a ground and ii) a possible provision
for review of the certificate on occasions when
attendance was likely to be eg 50% above normal
capacity.


AGENDA ITEM 9
Date and Place of Next Meeting


34.   In view of the amount of work remaining, it
was agreed that the next meeting of the Working
Group would take place on Tuesday 7 November in
Room 749 Home Office, Queen Anne's Gate, commencing
at 10.30am.   It would continue to use the Agenda
for WP(89) 2nd meeting as the basis for discussion.
I   ( 53
                              - "Z14-
                                                                    °io.(
                                                                1 5 NOV 1989
                                                          WP89(M)3


TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY

NOTE OF A MEETING HELD IN ROOM 749 THE HOME OFFICE QUEEN ANNE'S
•GATE ON TUESDAY 7 NOVEMBER AT 10.30AM


Present:   Professor L Maunder          (Chairman)
           Mr N Bush
           Mr W Carter
           Mr M Dickson
           Dr C Nicholson
           Mr B Stickley
           Mr J Sweet                   (Secretary)


                                                       Action


1.   Professor Maunder welcomed the Working Party
members and confirmed that the meeting would use
the agenda for WP(89) 2nd meeting as the basis for
discussion.


Minutes of Previous Meeting


2.   The minutes of the meeting on Thursday 2
November were agreed subject to the following:


      i.   Paragraph 23 - perimeter fencing.
           Although not raised at the previous
           meeting, useful information might be
           gleaned from the Scottish experience
           where few clubs had perimeter fencing.
           There was a general consensus that, if
           such fencing was to remain, a review of
           design was essential.   The 'high-
           security' type fencing formerly favoured
           by a number of clubs was regarded by
           Working Party members as unsatisfactory;
           some divide between players and
           spectators was probably necessary, but it
           ought not to be an impermeable barrier.
                                                    Action


 ii. Paragraph 10 - "defects" should replace
     "exit signs" in line 10.


iii. Paragraph 16 - although agreeing with the
    principle of a 'step-down' to a greatly
    reduced density, Mr Bush would only be
    prepared to see acceptance of barriers
    marginally outside existing standards on        /
     terraces of shallow depth.


iv. Paragraph 27 - after discussion, it was
    agreed that the definition of the loading
    test described in Annex C of the Green
    Guide needed further refinement.      It was
    essential to avoid misunderstanding as to
    what constituted "a test".    After
    detailed discussion, it was agreed that
    the following procedure offered a
    suitable framework.   There should be one
    preliminary load to act as a "shake-
    down" test followed by one principal
    load.   All deflection and recoveries were
    to be measured, and comparisons made with
    previous tests and other barriers on the
    same terrace.   The Working Party would
    need to give consideration to the level
    of load on the 'shake-down' test - should
    it be 50% of the working load, for
    example? - and to ensuring
    standardisation of recording procedure.
    Consideration would also need to be given
    to the number of loading increments, as
    recorded in paragraph 26 of WP(89)M2.      It
    was agreed the Dr Nicholson/Mr Dickson          Nicholson/
    would report back further at the next           Dickson
    meeting with a draft form of words.
3.   It was recognised that the whole question of
barrier testing was fraught, in the light of
Hillsborough, with political connotations.     This
applied equally to new barriers as it did to old,
since any recommendation to reduce testing would be
politically sensitive, and arguments to do so would
need to be overwhelming.     Although the building
regulations approach offered a rationale for
ceasing to test new barriers (where new meant a
properly authorised design of barrier in prime
condition and with design figures authenticated),
nonetheless, it was not entirely analogous.     Unlike
the testing of buildings, testing of barriers was a
comparatively simple and straightforward process,
on a modest physical scale.     Where the testing
process was perhaps unsatisfactory was in its
approach to the percentage of barriers to be
tested, and the application of that percentage by
clubs.    Testing 25% of the barriers in any one year
meant usually that both new and old barriers were
tested;   what was needed was a means of
concentrating testing on the older barriers,
thereby targetting the application of the testing
process more effectively.


4.   It was accepted that any perceived relaxation
in the mechanical criteria for testing would need
to be countered by a tightening of the inspection
process generally.   Working Party members agreed
that inspection had to     play a substantially larger
role, and that Chapter 4 of the Green Guide would
need redrafting to emphasise the underlying
objectives.   Members would give further thought to
a revised format.
                                                       Action



Review of Flows


5.   The previous meeting had given some
consideration to this topic and Mr Bush continued
his examination of the issues.


6.   It was accepted that the maximum notional flow
rate per turnstile of 750 persons per hour set out
in paragraph 47 of the Green Guide was too high.
Clearly much depended on the age, type and
mechanical soundness of each turnstile, on the
effectiveness of individual turnstile operators and
on whether a match was all-ticket, or had a simple
cash figure for entry (eg £5 as opposed to £3.60).
Nevertheless, informal research carried out by Mr
Bush at Anfield and Everton and by Dr Nicholson
following Hillsborough suggested that a more
realistic maximum figure was in the region of 660
per hour.   The suggestion that a figure of 500
persons per hour be regarded as the mean and that
variations either up or down be certified by the
local authority was left open for further              All
discussion at the next meeting.                        Members


7.   The paper on ingress presented by Mr Bush at
the last meeting (already circulated) suggested
four additional clauses for inclusion in Chapter 5
of the Green Guide.    These related to a) amenities
inside the ground;    b) subdivision of enclosures;
c) number of entrances to large enclosures and d)
greater care in the design of entrances so as to
avoid local pressure on spectators by particular
attention to matters such as downward ramps.    It
was felt that much useful information in the
chapter on egress was also relevant when dealing
with ingress and that the Green Guide therefore
                                                          Action

needed expansion to reflect this.      Whether it would
•be possible in all circumstances to comply with any
 'ideal type' was unlikely;    nonetheless the
important principles about design should be
reinforced in the Guide.      It was agreed that the
informative diagrams in paragraphs 82 and 84 of the
Guide should be adapted, additionally, for
inclusion in Chapter 5 on ingress.


8.    There were definitional problems when talking
about "large enclosures" and "adequate number".
Thought was given to the possibility of laying down
an engineering method to establish the relationship
between the number of entrances to an enclosure and
its capacity.   There were two aspects, the first
being the overall capacity of the entrances to an
enclosure to cope with the flow of spectators
emerging through outer turnstiles, and the second
being the distribution of entrances to a particular
enclosure so as to facilitate even packing.      There
were a number of unique factors affecting flow
rates on ingress which did not affect egress,
including the speed of flow through turnstiles,
individuals deciding to stand at particular points
(eg behind the goal) and the location of
refreshment stalls which might produce bunching of
spectators.   After discussion, it was accepted that
although it might be difficult to quantify these
features numerically, the general principles on
ingress to enclosures should be emphasised,
including where appropriate suitable references to
stewarding and gangways.


9.   Research carried out by Professor D Canter on
human behaviour in fire situations might offer some
useful insights, and it was therefore agreed that
 copies of his research paper be distributed to all
 Working Party members.    (Studies of Human Behaviour
 in Fire: empirical results and their implications
 for education and design - to follow).

 Egress


 10.    Chapter 6 of the Green Guide needed to be
 cross-referenced with Chapter 11 which, although
 having an unduly narrow 'fire' perspective,
nonetheless contained some useful advice.      Although
 it was recognised that the fire authority was a
powerful body, Working Party members believed that
consultation on all safety matters should be with
the certifying authority, who, in turn, would
consult with the fire authority.    It was essential
to maintain simple, clear lines of authority and
communication;  independent input from individual
bodies was to be avoided.


11.    A number of particular issues on egress
emerged in discussion.    There was some doubt as to
whether the advice in paragraph 50 of the Green
Guide on restricting the speed of egress at
bottlenecks remained valid.    Differing views
emerged, but it was accepted generally that the
principle of keeping the bottleneck outside an exit
route (eg back on the terrace) rather than in the
exit route (eg the tunnel) was right.


12.    Paragraph 53 - evacuation onto the pitch.
Evacuation onto the pitch should never be
considered as part of the normal egress system.
Although it was recognised that such evacuation
might well occur in an emergency, the pitch should
not be considered when working out egress times.
                                                              Action


 13.   Paragraph 51 - it was agreed that this needed
qualification by reference to the exit times in
paragraph 56.                                             Bush


14.    Paragraph 54 - it was agreed (i) that the
first sentence would be more appropriately sited if
it appeared in paragraph 50 and (ii) that the
density of 54 per 10 sq metres was too high for
reservoir a r e a s ^ A lower density, in the region of   -
35-40 persons, was required, and it was agreed that
the Inquiry would seek    Professor Canter's views on     Maunder/
an appropriate figure.                                    Sweet


15.    Consideration was given to the possible
amalgamation of features common to both ingress and
egress, such as signposting, but it was recognised
that there was comparatively little common ground
and that emphases might well differ.


16.    Working Party members agreed that the current
Green Guide contained insufficient information on                ^
emergency lighting, and that the information it did
contain was inappropriately placed in Chapter 11.                        K '
The emphasis on 'emergency' lighting was wrong;     it               ^
should more accurately be considered as 'auxiliary'
lighting and the Guide should have a separate
chapter on the subject.    That chapter should
explain in greater detail why the figure of 3 hours
(currently in paragraph 167) had been chosen -
Working Party members understood that the figure
had its origins in public entertainment licences.


17*    Paragraph 60 was superfluous, and the Working
Party agreed to recommend its removal.
+      .
                                                                Action

     18,    Paragraph 61 on exit systems was an important
     one but placed too much emphasis on routine egress
    •and attached too little weight to the problems of
     emergency evacuation,    what was required, both in
     the general introduction to the Chapter and in this
    particular paragraph was greater emphasis on
    analysis of emergency networking of routes.        It was
    aqreed that Mr Bush would give more detailed
    consideration to emergency/fire/network analyses
    and their presentation in the Guide.                        Bush

    Chapter 7 - Stairways and ramps


     ®•    Paragraph 73 - Discussion centred on the
    possibility of aligning these figures more closely
    with those quoted in the Buildings Regulations 1985
    approved document K on stairways and ramps.     On
    balance, it was felt that the building regulation
    figures might restrict flexibility, and it was
    therefore aqreed that the figures currently shown
    could remain. However, there was general
    recognition that sharper presentation would be
    helpful.                                                    Bush

           Paragraph 74 - Much discussion was given over
    to the contents of this paragraph.    Some members
    felt strongly that 'winders' was an unacceptably
    loose definition, and that the Guide would benefit
    from greater precision;    the preferred term was
     tapered treads'.    It was agreed to adopt this
    term.


21.        The figure of 16 steps in paragraph 74 (ii)
was the subject of considerable debate, with some
members favouring a reduction to 12 consistent with
74 (iii) on cascade staircases.       On balance,
though, it was felt unwise to depart from existing
                                                           Action

 figures without very good reason.    The figure of 16
■would therefore remain.    Paragraph 74 (iii) was
 deemed acceptable.


 22.    The Working Party noted and accepted the
 suggestion in Mr Bush's paper to introduce an
 additional clarificatory sentence into paragraph
 75.


 23.   More contentious was the question of
 handrails, regarded by many, it was felt, as an
 easy panacea for a multitude of sins.   After
considerable debate, and a recognition that the
 fire service view would need to be obtained, it was
aqreed that the Working Party would recommend a
width between handrails lower than 1.8 metres, and
probably either 1.1metres or 1.5 metres.      The views
of the fire service would be sought and the matter        Stickley
tabled for discussion at the next meeting.                Sweet

24.    The extension of handrails for 300mm before
the first step at the head of a stairway to at
least 300mm beyond the last step at the bottom of a
stairway, and the whole question of 'protection'
were areas requiring further thought.    It was
clear, however, that protection was needed only
when there was a drop, and that Table 2 of Chapter
9 needed amendment so as to refer to "handrails and
protectors ...".    it was agreed the Messrs Bush,        Bush/
Dickson and Nicholson would review all of these           Dickson/
matters further and report back at the next               Nicholson
meeting.


25.    It was agreed that Fig. 1 in paragraph 82 be
amended to specify that 'The width of A and B to be
no less than 1 .1m each' and that the word 'Down' be
                                                          Action

removed from the diagram.


26.   Similarly, Fig. 2 in paragraph 84 would be
enhanced by figures giving the size of the wing
barriers, and by the inclusion of an additional
barrier in front of the central arrow facing the
stairway.


27.   The section on ramps was inadequate,
particularly in failing to address separately the
question of disabled access and egress.      Building
regulations specified a gradient no steeper than 1
in 12, and 1 in 10 was probably too steep.       Mr
Stickley aqreed to obtain further details of work         Stickley
already carried out by the Sports Council and the
Centre of Environment for the Handicapped.       He
would report back at the next meeting.


28.   It was aqreed that Messrs Bush and Carter           Bush/
would look in detail at Chapters 10 and 14 in             Carter
readiness for the next meeting.


Review of Capacities


29.   Consideration had been given by Professor
Maunder to Chapters 8, 11, 12 and 16 of the Green
Guide.     A number of points had emerged including:


      i.     paragraphs 92/93.   The second sentence of
             paragraph 93 should refer to a 'drop',
             not 'rise', since use of the latter
            weakened the first sentence of the
            paragraph;
                                                       Action

 i i.   was the 280-380mm range too wide, and, in
        particular, was the 280mm figure too low?
        Working Party members agreed to give           All
        further thought to the question;               Members

 iii    paragraphs 97/98 needed to be more
        emphatic - "spectators should not

 iv.    similarly, in paragraph 99 spectators
        were to be "instructed";

 v.     were sunken gangways a good idea?     In the
        absence of any firm data on accident
        rates, it was probably acceptable for
        them to remain, although there was
        general consensus that they should be
        painted in their entirety;

 vi.    paragraph 100 ought to refer to gangways
        which were sloped or might, more
        generally, be recast to say that where a
        sunken gangway existed, its profile
        should match that of the rest of the
        terrace.  It was agreed to adopt this
        approach;

 v i i . Paragraph 101.   It was agreed that "in an
        emergency" in line 8 should be replaced
        by "except under strict control";

viii. paragraph 102, Professor Maunder's
        suggested addition (see paper already
        circulated) was not without its
        difficulties, since any attempt at
        segregation of sub-divisions would only
        be effective if such segregation was
#                                                                   Action

                  effective all the way back to the
                  turnstiles.    It was agreed that the
                  matter would be reviewed, once Mr Carter
                  had obtained details of the current              Carter
                  position at clubs;


           ix     paragraph 106 'desirable' and 'is' were
                  to be deleted, and 'should be'
                  substituted for the latter.    It was
                  agreed to recommend deletion of the final
                  sentence;


          x.      paragraph 107 Mr Sticklev felt strongly
                  that the barriers on viewing slopes
                  should be closer than on normal
                  terracing,    it was agreed that he would        Stickley
                review Table 1 (on page 37), and would
                reconsider the acceptability of the
                gradient quoted in paragraph 106;


          xi.   paragraph 108.     There was some suggestion
                of a minimum two metre width for an
                obligatory pitch perimeter path.      Before
                recommending adoption of this, Mr Carter
                undertook to find out the current                  Carter
                position at League clubs.


    30.   Further consideration needed to be given both
    to Chapter 11 (Fire Safety) - should section 4 of
    the ISE document be incorporated? - and Chapter 16
    (capacity).     The Interim Report had recommended a
    15% reduction in capacity, effectively reducing        the                )
    permissible maximum density from 54 per 10 sq              /
    metres to approximately 46.       Should that figure
    remain, despite some clubs' resentment, or should
                                                               Action


the Working Party recommend a return to the higher
.figure?    Was some longer-term research on packing       /   All
density now required?                                  *       Members c^i


31.   In addition, Working Party members would also
need to give thought to the following:


      i.    possible new design of structural
            elements such as fences, gates, barriers
            under the general theme of "design
            considerations";


      ii.   the possible role of the FLA on grounds
            and levels of standardisation;                       All
                                                                 Members
      iii. provision for the disabled;


      iv.   all-seater stadia;   and


      v.    what should be said about non-football
            stadia?


Date and Place of Next Meeting


31.   It was agreed that the next meeting would take
place on Tuesday 28 November in Queen Anne's Gate
commencing at 10.30am.    Details of the room and
Agenda would be distributed in due course.                     Sweet


32.   A further meeting would take place on
Wednesday 13 December in Queen Anne's Gate
commencing at 10.30am.    Again further details would
be available in due course.                                    Sweet
11 £(o
                                                                   2 -'W-
                            a.




                                                                        CO
                                                      s m t ic(bb|o'I
TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY                                   WP 89 (M)1


NOTE OF A MEETING HELD IN ROOM 749 THE HOME OFFICE ON WEDNESDAY
18 OCTOBER AT 2.00pm



Present:   Professor L Maunder (Chairman)
           Mr N Bush
           Mr W Carter
           Mr M Dickson
           Dr C Nicholson
           Mr B Stickley
           Mr J Sweet          (Secretary)

                                                         Action

Professor Maunder welcomed the Working Party
members and set out the background to the group's
establishment.  He drew attention to its terms of
reference and members took note of Introductory
Paper WP(89)1.  The wording of Para 5 (i) of the
paper was thought unclear;  HSE tests in Sheffield
had not shown, as the clause might be construed to
suggest, that a packing density of 54 persons per
10 sq metres caused discomfort.   Indeed, one view
saw that figure as itself too conservative;   Mr
Bush indicated that he had, in the past, used
densities as high as 68 persons per 10 sq metres.
The Working Party recorded the view that packing at
54 persons did not cause discomfort.

2.   The Chairman confirmed that, not withstanding
the Working Party's terms of reference, the group
ought to look at other issues where appropriate.
More particularly, it was open to the Working Party
to recommend making the Green Guide (or elements of
it) mandatory.  Crucial issues to be addressed
included packing density, crush barriers, tunnel
gradients, corrosion, perimeter fencing and gates,
and in that context, reasonable safety, rather than
spectator comfort, was the guiding principle.

3.   Discussion covered the history of the Green
Guide;  the incremental nature of its development;
and the contrast between those aspects dealing
primarily with crowd control and those dealing with
crowd safety.  The Working Party was concerned
primarily with crowd safety.  It was felt essential
that the Guide be written in a way which promoted
uniform interpretation.  The impact of the Football
Spectators Bill, were it to become law, was
unknown, but the Working Party recognised that both
uniformity of interpretation and monitoring might
be improved under the auspices of the B i l l 's
proposed licensing authority.  The roles and
                                                         Action

inter-relationships of the various licensing
bodies, though central to any revision of
practices, were accepted as falling outside the
Working Party's brief.

Agenda Item 2 - Interim Report

4.   The following recommendations (set out on pp
57 - 60 of the Interim Report) were those which the
Working Party agreed to concentrate on:

  Nos.   1-3, 7, 8, 10-12, 18, 19, 22, 31-33 and 40.

The list, though not definitive, emphasised those
areas where the Inquiry had touched on technical
issues.

Agenda Item 3 - The Green Guide

5.   It was accepted, that although the Working
Party should not seek to re-write the Guide
wholesale, it was right to ensure that ambiguities
were removed.  The following Chapters warranted
particular consideration:

     Chapter    2 -    particularly parts of para   29
     Chapter    3 -    particularly paras 30-35
     Chapter    4 -    particularly paras 36-39
     Chapters    5-12
     Chapters   15-17
     Annexes     A & C

Agenda Item 4

6.   Given the pressures under which both the
Working Party and the Inquiry were working, it was
essential to capitalise on the members' own skills
and expertise.  It was vital to ensure that the
Working Party meetings maximised use of the limited
time members were together.  To that end, it was
aqreed that members would address particular issues
in advance of the next meeting, and prepare
preliminary papers for discussion.  Members would
not be precluded from discussing any areas of
interest, but it was advisable to assign specific
responsibilities if the necessary progress was to
be achieved.

7.    it was therefore agreed that Dr Nicholson and      Nicholson/
Mr Dickson would examine those parts of the Green        Dickson
Guide dealing with structures and layout (Chapters
4, 9, 15 and Annex C), Mr Bush and Mr Carter with        Bush/
those on flows (Chapters 5-7, 10, 14 and 17), and        Carter
Professor Maunder and Mr Stickley with those on
capacity^ terracing and miscellaneous matters such       Maunder/
as fire (Chapters 8, 11, 12 and 16).                     Stickley
•   +
    8.   The primary aim would be to highlight those
    aspects requiring greater clarity, particularly
    given the possibility that the Guide might at some
    stage be made mandatory.   It was essential to make
    clear to non-expert readers of the Guide precisely
    what was expected of them when applying its
    recommendations. As an illustration, there were a
    number of respects in which para 119 and the
    ensuing table were unclear, or where explanations
    of the rationale behind the figures were lacking.
    The members agreed it was unnecessary for
    individual papers to resolve outstanding issues in
    advance of the next meeting;   rather, their purpose
    was to focus discussion by highlighting problem
    areas.

    9.   It was aqreed to circulate the following           Sweet
    documents to members:

          i.    Professor Canter's paper of 2 October to
                the Inquiry on aspects of crowd
                psychology;

          ii.   Mr N Bush's paper of 26 May 1989;

          iii. Mr W Bullogh's note of 17 May;

          iv.   the Building Research Establishment paper
                of 18 May;

          v.    Mr J Korff's letter of 18 May;

          vi.   the fifth draft of the Institution of
                Structural Engineers "Appraisal of Sports
                Grounds" [made available at first
                meeting];

          vii. bibliography of relevant articles and
               research papers prepared by the
               Institution of Structural Engineers
               [circulated at first meeting];

          viii Sheffield Wednesday Safety Certificate;

          ix.   list of those firms carrying out barrier
                testing at football grounds;  and

          x.    the Scicon Report on fire safety/flow
                rates [to follow].

    Agenda Item 5 - Any Other Business

    10.   There was no other business to report.
Agenda Item 6 - Date and Place of Next Meeting

11.   The following meetings were   agreed:-

      i.     Thursday 2November at 11 am at the
            University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne
            (precise details to follow).               Sweet

      ii.   Tuesday 7 November at the Home Office,
            Queen Anne's Gate, commencing with a
            buffet lunch at 1pm (subject to progress
            at meeting (i) above).

      iii. Tuesday 28 November at 11am at the
           University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne
           (precise details to follow).                Sweet

Agenda and papers will be distributed in due
course.




23 October 1989
llbl
                               DCI (ENGINEERING)      Reference


                                 27 OCT 1989                      SM E/956/02




                                                                  ,0
                             TECHNOLOGY DIVISION
                             FILE No:           ' —      1■
                                                                       ■



     G Jems, DC3/ED                                    cc! Dr J McQuaid
Mr H Cavanagh, Area Director, NW FAID                       Dr A Janes
Dr L Derrick, SPD D




HIIISBCROUGH INQUIRY

technical working party o n th e gkeen guide:



I attended the inaugural meeting of the above Working Party on 18 October 1989,
having first had discussions with Mr Cavanagh,                    and
colleagues in RISD.

Attached is a copy of the minutes of the meeting. I have been askwj to
consider those chapters of the Guide concerned with structural matters (4,9,15
and Annex C) in conjunction with Mr M Dickson who is the Institute of
Structural Engineers' representative on the Working Party. As I have already
obtained the collective HSE views from those mentioned above, I am fully
prepared for my meeting with Mr Dickson in the first week of November. Others
of the Working Party are to consider the other parts of the Guide, the aim
being to identify those parts which need attention rather than, at this stage,
to prepare a re-draft.

As you will note, I have been given a considerable amount of background
reading, some of which is listed in the minutes.

Bibliography

1   Dr C E Nicholson - Ihe Hillsborough Incident 15 April 1989: An
    Investigation into Various Technical Aspects prepared for the Court: of
    Inquiry - 20 pages.

    Professor D Canter, Department of Psychology, University of Surrey -
    Ccanments on Crowd Behaviour - 4 pages.

    L N Bush, Liverpool Council Surveyor responsible for Liverpool and Everton
    grounds - Submission to Lord Justice Taylor - 20 pages.

    W A Bullough, Consulting Engineer - Comments to Inquiry - 5 pages.

    R A Courtney, Director/Building Research Establishment - Offer of help to
    Inquiry - 5 pages.

    Jan Korff, Civil and Structural Engineer responsible for London football
    grounds — Letter to Lord Justice Taylor — 9 pages.
M

                                                                    Reference




               7    Institute of Structural Engineers - relevant Bibliography list - 2 pages.

               8    General Safety Certificate for Sheffield Wednesday PC, 21 December 1979
                     plus amendments, 11 August 1989 - 16 pages.

               9    List of firms who do crush barrier testing - 2 pages.

               10   General Safety Certificate for Sheffield United PC, 11 August 1989 -
                     15 pages.

               11   Institute of Structural Engineers - Appraisal of Sports Grounds, 5th
                    Draft, July 1989 - 73 pages.

               12   Horae Office - Crush barrier strengths and spacings, March 1973 - 9 pages.

               13   Evans & Hayden - Tests on live subjects to determine the tolerable forces
                     that may be exerted by crowd control crush barriers, November 1971 -
                     75 pages.

               14   The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 15 April 1989, lord Justice Taylor's
                    Interim Report, August 1989 - 71 pages.

               Should you require copies of any of these, please let me know and I will
               arrange for copies to be forwarded.

               Minutes of subsequent meetings will also be forwarded.




               C E NICHOLSON
               Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1
               RISD, Sheffield
               26 October 1989




CODE   18-77
\{€l
