Dr C Nicholson
D/D SEL 1


RESEARCH ON CROWD SAFETY


Further to your recent request, these are my suggestions for research on
crowd safety:

1) The effect of crush barrier spacing on barrier loading. Is the
maximum spacing between barriers in the same row (currently 1.4m in the
Green Guide) sufficient to prevent barriers further down the terrace
receiving extra crowd loading? We discussed this point briefly with Prof
Smith recently.

2) An investigation of crowd density variations within a terraced area.
To what density will people pack without constraint?

3) Revision of specified barrier dimensions to take into account
increases in average height and weight.

4) Investigation of remote counting techniques. This may be a bit
fanciful but it could be useful to discover whether any methods exist
e.g military applications.

Apart from measuring loads on barriers, i.e. strain gauging, and
appraisal of new barrier designs, I cannot think of any 'engineering'
work which would contribute to increased safety.




2 February 1990
                                                                    H=!./II
                                                                                    w ?
                                                                              -   ; " 3 (930




               NOTE OF A MEETING HELD IN MAGDAT.TCN HOUSE ON 17 JANUARY TO DISCUSS
                                         CROWD SAFETY.
               Present were:-                         CC

               Dr L Derrick^--    SGPC C?)                                    \ iaJc  ImxdZ'
               Dr C NichoJ^6n -   RLSD                                        ) N2A£OXCiK
                              -   FAID HQ                                 '       su q q eiH ci^
                              -   TD3
                              -   Leisure NIG                                     - Sec- kxltpcxju
                              -   LAU

                                                                     C 0 - nACHOl-S£>nJ
               BACKGROUND

               1.   The meeting had been arranged to discuss what further work
               had taken place on crowd safety and to discuss a possible approach
               to advice and guidance in the leisure industry with the imminent
               transfer of some enforcement responsibilities to local
               authorities with effect from the 1 April.
               TD

               2.   M r e x p l a i n e d that he had been working with the National
               Outdoor Events Association on the development of a British
               Standard.     TheBSI Project manager involved had seemed committed
               to the work andhad indicated that resources were available.
               Generally, Mr         ^iad been looking at the design of structures
               with the users psychology in mind, He thought it was possible to
               design for crowd safety and to provide an effective engineering
               solution to some aspects.      On top of that, effective management
               would be needed to work within the parameters which the
               engineering solution offered.      He had already undertaken some
               initial preparatory work on temporary stands but this work needed
               further extension and would require some 50 days of effort to
               produce it up to the sort of standard for a guidance note.
               He did not think that CONIAC would have an interest in temporary
               stands.                  "
Asr„..v.       RLSD

                3.    Dr Nicholson indicated that there had been two meetings of
                the working group on the Green Guide. RLSD had also done some
           ?   work on competent persons.    He said that Lord Justice Taylor, in
               Tfie^cbntext of the Hillsborough inquiry, had decided that the
                crowd density of 5.4 persons per square metre should be reduced by
                15%. RLSD had indicated that there did not seem to be any sound
                scientific basis for this judgement but this would almost
                certainly feature as a recommendation in any report.    Dr
                Nicholson said they had not seen the results of the report nor had
               been given any inclination as to what the report was likely to
                contain.   However, the line of questioning from Lord Justice
               Taylor's office had clearly shown the way that the report was
                                                 1
likely to go.   The final report was probably fairly close to
completion and there was to be a meeting at the Home Office next
week to discuss it.
4.   He referred to the Institution of Structural Engineers, who
had undertaken an appraisal of sports grounds with an audience of
designers principally in mind.
5.   There was a general discussion over the prosecution arising
from the Hillsborough disaster.   It seemed likely that
manslaughter was being considered by the West Midlands Police who
were looking at the whole conduct of the Hillsborough disaster but
it seemed unlikely that the element of recklessness necessary for
manslaughter was likely to be present.   There were probably also
breaches of the Safety of Sports Ground Act of a technical nature,
failures by the local authority to maintain the licence or to keep
it up to date and there might also have been breaches of the
Health and Safety at Work Act.   Proving the offences was likely
to be difficult in this case.   Whilst approaches had been made by
the West Midlands Police to Dr Nicholson, a   decision on any
prosecution was likely to be taken by the Crown Prosecution
Service in conjunction with the Director of Public Prosecutions.

6.    Dr Nicholson indicated that the cr<^sh barrier^ which had
collapsed in the football stadium had been corroded but, in any
event, had collapsed at a pressure which was likely to have
inflicted very serious injuries on the crowd who were restrained
by them.    The progressive collapse of two^Sarriers had led to the
catapulting of large numbers of people down the steps towards the
"front of the stadium resulting in the injuries which had been
found.
SGPC
7.    Dr Derrick indicated the work which her Crowd Safety Working
Group had undertaken and said that it seemed likely that some
research work was going to be needed in the area of crowd dynamics
and crowd psychology.    The Creasy work which had been produced in
1945 to 1946, though unpublished, was generally relied on as a
source of expertise in this area, but the work dated. There was
also some American work but this was unavailable at the present
time.

LAU
8.   Mr         indicated the work which the LAU had done m
setting up a working group to respond to local authorities and
employers1 pressures for advice and guidance in the area of pop
concerts.
Form of General Guidance
9.   There was a general discussion about the form which any
guidance might take and it was felt that a_core module was
probably needed which would describe the general principles which
applied to all leisure activities, for example, crowd behaviour,
crowd dynamics, crowd psychology, safe systems of work etc.
Supplementary and complementary modules would also be needed then
                                2
^       n> n>
©     -jb' <>
          o
    -r



                to either amplify or qualify the general guidance to deal with
                particular applications.     Modules might be needed on
                theatres/cinemas; horse and agricultural shows; car/motor-cycle
                events; aircraft shows; stock car racing; pop concerts (indoor and
                outdoor)): discotheques and clubs; shopping malls; sporting
                activities; transport termini; and religious and cultural events.
                The APAU, who were not represented, would probably be able to
                provide some expertise on the management of health and safety as
                part of the core general guidance.

                10. In describing the visits to pop concerts which Mr                and
                Dr Derrick had undertaken, Dr Derrick indicated that the noise
                levels had been particularly noticeable. Dr Nicholson suggested
                that noise levels at discotheques, clubs and pop concerts might be
                a suitable area for a Technical Development Survey.        The
                requirements to get one of these set up was that at least two
                divisions would need to support it.     M r i n d i c a t e d for TD
                that they would regard it as a useful exercise as did Mr
                He pointed out that this would also be a useful demonstration of
                collaboration between local authority inspectors and FAID.        Once
                the objective data on noise levels and exposure of workers and
                members of the public had been collected, it would be possible to
                undertake some medical evaluation of the likely damage that was
                being caused.   On the basis of this, it might then be possible to
                try and educate employers in this area to keep noise at reasonable
                levels. If this failed then enforcement action might be
                necessary.    M r a n d      Mrs          poth agreed it would be
                helpful to have a common enforcement policy in this area because
                of the sensitive area which was involved and to ensure uniformity
                and consistency of approach.     Work would need to be set in hand
                to develop a Protocol.

                11. Dr Nicholson asked to see details of the "Mojo" barrier which
                was being used at Wembley. The drawings produced by the Concert
                Promoters Association with their ideas for a circular barrier at
                Castle Donington had already been copied to TD and Dr Nicholson
                also asked for copies; there was potential for this having a more
                general application but a detailed evaluation of it would be
                needed.   Dr Derrick suggested that research on barriers might be
                a further area that might be needed. This was generally agreed.
                Dr Nicholson indicated that in Liverpool some work was being done
                on packing densities of people.
                Accidents

                12. Mrs          said that she was trying to identify information
                on accidents which might have occurred in the area of pop concerts
                and other activities, but it seemed likely that little information
                was available.   Dr Derrick indicated that a number of places that
                had been visited by her did have first aid facilities and the
                first aiders maintained quite detailed records going back over a
                period of years. Most of the accidents were of a fairly trivial
                nature involving faints and hysteria but there were some more
                serious accidents. Mr          said he would check on the
                agricultural side of FAID to see what information       they had
                on accidents at the kind of shows where they were the enforcing
                authority.

                                                  3
FURTHER ACTION

13. a) Mr         would maintain contact with the National Outdoor
Association encouraging them to undertake work with BSI which
would fit with HSE priorities and other work.   For example,
technical BSI standards on temporary stands, or barriers, or
seating would dovetail with the guidance which HSE might produce.
He would keep those present in touch with the work.

     b) Dr Nicholson and Mr        would prepare some initial
suggestions for research on crowd safety.
     c)        ©r:.„Kicholsoni would seek clarification from the West
Midlands Police about their request for HSE involvement with the
Hillsborough prosecution and liaise with Dr Derrick over a
possible Executive paper.
     d)   Dr Nicholson^and Mr       would consider the various
barrier designs proposed by the Concert Promoters.

     e)   Mr         tfould proceed with the proposal to provide
general guidance on pop concerts.    The next step was to put the
proposal to HELA.   He would also pursue with those present and
SGP B the proposal for a survey into noise levels at pop
concerts.

     f)
     j-)  Mrs         and Mr        .Twould gather ' together
                                                     -- -O ------- - what
                                                                     ----
information they ouuxJ on the kind and extent of injuries at large
gatherings, particularly in the leisure industry.
     g)   Dr Derrick said she would pursue the longer term
proposals for general principles of good management of crowds.
She proposed to discuss the issue with the Home Office and visit
other leisure industry venues plus Professor Carter at Sussex
University.
14. Dr Derrick said that it would be necessary to hold a further
meeting of the Crowd Safety Group involving most of the original
participants, the local authority interest now being represented
by the LAU rather than by the North West Leicester District
Council inspectors.




SGP. C
February 1990
