                                                                 H 3 /ia

EXAMINATION OF BARRIER 124A

1. Barrier 124A was examined by RLSD staff at Hillsborough Football
Ground on 17 April 1989. Various parts of this barrier were taken to the
Sheffield Laboratory on 24 April 1989 for detailed assessment. The
following is an interim summary of our findings:

2. It was deduced that barrier 124A had consisted of a continuous
horizontal tube, made from wrought iron, and four vertical supports each
made from two lengths of steel angle section joined at the top by a
steel gusset plate. A reconstruction is shown in Figure 1. The barrier
had failed apparently by partial collapse and fracture of supports 3 and
4, and by fracture of the horizontal tube at supports 2, 3 and 4, as
shown in Figure 2. The portion of the tube which been located between
supports 2 and 3 had been bent uniformly to give a maximum permanent
deflection of 133mm at midspan. The portion of the tube which been
located between supports 3 and 4 had been bent uniformly to give a
maximum permanent deflection of 200mm at inidspan. Barrier 124A was
estimated to be approximately 60 years old, although it had received a
number of modifications during its lifetime.

3. The tensile strength of the wrought iron tube material was measured
at 365MPa (23.6 tonf/in ) with an estimated elastic limit of 150MPa (9.7
tonf/in }. The tensile strength of the mild steel angle used for the
supports was measured at 360MPa (23.3 tonf/in ) with a yield stress of
288MPa (18.6 tonf/in ).

4. The tube fractures had occurred in areas which had been located under
the metal straps designed to retain the tube. At these locations the
tubes had not been painted, and the tube wall thickness, nominally
4.5mm, had been reduced significantly by corrosion. At the fracture
surface corresponding to support 2 the residual thickness of the tube
wall was found to vary from 0.4mm to 4.4mm around the circumference.
Similarly at the fracture surface corresponding to support 3 the wall
thickness was in the range 1.6mm to 4.5mm. At support 4, however, there
was evidence that the tube wall had been perforated by corrosion at two
locations producing holes which would have been approximately 10mm and
20mm in diameter before the collapse. Elsewhere, around the fracture
corresponding to support 4, the wall thickness was in the range 1.1mm to
4.5mm.

5. In general the appearance of the tube fractures was typical of
wrought iron which had fractured in a single-stage bending/tensile mode.
Fracture of the tube adjacent to support 3 appeared to have initiated on
the uphill side of the barrier at a position approximately 90 from top
dead centre. The other tube fractures had suffered some post-failure
damage the origins were not readily identifiable.

6. The failed supports had been corroded, particularly at the junction
with the concrete steps and/or reinforcement angles. In these regions
residual thicknesses in the range 3.1mm - 5.9mm were measured compared
with a nominal thickness of 6.3mm.

7. A relatively large amount of metal had been lost by corrosion from
supports 3 and 4 near, what would have been, the original junctions
between the support feet and the terrace. On two of the four feet this
region had been reinforced by the addition of a length of metal angle
which had been bolted on top of the original angle from which the
support had been made. The height of the concrete terrace had been
raised at some stage and this had concealed the previous corrosion
damage. The appearance of the concrete cores, extracted from near the
support feet, was consistent with this observation.
8. Calculations to establish the force required to cause the collapse of
barrier 124A, and the collapse, sequence are currently underway.

9. One the remaining barriers in the Central Pen will be tested to
destruction in the near future in order to validate the calculations.
