 ^ 5/ 70// o/ q/?


                r
Mr Lindsay



                                       cc: Mr Whomsley




OVERCROWDING


1.            |in SPD D3 has, as you know, been doing some prelimi­
nary fact finding on overcrowding.   I thought you might like to
see his note on progress. We are still going slowly and waiting
for Home Office reaction; the note is just for information.




LINDA DERRICK
SPD

17 August 1989
                                               C<_   r \s   2 i*/v *J c    -


                                                                          1 4 M G 1 989

 SPD D3




                       PROGRESS ON OVERCROWDING



 1-   You asked for a note about where I had got to on Over­
 crowding .


 2.   LITERATURE SURVEY


       (i)        As you know, SPD C4 agreed to take the lead on this,                    a
rather disappointing number of relevant articles were turned up
and have been requested.     I have asked for the full articles,
rather than an abstract, in the hope that the notes may turn up
references of interest.


     (ii) In addition, the "Guardian" review of "Football in its
Place" led to my borrowing it from the library and subsequently
requesting its purchase.     I was disappointed that it lacked a full
bibliography but it does seem to have been of interest.


3.    CONTACTS WITH INTERESTED PARTIES


      (i)    Local Authorities were my first port of call.         I got
some useful names off the LAU and have spoken to five Environmen­
tal Health Officers/Events Organisers in Mendip, Reading,
Brighton, Southend on Sea and the London Borough of Newham.


      (ii)   From these people I learnt of non-government bodies who
might be interested: The Festival Welfare Services Committee, and
the National Outdoor Events Association are the main ones (see
Annex 1).


     (iii)       1 already have some literature from these people and I
am waiting for more (see Annex 2).
      (iv)       Other groups I need to talk to include:


      (a) outside HSE, the Institution of Environmental Health
     Officers, and possibly Nottingham City Council, who, I am
     told, are the leaders for getting things safe.             It might be
     useful to talk informally to the Institution of EHO's at
     their conference in September I believe Linda is going.


     (b)Inside HSE,                         of the Leisure NIG has sent some
     useful papers (the problems encountered by an inspector in
     Leeds at a pop concert are instructive) and it might be
     useful talking to them further.            APAU know something about
     the International Safety Rating system which was used to
     safety audit London Underground; its structure may be appli­
     cable to out-door event companies and licensing authorities
     could use its strategy to assess safety proposals.


4.   CURRENT OPINION OUTSIDE HSE


     (i)        Everybody I spoke to, without exception, was enthusias­
tic about hearing from HSE.        I stressed that I was engaged in
fact-finding only, but all felt there was a need for some kind of
central authorative body which could issue guidelines all would
recognise and follow.


     (ii)       The areas where they thought guidance was needed
varied, the most general ones were:


     (a> numbers of people in a given area.            Mendip had great
      •     «                        is.^
     difficulty assessing how^people could get onto the
     Glastonbury site safely - the courts asked them for a figure
     and they gave 40,000, mainly by assessing the number of
     toilets available.       The organisers challenged this and 1_— I
                 (Mendip EHO) was in a difficult position.        In actual
     fact 70,000 attended the site.


     fbl levels of services provided to attenders.             The DOE and
     DHSS have recognised ratios for toilets and food providers
     (see Healthy Festival Sites1            but other areas need looking
^^at.   For example, first aid including drugs advice), informa­
  tion systems (lost property and people), communication sys-
  tems (phoning home for money etc).    I agree these are^obvious
  HSE concerns (apart from first aid), and could be seen as
  part of a PR exercise by the organisers.     But failure to find
  money, relatives etc can lead to distress and danger and this
  could be seen as a direct result of the organiser's negli­
  gence .


  Ic) safety of equipment.   I am unsure what regulation and
  guidance already exists in this area.     Matters that have been
  mentioned are: the construction of the stage/ stands, provi­
  sion of electric lights (for entertainment and visibility),
  types of fencing (chestnut stakes or steel), width and number
  of roadways within the sight, gas bottles in tents, etc.       One
  advantage of this, mentioned by the National Outdoor Events
  Association, is that manufacturers and contractors selling to
  the industry would be able to market products nationally - at
  the moment a product acceptable in one county does not meet
  the requirements of another.


  (d) requirement for every outdoor events to be licensed.       At
  the moment the Miscellaneous Provisions Act allows local
  authorities to license (if they so wish) events at which the
  predominant feature is amplified music.    Glastonbury could
  avoid the need for a license by slightly changing the balance
 of entertainment offered and should Mendip prove too diffi­
 cult the organiser threatens this, which would leave the
 authority with no control at all.     In addition, air shows
 need licenses and the CAA has just published detailed guide­
 lines for these.   Events such as County Shows, Horse and pony
 events, etc remain unlicensed.                in Southend-on-Sea
 is a supporter of the French system in which all out-door
 events require a license and are ranked according to size and
 risk and have to meet requirements accordingly.
 5 • ^ F U R T H E R ACTION


     (i) I obviously need to talk to more people and to wait for
more literature, especially from the National Outdoor Events
Association, to come in. There might be the need for visits
perhaps even to Festivals!


       (ii)    You have already mentioned the possibility of research
in the area of crowd control/safety as a result of reading "Foot­
ball in its Place" and speaking to the Home Office.        This obvi­
ously waits on Hillsborough but I think numbers, as in para 4(a),
is important and could be linked to research on control.


     (iii)       I need to find out (from               ) about what
safety controls do exist.


      (iv)             When our minds are little clearer an HSE working party
(Leisure NIG, LAU, SPD C4, APAU & us) which could invite in people
from outside might be a way of both commissioning research and
providing a coherent HSE approach to the subject.


6.    I hope that this note is of some use.       I think it is early
days yet to decide on what to do.        Of one thing I am certain, an
intervention by HSE into this area would welcomed.
                                                    ANNEX ONE

                            OUTSIDE ORGANISATIONS


 FESTIVAL welfare SERVICES COMMITTEE: 61 B Hornsey Road. London N7
      Phone 01 700 5754: Contact


 wi-h      1972 ^ C0‘'0rdlnate the wor* of organisations concerned
 With the provision of voluntary welfare facilities at open-air
  estivals.    Advisers include: Institute of Environmental Health
    icers, st John Ambulance, skool Bus and Travellers'           School,
  a e the Children ate.      only one or two full-time staff and funded
mainly by the Home office's Voluntary Services Unit.            Also gets
money from the HO's drugs campaign.       Annual Report is a good
clients view of what goes on.


NATIONAL OUTDOOR EVENTS ASSOCIATION: Contact Secretary
      ^°n           4469.     Set up ?1987 mainly as an organiser's
association.    Now split: 50/50 between organisers/manufacturers and
Local Authority Officials.       Funded by subscription and fees.      Has
set up a Working Party on Safety and Welfare which will start work
in the Autumn — Secretary
                                      (Southend-on-Sea 0702
355166).  some of the members probably already have contact with
HSE via Leisure and Explosives (pyrotechnics).         Offers advice to
lawyers on what guidelines would be appropriate (eg injured party
suing event organiser) and organisers dealing with EHOs.


ST JOHN'S AMBULANCE.    Rep on Festival Welfare is
0727 66828.    They liaise with Police and Organisers and provide
first aid on a voluntary basis (could refuse to if they consider
the site unsafe).    Only interested in first aid and probably not
interested in HSE's concerns.      Apparently no national guidelines
on out-door events, take each event on its merits.
                                               ANNEX TWO


                         LITERATURE RECEIVED


Health Festival Sites; Environmental Health Guidelines for Open-
air Festivals- Published by FWSC. 1980. £ 1 .


festival Welfare Services Annual Report 1988.      fwsc.   £2.


g p a m w u t y Festivals Handbook. Community Projects Foundation. 1983


Eestivals; A surv ival Guide,   fwsc.


Hackney'S Local Festivals Manual


EMklac Entertainment Licensing Regulations. Elmbridae Borough
Council.


                       LITERATURE REQUESTED


PQP Festivals: S Report and Code of Practice.      The Advisory Com­
mittee on Pop Festivals. DOE 1973


Er.ee Festivals. First Report of the Working Group on Pop Festi­
vals. 1978. HMSO


Pop Festival and their Problems. Second Report on the Working
Group on Pop Festivals HMSO. 1978


GLC Po p Concerts Code of Practice. Third Edition 1985.
Ub
                               &
                                      cc




OVERCROWDING


I read Chapter 4 of "Football in its Place". My inclination
is to agree with the author.  I want o/t read the rest of the
book so I am keeping it until Monday week. Please apologise,
if necessary, to the library. Despite the fact I fell asleep
first time I attempted it, I think it well written and
interesting.  I will recommend to recipients of Frank
Lindsay's minute.




LINDA DERRICK
28 July 1989
       ©     £(4L-fch570 |U0}^

MR LINDSAY                                  cc   Mr Whomsley, DCIF
                                                 Mr Cavanagh, AD NW
                                                             SB
                                                             AU




MANAGING SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS

1.         This is a short note before I go on leave to say I think
           it would be a good thing if the APAU could fill a need
           for guidance on safety management at sports grounds,
           bringing in expertise from a range of bodies. But there
           are a large number of people with an interest and we
           have to carry them with us, and that will take a bit of
           time. Our initial thought is that we should first sound
           out the H.O. informally.                  will do this.
           If they are receptive to the idea and assuming that Mr
                  and FAID are content, (and perhaps the Executive
           too?), we might suggest informally to Sheffield City
           Council that the request is converted into a
           recommendation by the Hillsborough Enquiry which I
           believe is due to make an interim report shortly. We
           would suggest a form of words for the recommendation.
           It would carry more weight that way and we would not be
           seen as putting ourselves forward. When we have talked
           to the Home Office, and assuming they are willing, I
           wonder if you o r c o u l d        suggest this to the
           Council?




LINDA DERRICK
28 July 1989


P.S.           I am in the middle of reading a book called
               "Football in its Place" by Professor Carter, a
               technical advisor to the Bradford Fire.  I
               recommend it. Chapter 4 would support a look at
               managing the safety of crowds.
                                                      tfsjio/z/o/g*?
 Ms Derrick                                      cc



 OVERCROWDING - SPORTSGROUNDS



 1.     As promised, I rang             , my contact at Home Office.
        He was enthusiastic about the idea of research on general
        crowd safety at sportsgrounds and elsewhere.     He will explore
        other views within Home Office, and come back to me.     He
        thought their Ministers would be very interested.


 2.     Home Office also supply the secretariat for the Taylor
        Inquiry into Hillsborough. _____________ will make discreet
        inquiries about what their views might be on such research -
        and, even more tentatively, whether they might recommend it.


 3.     One question we will be exploring later is who picks the bill
        up;        offered Home Office assistance in part, but not in
        full.   A likely initial outcome is for us to be invited to
        talk this through with Home Office officials.




 SPD D3


'71§   July 1989                                 mw\62


                   aaP   z\


                                           ---




                                t"
                                •f'
4   /   V
