                                                               Incident Report


                      HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

               RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                      Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ



                The Hillsborough Incident 15 April 1989:
                Examination of Crush Barrierlf^rom Pen 3

                                  by

                     P F Heyes and J G Tattersall

                                                IR/L/MM/89/9




Distribution                           Issue authorised by: Dr C E Nicholson
1 INTRODUCTION

Following an incident on 15 April 1989, staff of the Health and Safety
Executive visited Hillsborough Football Ground on 17 April 1989 at the
request of Mr Paul Jackson, Sheffield Environmental Health Department.
The crush barriers in Pens 3 and 4 (central pens), at the west end of
the ground, were examined and identified with a paint marker in
accordance with a drawing supplied by Mr Jackson. On each barrier the
support locations were numbered sequentially starting from the south-west
end, e.g. 149/2 refers to the second support from the south-west end of
barrier 149.

Barrier 124A appeared to have collapsed and a length of the horizontal
tube had become detached. This detached length of tube had been kept in
a secure place by Club Officials since the incident and it was placed in
Pen 3 on 17 April 1989 so that it could be examined in conjunction with
the rest of the barrier.

On 24 April 1989 various parts of barrier 124A were removed from Pen 3,
under the supervision of the authors of this report, and taken to the
Sheffield Laboratory of the Health and Safety Executive for
metallurgical assessment. This report contains details of examinations
performed on site and in the laboratory. The work was carried out by the
authors and by other staff of HSE working on their instruction and under
their general supervision.

2 ON SITE EXAMINATION

2.1 BARRIER 124A

Barrier 124A was located on the seventh, eighth and ninth steps of Pen 3
at the south-west end. The overall length of this barrier before
collapse was estimated to be 7.5m, including a tube overhang of 0.6m at
the south-west end near the radial fence, adjacent to Pen 2. The
horizontal distance from this barrier to the perimeter fence at the
front of Pen 3 was approximately 3.5m, and the distance of the tube end
from the radial fence, separating Pens 2 and 3, was 28mm. There were no
other barriers between barrier 124A and the perimeter fence.

The evidence suggested that, prior to the collapse, barrier 124A had
consisted of four vertical supports with a continuous horizontal tube
between them. The vertical supports had consisted of two lengths of 52mm
wide metal angle, having a thickness of 6mm, inclined at an angle of 20
degrees to one another. Each front support leg had been curved near the
top to form a horizontal surface and had been joined to the rear support
leg by a triangular gusset plate. The latter had been bolted to the two
lengths of metal angle. The horizontal tube had been made from hollow
circular section metal with an outside diameter of 60mm. An inverted
U-shaped strap had been bolted to the top of each support, and this was
intended presumably to retain the horizontal tube.

Figure 1 shows barrier 124A viewed from the north-east side. The
detached length of tube had a transverse fracture at either end. One of
these fracture matched the fracture on the tube in contact with support
2 and the other matched the fracture on tube in contact with support 3.
Hence in Figure 1 the detached length of tube has been positioned
between supports 2 and 3. This detached length of tube had been bent
symmetrically about its mid-point where the maximum deflection was
100mm.
Support 4, shown in the foreground of Figure 1, had been moved forward
and twisted in a south-west direction. The lower portion of the
front leg had remained straight, although by comparison with the front
legs of other barriers, it appeared to have moved forward through an
angle of 25 degrees approximately. In so doing the front leg had broken
away from the edge of the concrete step in which it had been supported.
Several pieces of detached concrete were observed nearby, two of which
matched the fracture on the step, shown in Figure 2. The upper portion
of the front leg had suffered localised bending and twisting in the
south-west direction i.e. inwards with respect to the other supports on
this barrier.

The rear leg of support 4 had been deformed and kinked at the lower end
near the junction with a piece of reinforcing steel angle. The original
angle section, from which the rear leg had been made, had been thinned by
corrosion in the area where this deformation had occurred. The rear leg
also exhibited localised deformation and cracking in the vicinity of the
lowest gusset plate attachment hole. The gusset plate had remained
straight but had been pushed inwards towards the other supports. The
tube retaining strap appeared to be intact and still in position.

Support 3 had been deformed extensively and flattened so that it was
almost horizontal. The general direction of deformation was towards the
front corner of the pen in the south-west direction. At its lower end the
front leg had been deformed adjacent to a piece of reinforcing angle,
but both the latter and the surrounding concrete were undisturbed. The
rear leg had been bent forward and the majority of the deformation had
occurred at the junction with the concrete step. The step itself was
intact. The gusset plate was undeformed but it had been torn from the
upper part of the rear leg and moved forward. The strap retaining the
tube at support 3 had been straightened partially but the tube appeared
to be captive at this position. A transverse fracture of the tube was
visible under the strap.

The length of tube in contact with support 3 had been bent by 100mm at
midspan and it had a ragged fracture near its free end. The latter had
presumably been located under the strap on support 4 before collapse
occurred. However, this fracture appeared to have been the result of
crushing of the side of the tube, the original manufactured end being
deformed but not fractured. During the visit on 17 April, a small piece
of tube, roughly semi-circular in section, was found by Dr Nicholson
(Deputy Director, Safety Engineering Laboratory) amongst the debris near
gate 3 in the perimeter fence. The fracture on this small piece matched
that near the free end of the tube. Assuming that this free end of the
tube had been located on support 4 before collapse, then it had moved a
distance of 1.4m in the horizontal plane before coming to rest on the
steps. In total the collapsed part of barrier 124A occupied an area
measuring 4m along the terrace and 1.4m down the terrace in Pen 3.
Supports 1 and 2 were free from damage and the length of tube between
them had not been deformed significantly. This length of tube contained
two circumferential welds: one approximately 0.2m south-west from the
strap on support 2; the other 0.05m north-east from the strap on
support 1. The tube had fractured transversely under the strap on
support 2 and a smaller diameter tube insert was observed protruding
from this fracture. There was evidence of considerable corrosion of the
original tube under this strap. The tube insert appeared to be
approximately 150mm in total length. The strap on support 2 had been
welded to the tube on the south-west side only. This was the only
position on barrier 124A where a strap had been attached to the tube.

2.2 OTHER BARRIERS

The remaining barriers in Pen 3 (149, 136, 136A, and 125) and those in
Pen 4 were also examined. Several barriers had been fabricated with
rectangular hollow section supports and these appeared to be somewhat
newer than the rest. Most of the old-style barriers had been modified in
some way, strengthening of the support legs and welding of the
horizontal tubes being common. Corrosion was evident at all joints and
intersections, and rust "jacking" had occurred at many of the gusset
plate/support leg junctions. Most of the horizontal tubes were
open-ended and in two cases (barrier 125 near support 1 and barrier 128
near support 1) the tube wall had been perforated by corrosion under the
support strap. An example of this is shown arrowed in Figure 3.

2.3 EXCAVATION OF BARRIER 124A SUPPORTS

It was agreed that supports 3 and 4 on barrier 124A could be removed for
laboratory examination. Three cylindrical cores, measuring 0.1m in
diameter and 0.4m in length, were cut from the concrete steps at
positions specified by Mr Pertee, a Principal Specialist Inspector in
HSE, before excavation of the supports commenced. These cores were
identified by the letter P,Q and U.

After cutting, core P was found to contain a piece of the front foot
from support 4 and core U was found to contain a piece of the rear foot
of support 3.

It became apparent during excavation that each support leg had been
flattened and shaped to form a foot which had been positioned
horizontally in the ground and bolted to a base plate. The supports were
freed by unscrewing, or grinding off, the nuts in contact with the feet
of the supports. In all cases the boundary between the support and the
concrete was marked using yellow paint.

When the front foot of support 4 was exposed, considerable thinning and
loss of metal was observed in the vicinity of the bend between the
upright and the foot. This area was further weakened during core
drilling and the remaining ligament of metal, approximately 5mm wide was
fractured accidentally during removal of the support. The extent of the
fracture thus formed was marked on the side of the support using black
ink. Part of the front foot was found to be in contact with a
reinforcing wire in the concrete and a length of this wire was removed
for possible examination.
The pieces of reinforcing angle, noted previously on the rear leg of
support 4 and the front leg of support 3, were observed to extend below
the surface of the concrete to the bend at the start of the foot.

The length of tube remaining in contact with support 3 slipped out the
strap during lifting of the support. It was apparent that this length of
tube had   not been fixed intentionally to the strap and it had been held
temporarily in position by accumulated rust and debris only.

3 LABORATORY ASSESSMENT

3.1 ITEMS RECEIVED

The following items were taken from Pen 3 for examination:

Exhibit No                         Description

CEN/1        A piece of metal tube found by Dr Nicholson near support 4
             on barrier 124A

CEN/2         A length of metal tube found by Dr Nicholson on the steps
             of Pen 3 between support 2 and 3 on barrier 124A

PFH/1         A length of metal tube, one end of which had been located
             in the strap of support 3 on barrier 124A

PFH/2        Support 4 from barrier 124A

PFH/3        Support 3 from barrier 124A

PFH/4        Items from the front foot of support 4 on barrier 124A
              comprising: two nuts; a slice of metal from the foot and a
              piece of reinforcing wire.

PFH/5        Two nuts from the rear foot ofsupport   4 onbarrier   124A

PFH/6        Two pieces of concrete found by MrHeyes near thefront
              foot of support 4 on barrier 124A

PFH/7        A concrete core, identified as "P", cut from the terracing
              near the front foot of support 4 on barrier 124A

PFH/8        A concrete core, identified as "Q", cut from the terracing
              between the feet of support 4 on barrier 124A

PFH/9        A concrete core, identified as "U", cut from the terracing
              near the rear leg of support 3 on barrier 124A

Exhibits PFH/4,5 and 6 were not included in the present examination.
3.2 VISUAL EXAMINATION

3.2.1 Concrete cores

Core P was extracted in three pieces: a cylindrical upper piece,
approximately 85mm in length, which was composed of an upper layer (27mm
in thickness) containing relatively fine aggregate, typically a few
millimetres in section and a lower layer (52mm in thickness) containing
coarser aggregate, typically 5-10mm in section; an irregular shaped
intermediate piece, with a maximum length of 120mm, which contained
coarser aggregate, typically 20-30mm in section, and bore an impression
of a section of barrier support foot; a cylindrical lower layer, 180mm
in length also containing coarser aggregate (20-30mm in section)

Core Q was extracted in two cylindrical pieces: an upper piece,
approximately 138mm in length, which was composed of an upper layer (23mm
in thickness) containing relatively fine aggregate, typically a few
millimetres in section, a middle layer (65mm in thickness) containing
coarser aggregate, typically 5-10mm in section, and lower a layer, 50mm
in thickness, of loosely bound coarse material; a lower piece, 245mm in
length containing coarse aggregate, typically 20-30mm in section.

Core U was extracted in two cylindrical pieces: an upper piece,
approximately 141mm in length, which was composed of an upper layer
(26mm in thickness) containing relatively fine aggregate, typically a
few millimetres in section and a lower layer (115mm in thickness)
containing coarser aggregate, typically 5-10mm in section; a lower
piece, 200mm in length, containing coarse aggregate, typically 20-30mm
in section. The lower layer contained a slice through a barrier support
foot consisting of, in descending order, a nut, a piece of foot, a piece
of bolt and a piece of base-plate.

3.2 BARRIER TUBE   Exhibit numbers CEN/1, CEN/2, and
PFH/1

3.2.1 VISUAL EXAMINATION
                                                             <►    S'
The two barrier tubes (CEN/2 and PFH/1) , shown in   Figures 2r and k", were
approximately 2.3 m in length and had an external    diameter of 60 mm. One
fracture on each tube, at the position coincident    with support 3,
matched and indicated that the two tubes had once    formed a single length
of tube.

Visual examination of the fractures showed that in general the failure
of the tube had occurred in a fibrous, ductile manner. On the two
matching fractures there was however a region of bright crystalline
fracture, shown arrowed in F i g u r e d consistent with a more brittle
failure mode. This crystalline fracture had occurred where the remaining
wall thickness of the tube was at a maximum. At this point the tube
wall curved slightly outwards from the longitudinal axis suggesting that
this had been the last part to fail.

At the fracture positions much of the wall thickness of the tube had
been reduced by external corrosion. The corrosion had occurred under the
locating straps in areas which were unpainted. The end of the tube at
the position of support 4 had been open to the environment and
additional corrosion of the internal surface of the tube had occurred.
            This had resulted in the formation of two holes, estimated to have been
            approximately 10 and 20 mm in diameter, through the wall prior to the
            failure. One of these holes, shown arrowed in Figure fr? appeared to have
            initiated the fracture and detachment of the small piece of tube (Figure
               found on the steps, item CEN/1.

            Elsewhere the internal surface of the tubes showed only light
            pitting/corrosion.

            Part of a rolled up newspaper was found inside tube 2 - 3 near end 3.
            This was a copy of the "Yorkshire Telegraph and Star", dated 24 October
            1931.

            3.2.2 WALL THICKNESS MEASUREMENTS AT FRACTURE POSITIONS

            At the fracture positions the wall thickness of the tube was measured at
            various locations around the circumference. The range of fracture
            thickness recorded at each location is shown below:

            Thickness at Support 2       0.4 to 4.4 mm

            Thickness at Support 3       1.6 to 4.5 mm

            Thickness at Support 4       1.1 to 4.5 mm   (not including the edges of the
                                                          corroded holes.)

            Measurements taken along the tube using an ultrasonic instrument showed
            that the wall thickness remote from the fractures was in the range 3.2
            to 4.9 mm. There were no areas of pronounced thinning.

            3.2.3 MICROEXAMINATION

            A transverse ring section was prepared from the tube in the painted
            region adjacent to support end 3. Microexamination showed that the tube
            had been manufactured from wrought iron and that it contained a
            longitudinal, forged lap weld. A layer of corrosion appeared to be
            present under the paint.


            A microsection of a sample of paint removed from the tube near to support 3
            showed that the paint consisted of 13 coats plus an initial metal loaded
            primer coat. The total thickness of these coats was approximately 0.5 mm.

            3.2.4 TENSILE AND HARDNESS TESTS

            Two longitudinal tensile test pieces were machined from the barrier tube
            in a relatively undeformed region adjacent to support end 3. These test
            pieces were identified T343 1 and T343 2 and when tested in accordance
            with BS 18 "Method for Tensile Testing of Metals" gave the following
            results:

                         Elastic Limit         Rp0.5      Rm          A%

               T343 1      142 MPa          271 MPa      371 MPa      17
                           9.1 tsi          17.5 tsi     24.0 tsi
d { S'I 7
               T343 2      159 MPa          269 MPa      358 MPa      17
                           10.3 tsi         17.4 tsi     23.2 tsi
Hardness tests were carried out on the ring microsection in accordance
with BS 427 "Method for Vickers Hardness Test" and gave the following
results:

                145, 115, 145, 142, 144,   HV 10

The hardness and tensile results are consistent with the microstructure
and typical for wrought iron.


3.3 BARRIER SUPPORTS   Exhibit Numbers PFH/2 and PFH/3


3.3.1 VISUAL EXAMINATION
                                                 <7       10
The two barrier supports are shown in Figures   and*9". Corrosion of all
support legs was evident at either the level of the concrete step or at
the position of buckling. The front leg of support 3 and the rear leg of
support 4 had been reinforced with additional sections of steel angle.
This reinforcement spanned areas of severe corrosion which had been at
positions below the present level of the concrete step.

3.3.2 DIMENSIONS

The general width and thickness of the angle of the support legs and the
thickness at locations shown in Figures^ and-9^were measured. All
measurements were made with the paint removed.1*


    Width of angle          Support 3                 49 to 50 mm
                            Support 4                 52 to 52.5 mm

    Thickness of angle
    remote from buckling    Support 3   Front leg     6.2   to   6.4   mm
                                        Rear leg      6.0   to   6.1   mm
                            Support 4   Front leg     7.1   to   7.4   mm
                                        Rear leg      6.6   to   6.8   mm
    Minimum thickness of
    angle at positions
    shown in Figures 4
    and 5                   Support 3   i     Front leg        3.1   mm
                                        ii    Rear leg         5.9   mm
                            Support 4   iii   Front leg        6.0   mm
                                        iv    Rear leg         4.0   mm


3.3.3 MICROEXAMINATION

Microsections were cut and prepared for examination from each of the
four legs, and the following microstructures were observed

    Support 3   Front leg - 100% ferrite
                Rear leg - Small amount of pearlite in ferrite in central
                             region; ferrite at edges.

    Support 4    Front leg - as Support 3 rear
                 Rear leg - as Support 3 rear

These microstructures were typical of very low carbon mild steels.

3.3.4 TENSILE TESTS

A tensile test piece was machined from the front and rear leg of support
3. The test pieces were identified FL3 and RL3 and were tested in
accordance with BS 18 " Method for Tensile Testing of Metals", and the
following results were obtained:


            Yield Stress           Rm            A%

    FL3           267 MPa        343 MPa           32
                  17.3 tsi        22.2 tsi

    RL3           308 MPa        376 MPa           31
                  19.9 tsi        24.3 tsi


3.3.5 HARDNESS

Vickers hardness tests were carried out on the microsections taken from the
support legs. These tests were conducted in accordance with BS 427
"Method for Vickers Hardness Test" and gave the following results:


    Support 3    Front leg    106, 109, 105, 106
                 Rear leg     123, 113, 123, 125

    Support 4    Front leg    112, 120, 116, 140
                 Rear leg     135, 141, 134, 121


These hardnesses are consistent with the tensile test results and
typical of mild steel.
