 3NFIDENTIAL


Mr J D Rixnington                     cc
Mr D C T Eves                              solicitor
                                           Mr A J Linehan


                                           Dr L Derrick



                                           Mr C Nicholson RLSD



THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER: FINAL REPORT: INQUIRY BY THE
RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


1.   In my minute of 13 February, I outlined some of the arguments
for and against bidding for some form of control over the new
Football Licensing Authority (FLA) and/or its Inspectorate.   I
also pointed out that much might depend on the outcome of a
meeting on 14 February between HSE, DoE and Home Office
representatives, at which we would get a feel for what, if any,
HSE involvement they might welcome.

2.   I understand that at that meeting it quickly became apparent
that DoE (which currently has oversight of the FLA) has already
had a number of bi-lateral discussions with the Home Office, and
are about to relinquish responsibility for the FLA in the Home
Office's favour.

3.   It was equally apparent that the Home Office are prepared, if
not keen, to have the additional work and would not welcome any
interference at this late stage from HSE.  I would not, therefore,
recommend any further action on our part on that score.

4.   However, the meeting did suggest that further work might need
to be done on the question of demarcation between the Home
Office's enforcement regime and ours, particularly when local
authorities take over HSE's HSW Act enforcement work in sports
grounds on 1 April 1990.  Because the current demarcation
agreement is between HSE and the Home Office it will effectively
lapse on 1 April.

5.   Tomorrow I am chairing a HELA meeting at which HELA members
will be asked if they wish the agreement to continue.  However
even if HELA think this generally desirable they would not
necessarily be able to speak for the local authorities they
represent.  As far as we know, there is no precedent for a
demarcation agreement of this kind between local authorities
collectively and another enforcing authority.  Informal soundings
suggest that HELA is likely to be very suspicious of entering into
any agreement which circumscribes local authorities' enforcement
powers.  However, if we are to avoid an embarrassing proliferation
of enforcing authorities within sports grounds, we will need to
                                1
^feeer HELA and the LAs towards some sort of agreement (perhaps
^*Long the lines of a less formal "Memorandum of Understanding"
 issued in a circular)  which at least recognises the boundaries of
 each enforcing authority's powers.  This is clearly a subject that
 will need careful handling on the LAU front.

 6.   I propose in the light of the HELA meeting to prepare a paper
 for the MB on 21 March, and think that further discussion can wait
 until then.




 D J HODGKINS
 D/SGPD

 26 February 1990

 [mp/fla, rat 241]




                                 2
I
                                                             r14 FEB 1990


                                           Department of the Environment
                                                        P3/165
                                           Room
                                           2 Marsham Street London SW1P 3EB
                                                                 0675
                                           Telex 22221    Direct Line 01-276
                                                         Switchboard 01 -27 6 3000

9 February 1990                                                    GTN 276


Dr L Derrick                                                                              .
Health and Safety Executive
Safety and General Policy Division                           ^ '      ____p-f-- -r~
Rm 270, Baynards House
Chepstow Place
LONDON WC2 4FT

                                                                          \ b   r -   ^

 J   jiz   J   J   ) r   L
%


THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY INSPECTORATE

Further to my recent          telephone conversation with ___________ I
confirm that we have         arranged to meet here at 10am on Wednesday
14 February in room          N17/14.   I will arrange for passes to be
available at entrance        door 5, North Tower.

I understand that in addition to yourself and              Doctor
        from your local authority division may also be attending.
In addition to Peter Lee and myself from DOE, Peter Bolton and
David Mould from G2, Home Office will also be attending.   As you
know responsibility for the FLA is likely to be transferred to
the Home Office in view of its functions post Lord Justice
Taylor's final report into the Hillsborough disaster.

As I agreed with                 there are three main issues to
discuss.   Firstly, to explore the respective roles and possible
areas of practical overlap between the HSE and FLA inspectorate
in relation to safety matters at football grounds. This may
require discussion of possible liaison arrangements between the
HSE and the FLA.    Secondly, you might be able to advise on any
initial training which the FLA Inspectorate might need.  Thirdly,
you might have some thoughts on how best to ensure, apart from
through guidance circulars, that local authorities are consistent
in implementation of their responsibilities under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 in relation to designated football
grounds.

I look forward to meeting you next Wednesday.

Yours sincerely




A R BADEN
Sport and Recreation Division
Dr L Derrick                           cc ^



THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY INSPECTORATE

I appreciate that your minute of 2 January has gone round to
members of the Crowd Safety Working Group.  I should like to
know their reactions, but the note on the Football Licensing
Authority makes me rather more doubtful about the case for
considerable HSE involvement than I was before.  This is largely
because the FLA does not seem to be a self standing body as
regards safety functions.  It merely makes recommendations to
the Secretary of State who might then decide to direct the FLA
to make requirements about seating a condition of the licence
for the club and his direction would be subject to parliamentary
approval.

2 . ^ This contrasts strongly with the position we took last year
which was that the HSE could take the safety functions of the
FLA.    I do not now recall that the idea was that we should
simply advice the Secretary of State, but even if it was, see a
big difference between that position and HSE advising the FLA
before it advises the Secretary of State.

3.  I would draw a distinction between our helping in particular
cases, and are helping the FLA to draw up appropriate guidance
to the clubs etc.  It may be however that there are analogous
situations where HSE does give advice on particular cases which
ultimately subject to Secretary of State's decision and
direction.  I suppose planning applications are an outstanding
example, but there I suspect we have a greater store of
expertise on which to draw than we have in this particular
case.




D J HODGKINS
D/SGPD

4 January 1990
Dr Derrick                                 cc




THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY INSPECTORATE



1.   In your minute of 2 January on the above, you sought views on
whether HSE should be involved with the Football Licensing Author­
ity Inspectorate.

2.   With our interests in the general policy on crowd safety,
where the safety arises as a result of a work activity, I think we
should be involved. This will help ensure a uniform and consistent
approach, particularly when sports grounds e.g.  Wembley , Selsdon
Park, are used for other purposes e.g. pop concerts. The over­
lapping interests are also a good reason for our involvement

3.   I am also attracted by the idea of the HELA model being used
to ensure a uniform and consistent approach to enforcement by the
local authorities who will be involved. You will recall that we
were advocating a HELA approach to MAFF over the LAs enforcement
of the Food and Environmental Protection Act. I would be very
happy therefore to meet          with you.




LAU                                        5 December 1989
                                                               Reference .
                         v>-o->«~-arr-^ri p ^ -..

                                             I-i \   y




             MEMBERS OF CROWD SAFETY WORKING GROUP

                                                         cc.




             THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY INSPECTORATE


             1.   I enclose for your information and comment a copy of a
             letter I have received from the DOE.           has not phoned
             yet; could you let me know if you would like to be involved
             in the meeting.

             2.    I would be particularly interested in how far you think
             HSE should get involved.   We will by all means be as helpful
             as we can in describing our expertise and the relationships
             we have with l.as, and our policy on overlapping legislation.
             But would we wish to be consulted (cf para 6) before advice
             is put to the Secretary of State about accommodation or
             seating capacity, or (cf para 7) about the safety certifi­
             cates issued by l.a. under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
             1975.   My impression is that both Home Office and DOE would
             welcome HSE's involvement and are well aware of the lack of
             expertise around.   It depends more on whether HSE wishes to
             offer or accept an invitation to give help.




             LINDA DERRICK
             SGPD C
             2 January 1990




CODE 18-77
                                                2   7   .   DEC


                                      Department of the Environment
                                      Room       P 3 /1 6 5
                                      2 Marsham Street London SW1P 3EB
                                      Telex 22221       Direct Line 01-276   (J675
                                                    Switchboard 01 -276 3000
                                                                  GTN 276
19 December 1989



Dr L Derrick
Health and Safety Executive
Safety and General Policy Division
Baynards House
1 Chepstow Place
LONDON WC2 4FT



 P   j e   U   -   d   *   J




THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY INSPECTORATE

Further to our recent telephone conversation I enclose an outline
of the functions of the Football Licensing Authority.      I hope
this will be of help in identifying any areas of overlap with HSE
responsibilities.

As I mentioned, I would like next month to discuss with you and
your colleague Dr Barnett what, if any, liaison arrangements
should be set up between the FLA and yourselves, and whether you
might be able to advise on any initial training which the FLA
Inspectorate might need and how best to ensure that local
authorities are consistent in their implementation of their
responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

I will phone early next month to arrange a mutually convenient
date for me to see you and

I would be grateful if you could provide                   ?ith the
enclosed copy o f t h i s letter and attachment,  I am also copying
this letter to                  at the Home Office, in view of his
letter to you of 8 December.




Sport and Recreation Division
THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY



c+-a+.        Football Spectators Act provides for the Secretary of
 tate to appoint a Football Licensing Authority (FLA) (Section
J:,       ■   z   be a non-departmental public body, whose members
thi H o L 3cP    ied by the Secretary of State, in consultation with
           Secfetary and the Secretary of State for Wales.   It will
employ a small administrative staff and an Inspectorate.

        ^em^ershJ-P  is   likely   to   include  representatives  of
      a    itself, of the police, of the fire service and the
  gineering profession.     The Inspectorate would be drawn from the
                  ®ources •       In addition    to   its  licensing
below    bility   the FLA may also    have safety powers as set out


Licensing Responsibility

f   i-*-    F^A will license grounds at which spectators may be
    ^        designated football matches.   It will be an offence
   admit spectators to a designated match without a licence or to
contravene the conditions of the licence.       Before granting a
licence,  and in monitoring      a club's performance under its
licence,   the   FLA  has  to   have  regard   to   four sets  of
circumstances, which will be reported on by its Inspectorate:

    (a)       whether the club has installed adequate machinery and
              established     adequate procedures to ensure      that  only
              members of the national football membership scheme or
              spectators authorised by the scheme (see para 4 below) are
              admitted to designated matches.     The scheme will allow for
              re!*U^reraen*:S        sc^eme to be suspended in an emergency
              and the FLA will therefore also need to consider the
              emergency procedures before granting a licence; •

    (b)       whether the club is carrying out the duties set upon it by
              the Football Membership Authority under the scheme;

    (c)       whether  the   club's  equipment,   procedures and other
              arrangements are such as may be reasonably required to
              reduce the risk of offences at matches;

    (d)       whether the club has met any other requirements which the
              Secretary of State has notified to the FLA.


^*     Accompanied children and disabled people are to be treated
as authorised spectators on •the terms laid down in the scheme
_ ros® re er to . .. ).  The scheme will also include arrangements
tor temporary membership (cross refer to ..„).         The club's
licence will spell out its responsibility for its temporary
..™     4 .^ arran9ements and it will be one of the functions of
  e FLA to ensure that these arrangements are satisfactory.
5.     Where the FLA is minded to refuse to grant a licence, then
it has to notify the applicant in writing and set out the grounds
for refusal.     *fhe applicant has a 28 day period to make
representations (Section 10(3)).   Similarly the FLA has to give
. e licence holder an opportunity to make representations where
it is proposing to vary the licence conditions (Section 10(11))
or revoke or suspend the licence (Section 12(4)).


Safety functions

^*     The  FLA wi^y. advise the Secretary of State about the
    ^cement of standing accommodation by seating at the grounds
of designated football matches.     The FLA will, after consulting
  e l°cal authority concerned, make recommendations on whether
  e club should be required to increase its seating capacity, to
”    ®x^ent and to what time table.   The Secretary of State might
  en decide to direct the FLA to make requirements about seating
a condition of the licence for the club or clubs concerned; his
d rection would be subject to Parliamentary approval.

7.   ^ The   Act   also provides   for the FLA to monitor the
performance pf— lpgal authorities under the Safety of Sports
 rounds   Act   1975   and to   require  changes    to the safety
certificates issued by local authorities where necessary.  Before
doing so the FLA has to consult the relevant local authority, the
        officer of police and either the         fire or building
authority.    The FLA will only take on this power if Parliament
agrees in the light of Lord Justice Taylor's final report (and in
particular in the light of any comments he may make about the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act) (Section 13).




SA RD

November 1989
                                                         -    J    U          ,   ~       f



                                                          /■'—     <   - «   r * ~    P




                                                  A   T*~ '        Vn .                       A
Dr Linda Derrick                       cc:   Mr Hodgkins, SGP       1
SPGC                                                       [O
                                             1             10
                                                           HJ                     >•/,,
                                                              hj
                                                              ;p C3


                                                              FAID


CROWD SAFETY - DEMARCATION ISSUE


1.   I refer to your minute to               of 2 November.

2.    As regards the position up to 1 April next year, I confirm
that,   where the HSW Act applies,     HSE cannot    ignore    its
application    and     Inspectors must   properly exercise their
statutory    powers   and    functions unless    there are clear
demarcation arrangements with another body      having enforcement
powers under overlapping legislation.    On and after that date,
however,   when the revised Enforcing Authority Regulations come
into force, enforcement of the HSW Act in the circumstances
applying here would pass to local authorities.

3.    I would add that whether or not the HSW Act applies would
depend on the circumstances.   On the question of crowd safety,
I would refer you   to my minute to Mr McDonald of 10 March 1988
on the subject of   overcrowding at fairgrounds, when I referred
him to the passages in instructions to Inspectors which had been
approved by the Judge in the Bradford fire case and quoted in
his judgment, viz:

     "the key to application of the Health and Safety at Work
     Act s.3 in this area lies in the risks arising from the way
     in which the undertaking is conducted and it follows that
     risks must be specifically generated in this way.    Risk of
     injury from violence among spectators would not be covered
     by s.3. On the other hand ground capacity, means of exit,
     crash barriers, hand rails, fencing,    the construction and
     strength of     stands etc. could be within its    scope"(see
     also EMB/87/73).

I advised then that in the light of that judgment, there were no
good grounds for extending s.3 to cover crowd behaviour,      as
distinct from the matters referred to above which are within the
control of the duty-holder under s.3. Another point to bear in
mind is that s.3 will only apply to the way in which an
employer,  or self-employed person, conducts his undertaking and
it is of course subject to the "so far as is reasonably
practicable"   qualification.   It would not necessarily follow
that there was a contravention of s.3 of the HSW Act in the
circumstances described by CIO - FIHQ as having occurred in
August 1988.  However, as HSE had responsibility for enforcement
it should have considered the matter.




                                 1
4.   There is of course no reason why HSE should not give any
technical advice that may be sought by local authorities.




A D OSBORNE
Solicitor
6 November 1989
fo b *   ■
                                                    ADO/GPJ/3/18




Mr D J Hodgkins


                                         c c : Dr Derrick




HTT.T.SBOROUGH DISASTER

Following our discussion this morning over the telephone, I write to
confirm my suggested changes to- your draft letter to the Assistant
Chief Constable, West Midlands Police HQ (who appears to be Mr,
rather than Dr, Mervyn Jones M S c ) .

I feel that the last sentence of your 2nd paragraph needs to be
expanded somewhat and I would suggest the following:

        "Nevertheless, I perhaps ought to make clear that this is not
        a case where we regard responsibility for taking enforcement
        proceedings as falling to HSE (this being the duty of the
        local authority under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975,
        or possibly a matter for the police) but we were able to
        assist the Inquiry because of our technical capacity and
        experience in safety matters."

In your last paragraph, perhaps "main" or "primary", rather than
"formal" remit in the 2nd line and, although it is a matter of style,
you might say "it might be necessary .... to consider asking a
reasonable charge for our time".

I agree that the consensus at the Executive meeting was that you
should send the letter, instead of Dr McQuaid, but on reflection, I
wonder whether, as we are clear that our assistance would only be of
a technical nature, it would not after all be more appropriate for Dr
McQuaid to send the letter now that the Executive has considered the
matter.  It does seem to me that as there is a duty on the local
authority under the 1975 Act to enforce its provisions, alternatively
that the police might bring charges, HSE should not be more closely
involved in enforcement proceedings other than as advising on the
technical evidence.




A D OSBORNE
SOLICITOR

26 October 1989
Mr   Rimington
Mr   Eves
Mr   Hodgkins
Mr   Linehan

Ms Derrick




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS:   BILL AND SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


1.   You will recall that, 2 or 3 weeks ago, I circulated a letter
from the Secretary of State for the Environment to the Lord
President of the Council, copiedlto Mr Fowler, proposing giving
overall responsibility for sports ground safety to a new Non-
Departmental Public Body, to be set up under the Football
Spectators Bill. The Executive discussed this quickly, and
Mr Hodgkins minuted Mrs Caldwell on 13 July with a draft
indicating HSE's willingness to take the safety responsibilities
envisaged for the new NDP B , if additional resources were made
available.

2.    It quickly became clear that DoE's proposed new NDPB had the
support of the Prime Minister's office, and that it was firmly
planned that this body should combine oversight of the Football
Membership Scheme with responsibility for safety.   Clearly no bid
from HSE for the safety responsibilities alone was going to
succeed, and the draft supplied by Mr Hodgkins was therefore never
sent.   However, HSL supplied a short letter for Mr Fowler putting
on record HSE's position, and this is attached for information.




SPD D3

2 August 1989
                         JH/A/02

                                                                                                c   c   f S


Hr ('Witis — fls              (v Uit:

                             D r-tc
                                                           Department of Employment
                                            Caxton H ouse. Tothiii Street. London SW1H 9NF
                                                                                   5803                   ] / v   \ a   i M   u   h   t   h   y
                                                       Telephone 01-273 .....................
                                                       Telex 915564 Fax 01-273 5821
   A   -   ' /
                                                                                                              M /s
                 fti"                                          Secretary of State
                                                                                                              !/V}r

                        The Rt Hon Christopher Patten MP
                        Secretary of State for the Environment
                        2 Marsham Street
                        LONDON
                        SW1P 3EB




                                                               CVxv a
                                  £               L iT T AND SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
                                        u i i o aBILL
                        FOOTBALL SPECTATORS        iu iu




                        Tih?°uaf J idleyTc°Pie<l to me his letter of 10 July to
                                  5a m * I understand he had to bring forward the
                        atfet? role
                        saiety r o l a ^for
                                         o r ?h» ? 1and that authority.
                                             the licensing    the 8111 doe3 now Provide for a

                        Lrto ^ 1?in8ut0,Put on reoor,d the contribution that can be
                        “ ! “Jjj     H*a “ h ?nd Safety Executive, although of course
                        already ™    ! I t           HSE’3 exPer« “ m mind, since It
                        covered  h? th?  ?.?!!?  <.*2“
                        covered by the Safety of Sports3afety in w oAct.
                                                           Grounds   r t s grounds not

                                     u large and exPerienced inspectorate, and
                        inauirv on3i-h#VetJU3t given evidence to the Hillsborough
                        It tas well                ?• Cra3h barriers ®tc in the ground.
                        aui-hnrit?ii   ^a i13      liaison arrangements with local
                        and safetv iacris?ai-tre      *nforcinS agents for much health
                        between HSE and            wJnSelieve 30me kind of relationship
                        beneficial               ” NDPB Wil1 be nec®3sary, and would be


                        ComSitteeinSirhRohJ‘ntRe^ t0 th® Prime Mini3ter, members of H
                        Committee, Sir Robin Butler and First Parliamentary Counsel.




                                                           NORMA        FOWLER
                                                                 ^°vv


                                                                    Ven'
i ( 2v
                     /
                         (J-

                 /                                    R eference   .........../ . . F . K J .........................................,;


                                            Accident Prevention Advisory Unit
                                            Room 124 St Hugh’s House
                                            Bootle L20 3QY
                                            Ext : 4836

Ms L Derrick                                cc     Mr D G Whomsley, DCIF
SPD D                                              Ar H Cavanagh, AD NW
Room 236
Baynards House



MANAGING SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS
1.   As I mentioned briefly to you on 14/7/89 in Bootle, the Health and
      Consumer Services Department of Sheffield City Council has written to
      APAU suggesting that it would be beneficial for sports grounds to be the
      subject of an (APAU) central approach. Their letter (copy attached) does
      not specify what they have in mind and I propose to seek clarification
      from them informally. I understand, however, that they have identified a
      need for a co-ordinated approach to safety management at sports grounds
      by their owners, sports (primarily football) clubs and their various
      agents and the need to influence consultants, such as those advising the
      3 Sheffield stadia, who operate on a near nationwide basis.
2.   I would wish to be able to respond positively to this request but clearly
      this is a complex situation on which you have the policy lead. Is there
      scope for investigating the issues involved under the auspices of HELA
      and with assistance from the LG and Entertainment National Interest Group
      at Preston?
3.   We would need first to clarify the legal/enforcement position vis a vis
     LAs and OGDs and have due regard for whatever emerges in the Hillsborough
     Inquiry Report. Although some aspects are likely to be outside HSE’s
     expertise there are others - in particular the general principles of
     safety management, organisation and arrangements - where we might
     usefully contribute. An audit of what actually happens at football
     grounds, in Sheffield or elsewhere, could at the very least provide
     better factual information on which to make policy decisions and might
     possibly inform future guidelines on the general management of safety at
     sports grounds under HSW Act S3.
4.   APAU would welcome views on how to proceed.




F D LINDSAY
Director, APAU
19 July 1989
                                                               Sheffield C ity Council

                               h ea lth                                 and                              co nsum er
                                                                      SERVICES
                                                                                                                D W P urchon. M IE H , A M In s tW M
                                                                                                                D irector of H ealth an d C o n s u m e r Services

                                                                                                                T o w n Hall C h a m b e rs
        M r . Frank Lindsay                                                            S       S '              1 Barkers Pool
        Director APAU                                                                 vt             •          Sheffield S1 1EN
        Health and Safety Executive                                                 'S         V"
                                                                                                               t e l e p h o n e (0742) 734611
        S t . Hughs House                                                                                       Te leco m G o ld 7 6 :L M X 8 7 7 (Env. H ealth)
        Stanley Precinct                                                                                                         7 6 :L M X 8 7 8 (C o n s u m e r Serv.

        BOOTLE
                                                                                                                T e lex 5 4 243 SHFLIB. G
        Liverpool                                                                          .   a.
                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                 Da te
                                                                          Our r
     Your reference
                                                                                               EPU/JCH/YG                21st June,           1989


         Dear Sir

         SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS -                                   CENTRAL APPROACH

                                                                                                                                                                 to
         Firstly, may I thank you for your understanding in r e l e a s i n g __
         assist us in the preliminary investigation into the tragedy of th*                                                                                    rh&
         April last.  David's contribution was invaluaDle to the Department
         A uthority.

         On the subject of Safety of Sports Grounds, it is our opinion that it would
         probably be beneficial for Sports Grounds to be the subject of a CenJra
         Approach, and this Authority for its part would be willing to support a
          contribute to such an approach.

          Should you wish to discuss this matter further then do not hesitate to                                                                                /
          contact me on the number shown.                                                                                                                      //•

          Yours faithfully




          j / N. Rice
                                                       of Health and
                                                      Consumer Services

V              “ “




                                                                                                                                                    HfcAlTHV
                                                                                                                                                 i SHEFFI



                                                                                                                                                                               R7579/1

For Telephone Enquiries on this matter ring (0742)..........................
                                                                                                                   H e alth a n d C o n s u m e r S e rv ic e s in c lu d e : r to r ja
                                                                                                                   Air Pollution, Animal Welfare, Cemetery
            734643 - M r. Rice                                                                                     Consumer Protection, Drainage and P e st Control, tn v ir
                                .                     "Director o f H ealth an d C o n s u m e r S ervice s”       mental Nuisances, Food Hygiene, Health and Safety at Worn.
All c o m m u n ic a tio n s to be a d d re s s e d    u ire c iu r                                                Home Safety, Meat Inspection, Metrology, Noise Control,
                                                                                                                   Standards Testing, Trading ’Standards.
                                           cc Dr Derrick




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


1. Thank you for your minute of 12 July and the correspondence
you attached on the above subject.


2. I think it is worth bearing in mind that the local authorities
will be inspecting sports grounds for a number of reasons. For
HSWA , licensing and food hygiene purposes. As far as HSWA is
concerned LA inspectors are independent of local politicians.


3. The creation of an independent NDPB seems unnecessary when HSE
could easily fit the role that is envisaged. It must also be more
cost effective to use an existing enforcement agency rather than
create a new one. It is independent of Ministers but accountable
to them. Its tri-partite structure and proven track record should
meet public concerns. Its legislative and reasonable
practicability approach would I have thought provided an ideal
means of reconciling membership scheme controls with safety.   As
you point out in your minute we also have the necessary technical
expertise available within HSE including experts on fire matters.
I would have thought however that any system which is set up
should permit local liaison with the fire authorities etc. to
reflect provision of water hydrants, access by fire tenders.


4. If the responsibility is given to HSE we could make
arrangements within the Enforcing Authority Regulations to allow
LAs to enforce the Act on our behalf. Uniformity and consistency
can be ensured thorough our existing HELA machinery and we could
set up a SCHELA working Group to make sure that this worked
efficiently at a practical level. There is a well established
successful record with the HELA system that could be applied
easily to the provisions envisaged by DoE.


5. On the licensing aspect I wonder whether a licence under HSWA
would however be appropriate given HSE's policy of using it only
in circumstances which represent high and special risks.




LAU                                        13 July 1989
(
Mr Cavanagh Area 18
Dr Derrick
              :ea 18




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


1.   The attached papers reached me this morning from D.E.     They
     describe DoE proposals to set up a new Licensing Authority to
     oversee the way Local Authorities grant safety certificates
     to sports grounds.     The proposed new Authority (see Annex B)
     will be a Non-Departmental Public Body, and will have its own
     inspectorate.


2.   HSE has deliberately kept a very low profile on football
     ground safety, with other departments taking the lead else­
     where.   However,   if a new NDPB is to be set up, I think we
     should consider making a case for its being based in HSE.        We
     are a respected safety authority, with expert staff in the
     engineering and building professions, which DoE think impor­
     tant (Annex B para 4).    We are used to liaising with Local
     Authorities, and to inspecting the systems etc^, mentioned in
     Annex B para 1.     Giving the job to HSE avoids needing to
     create a new NDPB.     Obviously we would need the resources
     currently on offer to set up the new Unit.


3.   I would be grateful    for views - by phone if necessary - by
     lunchtime tomorrow, Thursday, and am sorry for the short
     deadline.




SPD D3                                   17.   July 1989
i- Kjun   D L P '   I   LP1PLUVP1LN I        UK..                                                                (. u l Li j           f ' . i j i . ' a ' H   1u : ^ y      N U . ji u a u b b i 'y u ji   p w u t        i




                                                                                                               CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                      2 MARSHAM STREET
                                                    C   c   f $   l t 4   4   M   $   , l £   «   Q
                                                                                                                                                                                      L O N D O N SW1P 3EB
                              PfH V & 0 *£ Z / '                     is
                                                                                                                                                                                      01-276 3 0 0 0

                                                                                                                                                                                     My ref

                                                                                                                                                                                     Your r e f :
                                                                                                      —   P   ic x A   t c     .   £   b   i %      \   r




                           The Rt Hon John Wakeham MP                                                                                                                                    Aoeuj^Vro.                       c*s««wjb
                           Lord President of the Council                                                                                                                   ^UjCxCktt- ca_Sco_\p . So
                           Privy Council Office
                           Whitehall
                           London
                           SW1                                                                                                                                            1n                                      i , h        ■
                                                                                                                                                                          1vJ July 1909




                           FOOTBALL SPECTATORS’ BILL AND SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


                          The Home Secretary and I have been considering what amendments to
                          the Football Spectators Bill should be tabled during the
                          Committee stage in the Commons, in order to put the Government in
                          the most favourable position to respond positively and speedily
                          to recommendations which Lord Justice Taylor might make on safety
                          as a result of his Inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster. I am
                          enclosing copies of an exchange of letters on the subject for the
                          benefit of colleagues who have not seen them (at Annex A).

                          Following 2nd                                     Reading on 27 June,     the House approved an
                          instruction to                                   the Committee on the Bill that it has powers to
                          make provision                                   in the Bill relating to any aspect of the safety
                          of spectators                                   at designated football matches. Thus the way is
                          clear to table                                  amendments on safety.

                         Other things being equal, there might have been advantage in
                         delaying the tablino of these amendments i m ^ i t.*.*-* juatieo
                         Taylor's interim report. But I understand that the interim report
                         may not reach the Home Secretary until late July; this would mean
                         delaying the amendments until the autumn spillover. Given the
                         shortage of time in the spillover, the handling of the Bill will
                         require us either to complete Standing Committee this month or to
                         build up enough time to justify a timetable motion. We have to
                         work on the basis that we will reach the Clauses to which the
                         amendments iro to bo mods kfifsvs       Juallm Taylor's interim
                         report is received.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5WIISIIIF
FROM   DEP’ T   EMPLOYMENT   UK.                  CUI ED)   7. 12. ' 8 9   11:00   H0 . 2 0 S 0 6 6 7 9 02   P A GE   3




                                                 CONFIDENTIAL

                  Present safety legislation

                                                 G^uncJs Act 1975   local authorities
                  nttuSL © 6Sw6aa6*»tii4y fOYT         S«CQty tertiiicares m respect
                  or designated sports grounds with accommodation for over 10 000
                  spectators. They exercise this responsibility in consultation
                              ,loc*1 police,   fire service and building control
                                  f authorities are required to issue general safety
                  certificates in respect of grounds designated under the 1975 Act
                  *S?LJ:ann0« withhold one. The Home Office and the Scottish
                        j    , Department have issued a Guide to Safety at Sports
                  221? / known a® the "green guide". The guide is a voluntary
                  code. As a result of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
                                 ?7 the Home Secretary has power by Order to direct
                               ^     s 2n the c°n*ents of safety certificates for
                  specified classes of sports ground.

                 The Home Secretary therefore has powers which would enable him to
                 respond, if he so wished, to Taylor recommendations about, for
                 example, requiring local authorities to Impose particular terms
                          3iti?ns    in safety certificates.    But   the  existing
                 legislation does not contain powers to enable the Home Secretary
                 to monitor the way in which-an individual local authority carries
                         <-.?uty +1° / ssue and enforce a safety certificate and
                 require the authority to make any changes he thinks necessary. I
                            during the 2nd Reading debate that we had it in mind to
                 taDie an enabling amendment on this involving the licensing
                 authority under the Bill, to help us to deal with safety matters
                 on receipt of Lores Justice Taylor's report.

                 Proposed amendments

                 I propose to table amendments coveting the following two issues

                             A. an amendment which provides an enabling power to give
                             the licensing authority under the Bill the extra task of
                             ensuring that local authorities are carrying out their
                             responsibilities under the safety of sports grounds
                             legislation in such a way as to achieve a consistent
                             standard of safety at designated football matches; and a
                             power, subject to appeal, to require a local authority to
                             make changes to a certificate. The use of the enabling
                             power would be subject to Parliamentary approval, in the
                             light of any relevant comments by Lord Justice Taylor;

                         B. an amendment which would provide a power to require a
                         move towards all~seated accommodation at major football
                         grounds to be exercised by statutory instrument, subject
                         to Parliamentary approval, on the advice of the licensing
                         authority.                                              *
F ROM   DEP’ T   EMPLOYMENT   UK.                     < WE D >   7. 12. ’ 89   11:02   N0 . 2 0 8 0 6 6 7 9 0 2   PAGE   4




                                                   CONFIDENTIAL

                                    lQCal authorltle s ' issue and enforcement of safety

                 S . Z J S S t t i X ' Z is fQr an enabling provision, rather than one
                                        5® licensing authority under the Bill this extra
                      '       use we do not want to be seen to be pre-empting Taylor,
                 evidence                +.     criticism that there is no conclusive
                                 < central monitoring of the performance of local
                 best way forward^ 8               e n £ o r c i n g s a f e t Y certificates is the


                 view*that                 k P°rtS Council> wh° take the more radical
                 safatv             should be a central licensing authority to issue
                 varietv ±n l i S S t 8 *         sports clubs because of a perceived
                 dlffaniwi. standards applied by local authorities. But these
                 a r o u n d ar±“ from th* different nature of each football
                 accuSfd         ® central authority might in time similarly be
                 accused of inconsistency. Moreover, the enquiry by Mr Justice
                 conP^ u l 8 t h ^ th1 Bradford City football* c H b fire in S m
                            sa«Jlao?orify.a authorlty          certificate syste™ ««,

                 ao ni ffin?VS     i* r'?rd Ju8tica Taylor does not recommend central
                            !         al authorities, I may wish to make use of the
                 have araued*         i-hOWerI ThU® far in the Paasa9e of the Bill we
                 not work tnnofl there is no reason why local authorities should
                 a ° L tv           exl with *he licensing authority in dealing with
                                 J a        an   the requirements of       the national
                 could bL *              Bi
                                          Ut 1 think       ™ » t acknowledge that there
                             ® .po5®ntial conflict in this area. The Hillsborough
                 scheme          h?® unsubstantiated assertions that the membership
                 sSall numh«i                  3 worse", have increased the risk that a
                 " s a f i t v 1 authorities might seek to use their role as
                         y authorities to disrupt the membership scheme.

             tSe takee thisrl n ^ <and 1 ar® a9reed that the best way forward is
             its            enabling power. It would mean that, in addition to
                  tho n n i  respect of the national membership scheme set out
             in the Bill, we would take a power to give the licensing
                        1 i£ we felt At ri9ht to do so in the light of Taylor
             more detail at±0Anntn pSSp®ct of saf«ty. These are described iA
             shSn,?Hi          Annex B. We propose that the power in the Bill
             negative Resolution.        by atatutor>’               subject to


             The status of the licensing authority

             £eSr NDPBS                        authority should be established as a
             new n d p b . I am hesitant about creating a new public bodv but I
             toUthenF««?KSi   hi    C°ntemPlate giving powers of the kind proposed
                           tball Membership Authority responsible for the national
             autho” ^ S s S?akTng9inS?heh?Mieadin9 ^                           envisa9e the football
FROM   DEP’ T   EMPLOYMENT   UK.                            < WE D >   7. 12. ’ 8 9   11:05   NO.2080667902   PAGE   5




                                                         CONFIDENTIAL

                                   JS    po®8ible   to
                                              run the licensing authority as an
                Sec?eta£S of                  Department but that would make the
                fact 2 J 2        t directly responsible for its functions. The
                2 2         its work would cut across two Government Departments is
                                       f°r a NDPB' though        its own    line of
                at          MrtS would have to be a clear one. The main attraction
                d«v     nil      f t ^t ±t: would distance the Government from the
                                   3 25 ^   authority, and from detailed arguments
                services          # U fJties and perhaps local police and fire
                whom the          cl?® <-    the n»«mbers of the licensing authority
                su??«h^o « “° T fecr*tary and I would appoint should include
                              f   from the police and the fire service, as well as
                the engineering and building professions.

                Power to require all seater stadia

                t S 1° ^ ^ « S l ? n ? ilK1"ili0r0'i.gh <?isaster, the Home Secretary said that
                S L ™                  < believed that the future of football in the
                aro u S K              «    * ”ational membership scheme in designated
                VSZSO* X *               °W Lt seen,s also in Providing all Seated
                d i s a M e f S S £ 2 «#a!
                disappearance of terraces       ma;,0rat these
                                                           fo°tbaH    clubs",
                                                                 grounds.       involving   the

                                    thf s issue with the football authorities and
                bA hi            t  hm it is not our intention that there should
                qo          °hang* to a11 seated accommodation. The move to all
                which «nA«U L ^ aPKPr0pr±at* for the ma:)or Fo°tball League clubs;
                                  2      a matter for further discussion; and the
                SelnS hi     *®e2wt(?n    Phased in at the selected clubs. The cost
                th« morii-   football. it is clear that there is no consensus on
                               il                 seater stadia within football and there
                opposition to the proposal from individual clubs.

                    m t ^ ^ f ecrel&ry and 1 a9ree that the move to all seated
                       °dation at major clubs could not successfully be left to
                                    °f individual local authorities, who in practice
            instLrf                  ^ery difficult to impose such a requirement.
                           £hf<- nTeed®      be oarried forward at national level. I
                               i^ v sho'iLd consult the licensing authority on which
                     2          should be made subject to the change, to what extent (all
                                    A erraci,n9 allowed) and to what timetable. The
            licensing, authority would prepare advice in consultation with the
            c i u d s andmake         a formal recommendation to me. The Bill would
            provide forme to issue the appropriate direction in respect of
            the grounds concerned.                                           ^

            TlJi?  directive       power  would be   exercisable by   statutory
            Parliament* J T S i ® * *    th® ne9ative resolution procedure and
            Parliament would therefore be able to debate and vote on the
                  ^rn relation to the club or clubs concerned. The licensing
            authority would act on the directive by making the all-seated
            requirement a condition of the licence, and would be responsible
            for enforcing this as well as other conditions of the licence.
F ROM   DEP’ T   EMPLOYMENT   UK.                C U ED )   7 . 1 2 . ’89   1 1 10 7   N0.2080667902   PfiGE



                                             CONFIDENTIAL

                 Timing

                 The start-up date of the licensing authority will, of course,
                 depend  on our  decision ▼as to whether
                                                  .._____. . to when
                                                                 proceed with extending
                 Irfl         in                                            j         *
                 its  powers in  the way I am proposing,             we have seen Lord
                 Justice Taylor s report* and on Parliament's approval both of
                                              powers and of the membership scheme
                   2    , j the light of any comments that Taylor may make. We have
                 acknowledged that the earliest that the mamharsh^n srhana




                 Financial and manpower implications of the licensing authority
             As an NDPB the licensing authority would be subject to the usual
              financial controls, including corporate planning, which apply to
             such bodies. These controls would provide the mechanism for
             monitoring performance and value for money and for policy
             evaluation. The Football Spectators Bill provides for some or all
             of the costs of the licensing authority in respect of its
             functions under the national membership scheme to be recovered
             through fees charged to football clubs for the issue of licenses.
             I also propose that some or all of the costs of the licensing
             authority in respect of its safaty functions or of its role in
             relation to all-seated accommodation should be recovered in this
             way. I will consider further what proportion of the authority's
             costs should be recovered by the licence fee, in consultation
             with the Home Secretary and the Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
             Receipts from fees by the authority would be treated as revenue
             surrenderable to the Consolidated Fund and the authority's
             expenses would be met by grant in aid for which I would need to
             seek PES cover.

             In my letter of 28 September 1988 seeking the Committee's
             approval to Part I of the Bill, I estimated the cost to public
             funds of the licensing authority as some £250,000 a year and
             P®rhaps £500,000 in the first year. Given the extended powers we
             now propose, I estimate the total annual cost of the licensing
             authority and its inspectorate would be between £500,000 and
             £750,000 a year. This includes salary and ancillary costs
             including accommodation; travel and subsistence and a consultancy
             budget. The inspectorate will be the equivalent of nine full time
             staff members and the administrative support is likely to be five
             strong. The first year in which the costs will arise in full will
             be 1990/91 but there will be some preparatory costs in the
             present financial year for which we do not have budgetary cover.
F ROM   DE S ’ T   EMPLOYMENT   UK.                (WED)   7 . 1 2 . ’ 8 9   11:10   NO.2080667902   Pf i GE   7
        •4F
                                                CONFIDENTIAL

                   EC implications

                   The funatlons of the licensing authority have no EC implications.

                   Summary

                   Committee*that 1 Should table amendments to the Bill in Standing


                            if      t(? ffive the licensing authority extra tasks
                            relating to safety as set out in paragraphs 6A and Annex


                               ^    to require all-seated accommodation at major clubs
                            through the Bill's licensing system, as proposed in
                            paragraphs 6B and 13 to 16 above.


                              PreTssure to make progress with Standing Committee, I am
                   JkI       * 4. L mu8t ask for aPProval to table the amendments by
                             r this week. I am copying this to the Prime Minister,
                       L me“b®rs,f* H Committee, David Waddington, Sir Robin Butler
                   and First Parliamentary Counsel.

                                            OAvS    ^ >n 'N.iU \ A




                                           NICHOLAS RIDLEY
                                      *    (Approved by the Secretary of State and
                                           Signed in his Absence)
FROM   DEP’ T   EMPLOYMENT   UK.          (WED)   7 . 1 2 . ’ 89   H i l l   NO. 2 0 8 0 6 6 7 9 0 2   Pf i GE




                                     CONFIDENTIAL




                                                                         Annex B



           The licensing authority


           1* We propose to give the authority powers to enable it to
           monitor the way in which local authorities issue and enforce
          safety certificates. The object would be to ensure a consistency
          of approach as between one authority and another in setting
          standards for safety, and that local authorities have effective
          systems in place to satisfy themselves that ground operators
          fully   comply  with   the   terms  and   conditions   of   safety
          certificates.    The   licensing   authority    after    necessary
          consultation would have power to require an individual local
          authority to make changes to a certificate and to its
          arrangements for ensuring compliance with the certificate.

         2. It is important that a local authority opposed in. principle to
         the football membership scheme envisaged by the Bill should not
         be able to use its safety certificate power to frustrate the
         membership scheme. Equally it is important that the licensing
         authority should not approve arrangements for the membership
         scheme which are not compatible with safety. Guidance on the
         relationship between the authorities could be provided by Home
         Office and DOE, perhaps in the form of a joint circular.


         3. There is nevertheless a risk that there will on occasion be a
         genuine difference of opinion between a local authority and the
         licensing authority about how to apply the Guide at a particular
         sports ground. Under the power proposed, the final decision on
         any changes to the terms and conditions of a safety certificate
         desired by the licensing authority will rest with that authority.
         But since the local authority will still have the statutory duty
         to issue and enforce safety certificates, we would make provision
FI ?OM   D E P’ T   EMPLOYMENT   UK.                (WED)   7 . 1 2 . ’ 89   11:13   N0 . 2 0 8 0 6 6 7 9 0 2   PRGE   9




                                                 CONFIDENTIAL

                      in th$ / c j i ^ °r the local authority to be able to appeal against
                      the deopion of the licensing authority to the magistrates'
                      court. *



                     Structure


                     4. In order to carry out its functions the licensing authority
                     would need to have an      inspectorate. The Home Secretary has
                     pointed out that there would be strong misgivings by          the
                     Association of Chief Police Officers and the Chief and Assistant
                     Chief   Fire  Officers'   Association   at  the  idea   that  the
                     professional competence of the police and fire services in making
                     their input into the content of individual safety certificates
                     should be supervised by the licensing authority. To secure the
                    confidence of interested parties both the authority and its
                    inspectorate will therefore need to include suitable people from
                    the police and fire services. We also think that the engineering
                    and building professions would have to be represented on the
                    authority and the inspectorate teams since both make an essential
                    contribution to the content of safety certificates.


                    5. We therefore propose that a small licensing authority should
                    be set up on which the interests I have identified should be
                    represented under a lay chairman. Appointments would be at the
                    level of retired Chief Constable and his equivalent.        The
                    inspectorate would comprise of teams of inspectors, and I think
                    we would require three teams or their part time equivalent, on
                    which the same interests would be represented. Appointments to
                    the inspectorate would be at Chief Superintendent level.


                    6. The team of inspectors could be expected to spend some 4 days
                    on a ground inspection, including preliminary work on plans and
                    the safety certificates, reappraisal and report in the light of
                    the on site inspection and travelling. We envisage that grounds
                    should be inspected annually but that the authority would have
                    discretion about the nature and extent of each inspection. It may
                    decide that a full inspection is only required at less frequent
F &OM   DEP’ T   EMPLOYMENT   UK.            < WE D >   7 . 12. '8 9   11:15   N0. 2 0 8 0 6 6 7 9 0 2   PAGE   10




                                           CONFIDENTIAL

                  Interval a say every two or three years and in the                                light of
                  physlcMHfechanges   to  the ground.  The  authority                               and  its
                  inspect* f M would require a small,            say 5 man,            administrative
                  support team.
                          CONFIDENTIAL

Mrs Caldwell                               cc Mr   Rimington
                                              Mr   Hammer
                                              Mr   Linehan
                                              Mr   Woodcock
                                              Ms   Derrick
                                              Mr   Eves




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS' BILL AND SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


1.   You asked for advice on Mr Ridley's letter of 10 July to the
Lord President of the Council, copied to Mr Fowler, proposing
giving overall responsibility for sports ground safety to a new
Non-Departmental Public Body, to be set up under the Football
Spectator's Bill.

2.   I have discussed this with my fellow Executive members.   We
believe there is a good case for any new body with overall
responsibility for sports ground safety to be housed within the
HSE.  The attached draft letter for the Secretary of State sets
out our reasons.  Broadly, we believe HSE already has much of the
necessary expertise and is experienced in working with Local
Authorities and inspecting general safety systems and policies.
It is already responsible for sports grounds which do not require
a certificate under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1974. We
believe it would be cheaper to give the responsibilities to HSE
than to set up a completely new public body, whose duties would
inevitably overlap with HSE's, at least to some extent.   Finally,
we see presentational advantages for Government in giving
responsibility for safety to a body which is acknowledged as the
principal public authority on this subject.

3.   As you know, HSE has distanced itself from any general
responsibility for sports ground safety in the wake of the
Bradford case, since there was no doubt that the Home Office, via
Local Authorities, were enforcing more specific legislation in
this area.  However, our general technical expertise is highly
relevant to many of the risks involved, and HSE specialists have
recently finished giving evidence to the Hillsborough Inquiry.
While we could not do more within our existing resources, if there
is the political will to finance a supervisory safety authority,
we believe HSE would be a natural home for it. Although the draft
leaves open which Department HSE should answer to on this
question, I think the Home Office, which is responsible for the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act, would be the natural choice.  I
would envisage an Agency Agreement of the sort we already have
with several Departments.

4.   I attach a draft along these lines for the Secretary of
State.




D. J. HODGKINS
Safety Policy Division                       13 J u l y   1989
                            CONFIDENTIAL



The Rt Hon Nicholas Ridley MP
Secretary of State for the Environment
2 Marsham Street
London SW1P 3EB



FOOTBALL SPECTATORS1 BILL AND SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


Thank you for copying to me your letter of 10 July to John
Wakeham.


I was very interested in your proposal to set up the licensing
authority under the Bill as a new Non-Departmental Public Body
(NDPB), and to give it extra tasks relating to safety.    Like you,
I am hesitant about creating a new public body of this type, and
think we should consider an alternative approach, which should
also prove a little cheaper.


The Health and Safety Executive is the main public authority
responsible for health and safety.    It reports, via the Health and
Safety Commission, primarily to myself, but also answers to many
other Secretaries of State on different issues.    I suggest it
might be a very suitable body to have overall supervisory
responsibility for sports ground safety,   for the following
reasons:


     a)    the HSE already has a large and experienced
           inspectorate, with expertise in engineering and
           construction.   HSE specialists have just given evidence
           to the Hillsborough inquiry on the strength of crash
           barriers etc in the ground.


     b)    HSE already works regularly and harmoniously with Local
           Authorities on health and safety.   LAs are enforcing
           agents for much health and safety legislation, and a
          well established structure of committees ensures
          consistent standards.


     c)   HSE is well used to inspecting and monitoring the safety
          policies and systems of large organisations; it has a
          unit devoted to this.


     d)   under its existing general powers, HSE will already
          enforce health and safety in any sports grounds not
          covered by the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.


     e)   I see presentational advantages in giving the overall
          responsibility for sports ground safety to a large,
          respected and independent body, whose prime concern is
          clearly with safety in all its aspects.


In addition, while the HSE would certainly need extra resources to
take on this new work, I would expect this to be a cheaper option
than setting up a completely new NDPB.


I therefore suggest we should explore the HSE's being given the
responsibilities you envisage for the licensing authority under
the Bill, answering to the Home Secretary or to yourself.      I would
be happy to discuss this further in a meeting or among officials.


I am copying this to the recipients of yours.


NF                                 [recipients - Prime Minister
                                                - Members of H
                                                - David Waddington
                                                - Sir Robin Butler
                                                - First
                                                    Parliamentary
                                                    Counsel]
)3
                                                      PW/xnin43/SM



SFD D3                             cc Mr Cavanagh, Area 18
Room 270                              Dr Derrick, SPD D, B23 6
Baynards House                                    Area 18
                                                  SPD C 4 , B343
                                                   RPD B, B171




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

While I have no objections to the proposals for an overseeing
body as described, I do not see any way that the description fits


The politics are clearly to use inspectors recruited from the
ranks of ex-police or fire services, reporting to another of the
same ilk so that they will all feel comfortable with each other.
That would fit ill into the HSE set up.

We could not use existing inspector staff, and the calls on our
specialists (building/engineering) would stretch their existing
resource very considerably without any guarantee of being able to
make up numbers by recruitment.

To set this up within HSE in respect of a single sport seems to
me quite unsuitable, particularly if at the same time we are
continuing to carry out ordinary S.2 inspections under HSW at the
same grounds for existing purposes.  Better leave this strictly
to others in my view.  I have consulted Area 18 who agree with
this line.




P WOODCOCK
SAD FI3
12 July 1989




                                              I   V    T
Mr Hammer, DDG
Mr Hodgkins, SPD
Mr E v e s , RPD
Mr McQuaid, RLSD
Mr Linehan, CIF
                    Area 05
                  C
                ISMSU
                 , SPDA
                 MD
Mr Cavanagh. Entertainment NIG
                     siplined Services NIG



                  HSL 1, DE
                   18


                                             cc:
                                                               D3




OVERCROWDING - GENERAL POLICY ISSUES


1     I would like to thank all those who replied to my minute of
2 8 April about Hillsborough and the general question of
overcrowding.

2.   The responses suggested that it was SPD D who had
responsibility for policy on this issue within HSE, and we accept
it.  However, there was general agreement that any major action,
even if desirable, should wait until the Hillsborough Inquiry
makes its report.

3.   There also seems general agreement on the legal position.
Section 3 of the HSW Act undoubtedly covers the safety of many
types of crowd - in particular, those who pay cash to an
"undertaking" in return for watching an entertainment.   The
Bradford fire judgment had already firmly established this.
However, as with many other areas covered by section 3, the safety
of crowds can also be covered by more specific legislation.  For
example, football crowds like the one at Hillsborough are covered
by the Safety at Sports Grounds Act, and HSE has agreed with the
Home Office that section 3 will not be enforced in these
circumstances.

4.   A more general point was also raised: where potential crowd
safety problems are not covered by other legislation, how far
could HSE's section 3 responsibilities stretch? Mr Linehan
suggested as a general rule that HSE has no responsibility for
protecting crowds from themselves (ie. crowd violence). However,
he proposed that HSE does have a responsibility for protecting
crowds from risks which can reasonably be foreseen and which arise
out of the work activity - such risks could range from pieces of
'   •
                          debris from a motor racing accident, to the inherent dangers of
                          requiring large numbers to gather in a confined space.  This seems
                          a very sensible distinction to draw, and is in line with the
                          Bradford judgment.

                          5.    At MB recently attention focussed on the work which RLSD is
                          doing to assist the local authority and others in the Hillsborough
                          case.   It was generally agreed that the scientific technological
                          and medical services could in appropriate cases offer advice and
                          assistance irrespective of whether HSE had enforcement
                          responsibilities.   It would be important that the cost of such
                          help was recordedJas even if it was decided not to charge it was
                          important evidence of additional work done by HSE.

                          6.   Respondents suggested that, while awaiting the Hillsborough
                          report, SPD should familiarise itself with current thinking on the
                          subject and with the practice of HSE and Local Authority
                          inspectors.  Mr Hall also pointed out that overcrowding on railway
                          trains and stations was a subject on which he was asking for a
                          literature search to be undertaken.

                          7.   I therefore propose asking David Lewis in SPD D3 to do the
                          following:

                                            work with SPD C3 to initiate a literature search;

                                            talk to the LAU and LGTB/LACSAB about any local
                                            authorities who might have particular experience;

                                            talk to such a local authority to discover what written
                                            guidance they have on overcrowding, who they believe has
                                            expertise, and what legislation they believe applies to
                                            them.

                          I would also be grateful if recipients could copy to us any
                          relevant reports, minutes, evidence on the subject so that we can
                          act as a focal point and keep abreast of developments.  With this
                          background knowledge available we can consider our position again
                          after the Hillsborough inquiry has reported.

                          8.   If you have any further views or advice please contact
                          Mr Williams or Mr Lewis.




                          fAiV)
                                                                          % ****   ' J   * '   ^
                          LINDA DERRICK
               J*         SPD D

               2.4        June 1989

                                                                           » .or
    fa w e
                               rvA


    - t&   a   u   ,   iUc t
                           ta   d   c k .           X      LnlU Ufa   .        hlfl
    <


•   ’
                                                     A            From:           R J SEYMOUR
                                                                                  8 June 1989

                                                              ^                 rt\tW          2cu*-s

                                                                                                J     lI H

                                                                                                                 m §
PS/MR PORTILLO               i                              cc PS/SOS
                                                           t   PS/Sir Alan Bailey                            >
             W \X     Y f e W                    ,       X I
                                                           ,   Mr Rimington HSE                     \ s




         r   J       W           -   r       ^            1


                         y




OVERCROWDING Otf THE___JJDNjf>ON UNDERGROUND:       IMPROVEMENT NOTICE
SERVED BY R A I L W A S T U s PECTQRATE
                                  I     A\  V
                                            ^ I-V
The Minister will wish :o know that                           Principal
Railway Employment Inspector, has today served an Improvement
Notice  under      the       Health   & Safety    Work Act on London
                                                                  / o   X   -

Underground Ltd, requiring action ^ r h i n 3 months to mitigate
danger from overcrowdinc

2.  The    Notice,   whichl  was yzfiscussed with  LUL's   Passenger
Services Manager before i s s u ^ says that LUL is contravening
Section 3 of the HSW Apt       operating stations so that persons
                                         b   y


not in LUL employment/ are exposed to risks to their safety
because   of   overcrowding/ and   reasonably    practicable   steps
to avoid such risks have >not been taken.
 •                       1/
3.  The Schedule to >jthe Notice calls       for the establishment
at each station of a system whereby -

     Circumstances y&ha/ch prevent the even flow of passengers
     are   recognissra. /intime for effective  measures to be
     taken before ^overcrowding ensues:

     Means of communicating information and advice to passengers
     are available anjH used.

4.   These requirements    do not conflict with LRT's published
plans   for   implementation  of  the  Fennell  recommendations.
 None of the recommendations deal specifically with arrangements
to prevent overcrfowdjVg although some are closely related.
These include

Rec 9:           Station  instructions   for  emergencies  and closure
                 to be implemented in below ground stations by 31.5.89

Rec 12:          Evacuation  by   train:                          revised               procedures               to    be
                 issued by 30.4.89.

Rec 62:       Investigation   of   passenger    flow   and   congestion,
              followed  by   remedial   action:      initial   study  to
              be completed by 3 0.6.89.

Rec 89:       Training of staff in use of PA and other communications
              systems:   accepted and implemented as part of regular
              training arrangements.
Rec 97:    Training of potential station supervisors in evacuation
           and closure of stations:  accepted and implemented.

Rec 110:   Improvement  of  PA equipment:      accepted but   will
           take 3 years (subject to review) to implement.

The purpose of this Notice is to ensure that while these
recommendations  are in   course of implementation, there will
be adequate arrangements for station staff to recognise the
onset  of  congestion  and  take effective  action to prevent
a dangerous situation.

5.    Since the Notice relates to public safety, a copy will
be placed on the public register established by the Inspectorate
in pursuance of the Environment     & Safety   Information Act,
1988.    I do not think any further publicity is needed, but
if questions are asked I am prepared to answer them along
the lines set out in this minute.




R J SEYMOUR
Chief Inspecting Officer of Railways
S18/06
276 4849

8 June 1989.
    10

         4




L
                                                                             Rctcrcncc

 *
                                                                   Accident Prevention Advisory Unit
                                                                   Room 124 St Hugh ’s House
                                                                   Bootle L20 3QY
                                                                   Ext : 4836

               Ms L Derrick                                        cc   Mr   J   D G Hammer, DDG
               SPD D                                                    Mr   D   J Hodgkins, SPD
               Room 236                                                 Mr   D   C T Eves, RPD
               Baynards House                                           Mr   J   McQuaid, RLSD
                                                                        Mr   A   J Linehan, CIF


                                                                                                   PD A
                                                                        Mr Cavanagh, Entertainment NIG
                                                                                        Splines Ser NIG
                                                                                        AU
                                                                                        APAU
                    (   A    l
                                                                                         SPD D3
                                                                                        SPD C4



               HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND - HSE INVOLVEMENT

               1.       Thank you for your memo of 28th April and the comments therein.
               2.                        EHO, has now completed most of his work with Sheffield City
                            Council’s contribution to the Inquiry and has returned to APAU on
                            22/5/89. There is therefore no threat to the continuation of APAU audits
                            in the LA enforced sector.
               3.       As to the wider aspects of your memo you appear to be receiving copious
                         advice. I will not add to it save to say that I understand that
                         Sheffield City Council now feel it inevitable (almost irrespective of
                         whatever the Inquiry finds) that steps to improve the safety management
                         at football grounds and similar places will have to be taken.
               4.       Although the gist of much of the advice you have received (to which I
                         also subscribe) is to the effect that matters such as crowd control and
                         crowd violence are not in HSE’s mainstream activities, I would not wish
                         at this stage to rule out future APAU involvement. The principles of
                         safety management can be applied as much to managing a football business
                         as to other activities. The LA ’s are much closer to the problem than HSE
                         and it may be prudent, under the auspices of LAU/HELA to be seen to be
                        offering such positive help as we can - and as RLSD have already done.
               5.       If a request is tabled         I   would   appreciate      being   associated     with
                         consideration of it.




               F D LINDSAY
               Director, APAU

               25 May 1989
CODE   18-77
f
MS DERRICK                               cc Mr   Lindsay
                                            Mr   Hammer
                                            Mr   Hodgkins
                                            Dr   McQuaid
                                            Mr   Linehan




                                            Mr Cavanagh
                                                             >AU
                                                             >AU
                                                             >PD D3
                                                             ?D C4




OVERCROWDING - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND.

1. Your minute of 28 April to Mr Lindsay and his of 19 April,
invited comments on HSE's possible role in contributing to
the Inquiry's thinking about overcrowding and crowd control.

2.   Even with all the      safety expertise that we        can muster -
and knowing that RLSD are assisting on the question of crash
barriers - I doubt whether we know enough about policing
policy and the‘psychology of crowd behaviour to contribute
very much.    We have possession of a few fragments of the
human jigsaw - you mention alcohol and violence at work, for
example, and we certainly have some responsibilities in
connection with the safety of the public assembling at places
like funfairs, leisure parks, where we cannot look to other
legislation and enforcement regimes on a "deemed to satisfy"
basis.

3.   While    I   do not   think   we   can contribute      much   to the
Hillsborough Inquiry, I do think we need to keep abreast of
the thinking it will generate. It is probably expecting too
much     to find someone in the Home Office who is responsible
for,     and knowledgeable about, licensing policy and standards
in connection with the Safety in Sports Grounds Act   and   the
Football Spectators Bill, but there ought to be. Similarly,
someone  there with responsibility for      policing policy
(Mrs Catto?) might be able to connect us with people who are
more knowledgeable than us about crowd behaviour. Is anyone
at   the  Department   of Transport    worried   about   the
overcrowding   that is taking place on London Underground
platforms, and how are they dealing with that? (Mr Seymour
might be able to help).


4. Whether this would lead to , HSE being able to give better
guidance to our inspectors and local authorities, where we do
have responsibilities, I cannot tell. I would stop short of
involving ourselves in the Inquiry on this subject, but I
would wish us to keep in step as the thinking develops around
the Inquiry, either within Departments of' beyond.




D C T EVES.
11 May 1989.
L h -
                                                         ikfl- ,—                              j,   «-vv
         cc                                                                                            -cJ<.

                                                   V ,   j -JfcJL   Ji   -5   "^5t>          7^ ®
               --fc U v u n filU X   .               ^   tx^            SS            J r\


                                                   HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE
                          k   .                    NORTH WEST AREA 18
                                                   VICTORIA HOUSE     -p ^                            .
                                                   ORMSKIRK ROAD       1 ^
                                                   PRESTON PR1 1HH

DR L DERRICK
SPD A
                                             cc:   Mr    Hammer, DDG
                                                   Mr    Lindsay, DIR APAU
                                                   Mr    Whomsley, DCI FI2
                                                   Mr    Hodgkins, SPD
                                                   Mr    Eves , RPD
                                                   Mr    McQuaid, RLSD
                                                   Mr    Linehan, Cl
                                                                     LAU

                                                                              3U
                                                                              PDA

                                                                               Lplined
                                                                                es NIG

                                                                              MJ
                                                                              PD D3
                                                                              D C4



OVERCROWDING - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND TRAGEDY

I enclose a response to your memo of 28 April from the NIG which
gives a number of useful references.

I suggest that this issue can best be approached through separate
steps:-

1.   Does HSW Act S.3 apply to crowd safety?

The answer to this appears to be yes in some cases.  While
hooliganism, individual behaviour, drunkeness etc are matters of
public order and do not directly arise from the manner of
conducting the undertaking, overcrowding and crowd control do and
are within the control of the persons conducting the undertaking.
Section 3 will therefore apply to problems arising from over­
crowding due to inadequate control or direction, unsuitable
structures or gangways etc.

2.   Does HSE need to enforce?

The approach to this is well established.  We do not enforce where
there is other more relevant legislation which is being enforced,
or where the priority is deemed to be low.  On football grounds
and other places covered by the Safety at Sports Grounds Act
there is such legislation and the Section 3 review gives guidance
on how HSE should determine its role.  At fairs and on the
Underground in the absence of more specific legislation the HSW

                                         1
Act will apply and HSE will have to consider enforcement according
to priority.   The Silcock Case at Bolton Crown Court referred to
by            incidentally did accept that control of the public
was covered t>y the HSW Act and that the prosecution had
established a case to answer.   The Judge ruled however that the
prosecution had failed to prove that the defendants had not done
all that was reasonably practicable to control behaviour on that
occasion.

3.  There is a possible third step which is implicit in para.3 of
your memo, which is that HSE may have a role to ensure that a
Football Club has a management structure capable of efficiently
carrying out its functions including compliance with the Safety at
Sports Grounds Act.  This is a new dimension which so far as I am
aware has not been considered before and on which the Solicitor
may wish to comment.




H CAVANAGH
Area Director
11 May 89
DR DERRICK                                  cc Mr   Hammer
                                               Mr   Hodgkins
                                               Mr   Eves
                                               Dr   McQuaid
                                               Mr   Linehan




                                               Mr Cavanagh

OVERCROWDING - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND TRAGEDY

1 In response to your minute of 28 April, I do have some doubts
whether HSC/E should seek to contribute to the debate on
overcrowding and crowd control.

2 Our policy on Section 3 enforcement, as stated in the 1989-90
Commission Plan, is to "avoid duplicating the work of other
authorities"; the Plan adds that "in areas of overlapping
legislation, the Executive seeks to agree demarcation lines with
other authorities..... ". The present arrangements whereby Home
Office lead on public order matters (including football
hooliganism; the regulation of open spaces, parks, and pleasure
grounds'; fire precautions; and law enforcement) seem to fit well
enough within the agreed criteria for seeking demarcation
agreements.   The dividing line - reserving all public order
aspects to Home Office - has not generally been difficult to
maintain in the past (eg on violence to staff, in the context of
the Ministerial Group on Crime Prevention; or on model
bye-laws).

3 Do you have specific reasons for suggesting a change now?
("Growing public debate" seems an argument against, rather than
for). The only arguments I can see would be:
                %

    i) if you conclude following further work on Section 3 that
       HSE has a legal obligation to enforce in certain areas;

   ii) or if HSE had relevant expertise (eg stemming from work
       on human factors) to offer, perhaps on repayment. Your
       minute however refers to academic work; why should Home
       Office not commission that themselves?




RPDB
9 May, 1989
 )575A
                                                                HEAIHH & SAFETY
                                                                 EXECUTIVE
                                                                VICTORIA HOUSE
                                                                ORMSKERK ROAD
                                                                PRESTON ER1 1HH


Mr H Cavanagh
Area Director




OVERCROWDING - MLTSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND TRAGEDY

1.   Dr Derrick wrote 'on 28 April 1989 about HSE's possible role in the above

     case, particularly on matters of crowd control and overcrowding.



2.   The NIG has taken the view, following earlier guidance that this is not a

     matter in which FI should normally became involved.     As early as 1982 FI

     Code IN Ma, Appendix 2, para 30, stated that the existence of the Safety at

     Sports Grounds legislation meant that, by agreement, presumably with Home

     Office, FI would have no role.



3.   Apart from that our view of crowd control and possible problems of crowd

     misbehaviour has been guided by the advice of the Solicitor.    On 10 March

     1988, in a document ref. ADO/GRJ/4/1, to                 referring to the

     Bradford FC case, he suggested that crowd control could be within the scope

     of the HSW Act S3   although crowd misbehaviour might not.   Even if crowd

     control, arising from the way in which an undertaking is conducted, at a

     sports ground is within our scope I think the existence at the more specific

     legislation means that we should not become involved.    This is the view in

     EMB/87/73.   A similar point is made in the fairground racaa on crowd

     misbehaviour, R v Silcock, Bolton Crown Court, 28.1.1987.



                                       -1-
1    More specifically, the Solicitor wrote to                 ref ADO/GQT/4/1, on

     18.1.1988.    He again referred to the Bradford FC case which suggested that

     risk of injury from violence would not be covered.     The means of crowd

     control installed at a sports ground may be covered by S3 but, I suggest

     again, only if the more specific legislation could not be applied.



5.   I have taken the FX position to be that we could only reasonably be involved

     in crowd safety matters at a sports ground covered by the specific

     legislation if we were asked to respond on a good will basis by the

     enforcing authority.    FI/HSE could be called in on those terms only.



6.   We do not know the precise cause of this tragedy at Hillsborou^i.



     It may have been due to inadequate physical measures for crowd control or it

     may have been due to a poor system of work.     Either way we have to be sure

     that no other legislation is more relevant than the HSW Act and we have to

     be sure that our expertise is adequate.     It seems to me that the Safety at

     Sports Ground legislation is specifically intended to deal with the

     Hillsborouc^i situation.   It may or may not have been adequate in the

     circumstances but, as it exists, I hesitate to say that the HSW Act should

     be vised.   Equally, expertise lies, as far as I can judge, with Heme Office

     through IAs and the police, not with HSE.    I would suggest that HSE does

     decide what it is going to do about crowd control in the event of

     misbehaviour as there is concern about such things as pop-concerts and other
     mass gatherings.




SENIOR PRINCIPAL INSPECTOR

                                       -2-
b f a t'
Ms Derrick
                                       cc: Mr   Lindsay
                                           Mr   Hammer,DDG
                                           Mr   Hodgkins,SPD
                                           Mr   Ev es , RPD
                                           Dr   McQuaid,RLSD
                                           Mr   Linehan, CIF
                                           1           n    c
                                           ]               SMSU

                                           ]             SPDA
                                           ]           MD
                                           Mr Cavanagh,Enter-
                                              tainment N IG
                                                         scip-
                                                         s NIG
                                                         U
                                                         PAU
                                                         SPD D3
                                                         PD C4
                                                         DE




OVERCROWDING - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
GROUND TRAGEDY


1.   You invited comments from the recipients of your memo to
      Mr Lindsay of 28 April about the role of HSE in
      overcrowding and crowd control policy.    I would like to
      contribute to the debate in relation to spectator
      entertainments, a large proportion of which will become
      the responsibility of the LAs for health and safety
      enforcement under the new E A Regulations.

2.   Most spectator entertainments require licences under the
      Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act.
      Licences are not issued until necessary discussions,
      inspections and enquiries have taken place.   If they
      are issued, they will be subject to conditions which
     will often include a maximum number of "customers"
      allowed.   They can be refused on the grounds that
      public safety would be placed in jeopardy.

3.   Various bodies are involved in enforcing Licence
      conditions; the local authorities, the fire brigade and
     the police.

4.   Whilst the issues to be addressed in granting a licence
      are well known, conditions are not standard, nor do I
     think they can be.    For example, at the Knebworth Pop
      Concert, the main problem was orve of traffic management
     which would not be the case for a better situated site.
I am not aware of any central debate about these matters
but a grwdt deal of consideration is being given to them
by the interested practitioners, mainly the police.
For example; does public safety cover the safety of the
public attending the event on\ijfordoes it extend to the
residents of nearby towns who may be denied access to
emergency services if all the roads are blocked up; is
it possible on all occasions to police "maximum
numbers" conditions?    The police commander at Knebworth
believed that if he turned away the 10-30,000 additional
people who had travelled from all parts of the UK and
abroad, he would be responsible for "a riot to beat all
riots".
One of the guiding lights in identifying areas for HSW
Act enforcement ( whether the HSE, the Agencies or the
LAs) has been to leave the job to others where they have
more expertise, and/or specific legislation (fire
matters are an example, and you quoted the
responsibility of the CNAA in relation to air shows). I
think that crowd control at licensed events could fall
into that category.    I don't think that those involved
necessarily have all the answers but I would suggest
that the problems are being addressed and by people with
a wealth of experience.

The LAUs information on this subject has largely come
from informal discussions and anecdotal evidence. ( The
two attached reports are illustrative - I have not
copied them to other recipients but they are available
if required).   My gut feeling is that crowd control at
public events is best kept to those already
experienced,but if you would like to follow this up
further, we could help with this through our LA
contacts.
    •                                             ■   ■                    /                ...............................




         C onference paper:
i


I




                                      “Public Entertainment Licensing”


                                                                                                                          by Brian Homans
    i
                                                                               C hief Superintendent, Hertfordshire Police
    i

         N.H.Morton, Chairman of Session.
                                                                        was with the     welcome  I received and the
         I remember I was once told that you should                     opportunity to   share your dinner table last
         never give too high a billing to a speaker,                    night.
         as you don't know whether or not he/she will
         let you down.     I know our speaker this                      Having enjoyed the evening, it came somewhat
         morning, and therefore feeL quite confident.                   as a shock that an incident   ocurred during
                                                                        the night when I thought I wasn't going to
         Brian Homans was engaged to speak at a                         be here this morning.      I discovered that
         seminar held in York and organised by the                      in the bathroom adjoining my room, there was
         Northern Branch.      The subject matter to                    a toilet seat that remains upright for 7.3
         which he was addressing himself was Public                     seconds   and   then   falls   down with a
         Entertainment Licensing,  and in particular                    resounding crash.
         Pop Concerts, and even more particularly the
         Knebworth Pop Festival.      The information                   I was asked to talk about police involvment
         which we received and the manner in which it                   with places of public entertainment, and of
         was presented was such that we thought it                      course they are many and varied.        They
         would be    a    fitting  climax   for this                    stretch right across the spectrum, from the
         conference.                                                    sort of thing that I want  to concentrate on
                                                                        i.e. the Knebworth Pop Festival, right down
          Chief Superintendant Brian Homans has been a                  to the little events in the village halls.
          policeman in Hertfordshire for 27 years, and                  A lot of them to be absolutely frank with
        * has worked in all        the divisions of the                 you, in the pressure of todays policing do
          force.     Almost half of his service has been                not create many problems at all.
          with the traffic division involved with
          main road and motorway patrolling.             He             I will   just dwell   for a minute or two if I
        | deals     with   accident    investigation and                may, on alcohol.       There is much publicity
          traffic management.       He is currently the                 given to the problems of sSciety created by
          Divisional     Commander    for    the    largest             drugs, and I would not belittle      that as a
          territorial division in V his          force;  is             problem per se.     But what I would say as an
          responsible for five police stations           in             operational   Police Commander is that the
           Stevenage and North Hertfordshire.        One of             effect of alcohol is something which creates
           his many headaches       is    to   police the               a problem    for us every hour of the day,
           internationally famous      Pop    Festival at               every day of the week.     A tremendous amount
           foebworth Park, and much of his paper today                  of police     resources are injected on a
              going to revolve around his first hand                    regular basis; Thursday, Friday and Saturday
            Experience of last years' concert.                          nights; strengthening the street patrols to
                                                                        deal with whatever may occur from the odd
              o■
         i arian Homans.                                                'punch-up' to absolute mayhem,    caused in my
                                                                        view almost entirely by alcohol.          What
          ;       I echo the remarks made by Colin Pearce               looks like     a tranquil     High Street   in
              H the start of       his presentation this                Stevenage at 3.00pm on a Friday afternoon-
              “°rning.   That is to say how delighted I                 you should see at      11.30pm on a Saturday

              •^PECTOR   V o l : 34   No.   5   S ^ / O c * .   1*18*
       g     ‘                                  District Council for thirty thousand people,
                                                and the capacity of that park    is such that
 So we     do have a difficulty with enforcing it can loose 30,000   people and itdoes    not
 legislation associated with drinking in that create any operational      problems    for  us
 type ofplace of public entertainment,     i.e. whatever
 the public house.      For   that we have an
 enforcement capability and rely very heavily   It has been the tradition of Knebworth Park
 upon our empirical     knowledge.     We know since about 1974,   to stage    one major Pop
 where  the    problems are and deploy our Concert every year.        Those of you who were
 resources accordingly.                         into such things will remember such names as
                                                                                   the Rolling Stones,    Lead Zepellin,    Deep
There are also other      types of   licensed                                      Purple etc,   who have appeared     there and
premises.    Clubs   for example, to which we                                      attracted crowds of various  sizes.      Last
do not have an automatic right of entry - we                                       year the objective was   to stage a concert
need a warrant from the magistrates upon the                                       including Queen and Status Quo.      Over the
laying of an    information.     This is done                                      years these concerts    have  been staged by
from time  to time but it is1very demanding                                        various different promoters.
on Police resources.       We raided a club
earlier this year on a Thursday night.     It                                      There is a cost  to policing,   and there are
                                                                                   many other costs as well.    But we charge in
                                                                                   the same way  for policing    inside football
                                                                                   grounds as we do for inside Knebworth Park.
                                                                                   What happens    outside   isborne by   the
                                                                                   ratepayers, and you may be wondering whether
                                                                                   that is morally or ethically correct.

                                                                                  That has      been    thepractice       and   the
       "th e        coA i       of      [x> - l-tc j n g o u Ia i dp     th e .   tradition,   though we have experienced some
      ly io u r u iA . . . a a b o n n e b y -the. n a ie f x u je n a , y o u    promoters who have shall     we say,   been less
      may. w o n d e r w h e th e r t h a t L a man a l l y                o /i   than willing to 'stand their corner'.        This
      e t h ic x iJ J jy c o /i/i p .ct                                           resulted in    1985  in quite an interesting
                                                                                  legal battle,    and I am sure most of you in
                                                                                  your    capacity      of     local     authority
                                                                                  representatives, will     be aware of the Local
                                                                                  Government   (Miscellaneous    Provisions) Act,
                                                                                  under which      licences   for this    type of
                                                                                  outdoor musical entertainment      are  issued.
                                                                                  In February 1985 the N. Herts D.C. issued a
                                                                                  licence early in the year for an attendance
was a    members   only club,   and we   knew                                     of 120,000 people, at a pop concert to be
youngsters were getting in’ there without                                         staged in the summer.
being members.    They were being served with
alcohol,  they were underage     and just to                                       One of the conditions          set down in the
mount this operation took sixty officers.                                          licence was that the organisers were            to be
I just   cannot spare     60 policemen on a                                        responsible     for    reimbursing       the    local
regular basis    to undertake   that sort of                                       authority and the County Council             for any
enforcement activity.                                                             additional      public    services       which were
                                                                                  provided.     The interesting point           to note
As Neil    said,   I am the Commander for the                                     here is that they said in the conditions
Policfe Division which covers Stevenage and                                       that   the organiser should reimburse the
North Herts.     Just to the S/W of Stevenage                                     costs.    From our point      of view that meant
lies Knebworth Park,      which is one of the                                     that we     needed to       negotiate with         the
stately   homes, and to maintain a       large                                    promoter     to    identify      the    appropriate
house in a large estate, the owners need to                                       policing levels and therefore          the policing
capitalise on that asset to bring revenue in                                      costs.     It came to an impass         and we could
to keep   it going.   Virtually every weekend                                     not agree,      because    we     said     that o u r
they have some sort of function there, the                                        experience showed that we needed 'x' n u m b e r
majority of which do not cause us any                                             of policemen for various purposes,             in the
problems.     There is the Annual Classic Car                                     interests of public safety, crime prevention
Bonanza, the Jaguar Owners Club, the Teddy                                        and public order.              We    informed the
Bears Picnic on a Bank Holiday etc.       They                                    licensing authority that the promoter w o u ld
have a permanent licence issued by N. Herts                                       not agree     to what we regarded            as the
1 6
                                                                                                         V o— l :   34   N o■ . 5_- TNSPKCTOH
                                                                                                                                    .       —-
appropriate policing   level,  and that he             and the other 50% seven days in advance.      I
would not come up with the amount of money             can then assure the licensing committee that
which would   fund  the costs.       So the            I can provide the level of policing which I
licensing authority withdrew the licence.              think is commensurate with maintaining a
                                                       certain level   of public   safety  at   thi.i-
The  licence holder,       the owner of the park       event.
went to the Queens       Bench Division of the
High Court,     by way of appeal.            Their     We think we are unique in Hertfordshire m
argument was       that   this was not right,          taking this approach.       Since  then, and
because   in terms of       the Act, there is no       particularly since I gave the paper at your
facility for      the   licensing authority      to    seminar in York, several  Police Forces have
impose a condition that requires anything to           approached us and asked   for a copy of our
be paid for.              Yes,    you will provide     contract, because  they think this might be
services which will        ensure public safety,       the way ahead.
but they claimed that it was an ultra vires
condition    that   the services must be paid          What I would like to do now is talk through
for.     The Judge used his commmonsense, and          some of the difficulties, which have a very
said 'well if it has not got to be paid for,           significant bearing upon public safety, and
how can you guarantee           it is going to be      matters which might form objections to the
provided.'         He said that technically the        licence on those grounds.
condition was wrong, but it was designed to
meet    the    necessary      objective,   and he
dimissed the appeal.            In other words he
informed    the appellant       that  if he didn't
 like the conditions,        he    felt that    the
authority were correct to keep the licence
withdrawn.

 The landowner then went for judicial review,           "We h a v e e x p e /u e n c e d Aome p /io m o ie n a w ho
 and the same sort of argument was thrashed             h a v e , A h a il       we     ^ay_,       been.        le / iA th a n
 out.       Again     the Judge    said it was          w L L L u rg . t o A t a n d t h e i j i c u /in e /i" .
 technically    inappropriate*    to put   in a
 condition that particular public services
 have to be paid        for, as opposed to being
 provided.        But   it we did not have a
 condition in those terms, the licence would
 effectively be "totally silent on policing".
 The Judge     felt that     this would   be an
 untenable situation, and upheld the stance
  taken by the local authority.       So because       On 9th August, 1986, the Knebworth Park Pop
  the plans were well     laid, the promoter and       Festival featured the groups       Queen and
  the landowner had no option but to go along          Status Quo.     The police commitment to an
  with the scheme of things.     The license was       event of this sort requires a vast amount of
  again modified and issued at the eleventh            planning.      Three months   in advance, I
. hour,   after we had formed acontractual             strike off two officers,  to run a planning
, agreement, outside the terms of the licence          room and control the planning team, which as
1 for payment for our services.                        time draws near increases _ to some twenty-
                                                       officers.   We assign individual officers to
I Since then,        the outcome has been that we      different areas of responsibility; someone
I have           subsequently      overcome     that   will be in charge of coach parking; someone
1 technical/legal problem, in conjunction with         else will be in charge of car parking,
 * Herts D.C.           We now have legally binding    motorways etc.    Essentially there are two
 ? Contracts.             The contract places an       officers initially doing the job.
   obligation on the promoter in contractual
   ‘-erms,      to   provide   the    costs of the     The connurbation of Stevenage   is crossed by
    5d<Htional policing inside' the park, on the       the A1(M), where there is a grade separated
     c«<sion of the concert.         When the formal   interchange   (a   flyover)   above   the A1
    i-?Plications are discussed       in the Council   motorway, with a dual carriageway leading
     Camber, I go along to the hearing knowing         into the industrial     area  then the main
             x have   in my hand a signed contract     connurbation.    Off to the West is a little
      '•llch says not only will they pay for it,       concrete road which is the one and only
        :t they will pay   50% 14 days in advance,     vehicular entrance of any       substance to
      <nebworth Park.   it is about 12 ft wide and
                                                     from Thursday morning,     through Friday and
     leads directly   from the motorway, and that
                                                    Saturday morning for a concert which starts
     in itself will really be the crunch of all
                                                    after lunch on Saturday.      and goes through
     the problems   that ensue.   A quite tranquil
                                                    until 10.00pm.      The promoter, who on this
     country park     with a    herd of deer is
                                                    ocassion was Harvey Goldsmith,        is a very
     transformed to a mayhem of Seething people.
                                                    sharp businessman and very       experienced in
     They build an arena of 35 acres, fenced in,
                                                    the promotional game.      He tried to tell us
     with an enormous stage, topped by a relay
     screen.                                        that he was going to stage a different style
                                                    of concert,    i.e.   an afternoon concert as
                                                    opposed to an evening concert.           we said
     It is necessary for the police to run this
                                                    that whatever your intention is, we consider
     operation,   and because of my position I
                                                    that people who have been coming for the
     become the operation commander.    We need to
                                                    last ten years will       still   fall   into a
     establish some control inside the park, and
                                                   pattern of arrival that we are experienced
     we use two mobile control units.    They have
                                                   in dealing with, and you must make provision
     two purposes.    Firstly we need to have a
                                                   for camping.      He said he didn't want to do
     radio control point and secondly we need an
                                                   that because     it would cost him money.
     on-site police station   for lost children,
                                                   Fortunately    the     Licensing    Officer and
     lost property, crime reporting etc.    The
                                                   Environmental    Health Officer were on my
                                                   side, and ultimately camping was provided.
                                                   He had put on his posters and tickets "no
                                                   camping facilities will be provided", but in
                                                   spite of that we said he must do      it, and he
                                                   did.

                                                                                   This sort of operation     takes 650 policemen
      "A i/ix m q u u J c o u n t/u j p a /ik w L t h   a h e jid   o   f         over three days.     There are 1600 policemen
     d e e / i, is .i i/ia n - ifo n m e d i n t o a    mayhem      of             in Hertfordshire.     We managed to police-it
     'ie .e ih in g , p e o p l e " .                                             entirely on our own     without the support of
                                                                                  other forces.    But it does mean that nobody
                                                                                  has a weekend off;       people are working 12
                                                                                  hour shifts;   getting paid overtime etc, and
                                                                                  it costs a great deal    of money.         Many
                                                                                  officers have to be moved around the County;
                                                                                  there is a logistical    problem as we do not
                                                                                  have enough transit vans,         so we have to
                                                                                  hire them.       So when I said       it was a
 promoters in their generosity pay for that.                                      heachache - it really is.
 We have a powered glider in the air which we
 use as a communications link and for traffic
                                                                                   The   major    problem     is associated w i t h
 surveillance.
                                                                                   transport, traffic and pedestrians.      People
                                                                                  arrive at Knebworth in various ways, they
 The   control     complex    consists    of the
                                                                                  hitch-hike,    walk,   come by car, by coach,
promoters      caravan,     the"    first     aid
                                                                                  train, public transport and organised coach.
establishment, police control van and two
                                                                                  It is difficult to establish in a d v a n c e
prison vans.           it is     essential  that
                                                                                  arrival patterns,     and modes of transport.
ambulances     and    medical    facilities are
                                                                                  We knew from ticket        sales, that we c o u ld
provided on site, usually by the Red Cross
                                                                                  expect about    400 coaches,   and we knew frorc
and St.Johns Ambulance Brigade.        One of my
                                                                                  previous experience that if it was a sell­
objectives at future pop concerts is to get
                                                                                  out we could expect 30,000 + cars.      A g re a t
the two to talk to each other!               tw o
                                                                                 deal of thought          goes  into the a r r i v a l
thousand people were treated on site by the
                                                                                  routine.      You do not always get it r i g h t .
first aiders and medical teams.       Complaints
                                                                                 We are back to the previous philosophy of
range from headaches to pregnancy, through
                                                                                 staggered arrival over Thursday, Friday and
to tragic fatalities.
                                                                                 Saturday.     The impact of the advertising or.
                                                                                 this particular event was,         from a police
Camping prompts me to say to you that you do
                                                                                 control point of view, disastrous.        We
have to take cognisance of what has gone on
                                                                                 all sorts of traffic points manned and plans
in the past.     History,  accepted practise
                                                                                 laid,   and by     10.00am on Saturday for s
and tradition.    in the past Knebworth has
                                                                                 concert planned to start at 3.00pm th e re
had the tradition of being a weekend event.
                                                                                 was only a trickle of cars and coacheS
That is to say people have started arriving
                                                                                 coming in.          We stood there like Genera*
18      ‘                                                                   --
                                                                                                      Vol : 34   No. 5    INSPECTOR
 TurU.f
 Ojst.fj'    waiting       foe     the c*oacho5> to   come over    traffic during   the week were relatively
 the hill.   sure enough, half the population                      deserted,  so we closed off one lane of a
 of England set off  to arrive at Knebworth,                       dual carriageway to use as a coach stacking
 they thought at about   12.00 noon!     They                      area,  and   they were escorted there by
 thought arriving at that     time would give                      motorcycle outriders.
 them chance  to have a look around, have a
 little lunch and watch the concert.     This                      Then we had the telephone calls.    At 12.00
 created five miles of stationary motorway                         noon we received calls   from traders in the
 traffic.
                                                                   town complaining that their customers could
                                                                   not get out.
 Those of you who have been involved in
 traffic studies will     have heard    the term                   Now we come     to a fundamental and serious
 "conflict points".     South-bound traffic has                    question.    The grounds on which the police
 to leave the A1(M) up the slip road and has                       can legitimately object to the staging of an
 to give way to traffic on the roundabout at                       event   like this,   really hinge on public
 the top.    Conflict point No.1     But in fact                   safety.       We have to ask ourselves, as
 it is conflict points Nos.1 & 2, because the                      presumably would the     licensing authority,
 flyover   was    never    designed    to   take                   that when you have 20% of the road network
 pedestrians, only vehicles.        There is no                    around your town totally throttled with
 other way you can get into Knebworth Park on                      traffic looking for non-existant parking
 foot, than to walk around the roundabout.
 Then there is traffic    from Stevenage trying
 to merge   in with traffic coming up from
 London.

We tried our level best to separate coaches
from other traffic.      Of all the statistics
that have emerged     from the Knebworth Pop
Festival,   there   is only one that      I can                       " 2 , 0 0 0 p e o p le , a n e t r e a t e d   on A ite         by
proudly claim to be accurate, and that is in                         f u jiA t    aj.d.e/iA     and      medLc.aU.     te a m A .
relation to the number of coaches.       I can                       C o m p la in t s     /iang.e      jL/iom     headache a         to
say that because we offered,       in view of                        p re g n a n c y , th r o u g h t o ts ia g lc f a t a lL t L e W .
previous experience      when coaches became
bogged down in the park,      to organise the
coach parking     facility on behalf of the
promoter.     We planned a pjrecise operation,
each coach being      allocated a number and a
parking area, and people would be told where
their coach was and its number.       You will
remember earlier I mentioned 400 coaches                          spaces, is public safety placed in jeopardy?
were expected - we ran out of stickers at                         You could not get a fire engine, ambulance
694.    in a little town like Stevenage,                          or police vehicle through the area, and that
where do you put 694 coaches?                                     would make an interesting debate.

 There was a playing field in Stevenage                            There were 35,000    cars and most of the
 which was    used by    fairs and circuses                        ground inside the park was used for car
 complete with a hard area.    We used that in                     parking.    The A1(M) was blocked for five
 consultation with Stevenage Borough Council                       miles in a northbound direction.    The A1(M)
 a°d accommodated 200 coaches.       We had a                     was being fed from London, the M25, the A405
 9reat deal of what we call indiscriminate                        and the A414 etc.      I am sure I d o n ’t have
 ^erb-side parking.   What do we do about it?                      to   tell   you   that the most dangerous
 Nothing!
                                                                  situation on a motorway is the tail end of a
                                                                  queue of     traffic.      The most     serious
  *e found another area to accommodate another                    potential accident hazard.         We provide
I wo hundred coaches, but ultimately we ran                       police patrol cars to keep in advance of the
f       of off-street parking.       However, for                 tail end of the traffic to slow them down.
V ’ 1 its faults, Stevenage has a very good                       During the run up to the event, the promoter
   ;?ner distributor road network which feeds                     was worried about one particular aspect.
   •“Other industrial estate on the North East                    Those of you who know the A1(M) will know
    ^rner-     Fortunately at a'weekend it is not                 that the new tunnel has opened at Hatfield,
         busy,   so we could use that area.                       a 1 km run of motorway tunnel.           At the
     ' er roads which were full with commuter                     time this pop festival was approaching,
                   . , mmummmmi.........—
   s< ^ £ T 0!(   Vol :   34     N o.                                                                                               1n
                                                       filled!", causing damage and injury.      The
that tunnel was partly constructed, and the
                                                       promoter offered a deal,      asking us if we
North-bound A1     had a section in it just by
                                                       would change our policy of no alcohol being
Hatfield Polytechnic, that reduced from two
                                                       sold inside the arena, if he allowed only
lanes to one lane,      nicely coned down to a
                                                       franchises that     sold beer    or wine   in
pinch point where        they went     through the
                                                       plastic cups.    We said we would think about
roadworks.        The promoter was constantly
                                                       it because    it was a radical     change of
oressurising us to prevail upon the Dept, of
                                                       policy,   although ultimately we agreed.
Transport    to    open    up    this particular
                                                       There were three lorry loads of full bottles
bottleneck,     because he felt              he was    and cans brought out after the event, taken
 providing wonderful parking       facilities and
                                                        at the entry points as a result of searches,
 all the poor motorists would $ot be able to
                                                        even though the promoter had banned them.
 get there,     because of     the bottelneck at
 Hatfield.    In the event it turned out to be
                                                       At the entry points not only did you have to
 our saving grace, because it put a valve in
                                                       show a ticket, but also surrender any drink
 the feed.      We did have stationary traffic
                                                       which you had.       Not everyone did, and it
 back to between Welwyn and Hatfield, about 8
                                                       turned out   later that one of the franchises
 miles.    Then there was a gap,         then there
                                                       was selling beer in bottles.        There was a
 was the Hatfield roadworks,        and then there
                                                       secondary   impact on the condition of not
 was another five mile queue leading back to
                                                       allowing alcohol    in the arena, because for
  the intersection of       the A1/M25.          The
                                                       the last    12 years     they had brought drink
  traffic patrols on the M25 could not risk
                                                       with them into Knebworth Park.        When they
  another hazard    there,   so they closed the
                                                       got there and found they could not take it
  access roads from the M25 to the A 1 .        That
                                                        in, in bottles, they decided to take it in,
  was necessary to keep the M2S flowing.          So
                                                        inside themselves.        The result was that
  I have to say    that had the roadworks not
                                                        they sat around on the grass for an hour or
  been there at the time, the queue of traffic
                                                        two, consuming the drink they had originally
  would have been stationary      in the tunnel.
                                                        planned to consume over an 8 - 10 hour
  Stationary traffic in a tunnel          is another
                                                        period.      Some of them could hardly walk
  problem.      Although there are fans in the
                                                        through    the   gates.         The inflow   of
   tunnel, people tend to panic and leave their
                                                        pedestrians seemed to continue        for hour
 cars.
                                                        after hour.
 Most of the motorway congestion was caused
                                                        Several  lighting towers were installed in
 by one thing - the promoters advertising,
                                                        the arena to provide lighting for the crowd
 which said "Gates open 12.00 noon - concert
                                                        and the stage.   More of the significance of
  starts 3.00 pm"
                                                        this later.
  There was a time when I said to myself 'you   The   issue   of attendance figures raises
  are not in charge of   this  - it is just
                                                another question.       What validity  is there
  happening'.                                   in a piece of paper which says you are
                                                licensed to hold a concert         for  120,000
  The entry road into the park split into two
                                                people.Is it enforceable?      I    tell you it
  legs, but as soon as one parking area was
                                                is not.          It raises all sorts of moral,
  full we had to close one of them, which
                                                ethical and legal questions, and I as police
  added to the congestion.                      commander in charge of the operation, have
                                                to ask myself 'what if it was enforceable .
  Pedestrians were directed in-: as straight a
                                                What    if there were some magical method c*
  line as possible across the car parks and
                                                establishing that 120,000 people had enterec
  into the arena.    If you don't do that, they
                                                 the arena.?    (turnstiles would be no good in
  will take the shortest route anyway.     When
                                                 this situation)       and we denied access te
  the pedestrians get to the edge of the
                                                 others.       We are back to the King Canute
  fenced area, there are a number of gateways.
                                                 role.     What    would I do with all the 10;
  Before entry they mill around on the grass
                                                 30,000   people who have travelled from     a--
  by the entry points.     At the entry points
                                                 parts of the U.K. and the continent?     The-';
   there were signs    "No   bottles,  cans or
                                                 is just no way,     without causing a riot -
   recorders".   It is worth commenting on the
                                                 beat all riots that we can turn these peop^
   question of alcohol within the arena.
                                                 away.
   It has been our experience    in the past,
                                                         At about     6.00 pm I asked Harvey Goldswi ^
   that people take all sorts of drink into
                                                         "How many    people have you got in now?            ^
   the arena,   then they throw the bottles                           hundred and nineteen t h o u s a n d ^
   about,  sometimes  empty,  sometimes   re­            said "One
                                                                                                    INSPECT^
                                                    to you are not     enough.      In the closing
hundred, because I have four hundred tickets
                                                    stages of    the concert,    and by now it was
unsold!"    I pointed to the grass and said
                                                    dark,   with   in excess   of120,000 people
"Thats green down there - not me .
                                                    wanting to     go home,    we now had a murder
                                                    enquiry and    a scene which we were not sure
We knew people had been getting in without
                                                    we could identify.      So by searchlight and
paying.    He employs   a security service,
                                                    handlamp we did manage to identify where the
manned by gorillas  in tee-shirts and they
                                                    murder scene was,     bythe blood      on the
stop you at check points. ;}
                                                    ground.    In darkness with portable lighting
                                                    we had to grid off a larger area than we
Before   I    develop     the   next    point of
discussion, can I just ask you to think             would normally do, to search for weapons and
about   the     problem    of   identifying any     clues etc.    At the same time we had to make
particular     location in an arena of that         certain operational decisions.
size.      "Mary Brown has twisted her ankle"
                                                    All those people were wanting to go home.
"Where is she?"      "In the arena".       Thirty
                                                    Amongst those people are the murderer, and
five acres seething with bodies - how do you
                                                    probably several potential witnesses.    But
find them?        We considered all sorts of
                                                    within that mass of people there would only
things.     If you put tape across and form a
                                                    be a handful1 who could help us with our
grid area the tape disappears very quickly.
If you install metal          posts   they would    enquiries.   So what do you do?  We made
disappear and maybe be used as weapons.        In
the future we will have to develop what we
 term as notional gridding,         which is an
overlay of a grid with marks around the
perimeter     fence.       That may be the way
ahead.
                                                       "We have, t o aAk o u n .4 & lv e A .. .when, y o u have.
At about 6.30 pm I went home for a shower
                                                       2 (f/0 o f th e / w a d n e tw o n k t o t a l l y , t i v i o t t l e d
and a shave,       with the intention of going
                                                       wUh       tr a ffic . • •           p u b lic       s a fe ty ,       in
back    later   in the evening for the mass
                                                       feofxm duy?”.
e x odus .   Over my radio I heard that someone
had been stabbed in the arena,       and it was
reported to be very very serious.      From the
tone of      the conversations    I knew that
someone was very seriously ill and probably
much worse.      I went back to the site, where
I found that a young man from Scotland
 standing there enjoying the concert with
 some friends was subject to a vicious knife         the decision which was    the best we could
 attack from which he died virtually on the          achieve, of getting hold of any people we
 spot.     He had been stabbed in the heart, in      knew were in that area.    One or two people
                                                     said     they saw a scuffle but did not see
 the neck and in the head.
                                                     much.        There were the friends of the
 If I can take you back to visualise the full        victim.      However everyone else wanted to
 arena.        As   the final numbers were being     go home.    There is no way in that situation
 performed, the natural tendancy of the crowd        you can stop and search every vehicle.
 was to surge forward to get a better view,          There were 35,000 cars and 694 coaches.     We
 and become      involved in the clapping and        therefore made the decision of      taking the'
 waving.      The only information we had as to      index numbers of every vehicle leaving the
 this stabbing was that it was somewhere near        site.That we felt was as     much as we could
 one of    the lighting towers, and there were       do at    the time. As people were pouring out
 three.      If you have ever been in that kind      there were scenes of crime people pouring
 of environment,      standing 2 or 3 feet away      in,   together    with photographers,   finger­
  from someone, it is difficult to communicate       print people e t c .
 with them.       The noise is tremendous.      I
  would just    like you to envisage the problem     The finger tip searching was difficult.
  faced by the emergency services,         in (a)    From the interview of witnesses we had vague
  identifying where and then ’(b) getting in to      descriptions of two or three people who were
                                                     alleged to be causing trouble;     they were
  rescue this    individual who was bleeding to
                                                     reported to be     drunk,   reeling around,
  death.    They got him out, and he was rushed
                                                     bumping   into   people,  being aggressive,
  to hospital where he was pronounced dead.
                                                     looking for trouble and who were thought to
   As if all the difficulties I have described
                                                                   —                         —                “               21
*   -------------------------------------------
       involved in the incident.    Searching the                                                     parks   emptied   and Knebworth House                was
    scene for clues the    following morning we                                                       restored to peace and tranquility.
    found thirty knives, and in reality we never
    found the    knife   that    inflicted those                                                      It does  leave us with the kind of problem I
    injuries.   The Home Secretary   is on record                                                     have described,    and the more    important
    as saying that the difficulty arising when                                                        question of how do you get    it better on a
    people carry knives and have a bit to drink,                                                      future occasion.
    and get   involved in an argument, then the
    knives will be used.                                                                              We Were approached again this year about a
                                                                                                      concert,   and we   said that our feeling was
    The brief description of these assailants                                                         that irrespective of the difficulty in the
    was circulated over the radio, and you have                                                       arena,   and all our previous experience,
    seen the seething mass of people.         Now                                                     there was no way we could condone this sort
    imagine that mass of people going out all at                                                      of traffic mayhem.      I would not criticise
    once in the dark.    One of my policemen saw                                                      the organisers,   they had a car parking team
    a lad wearing a tee-shirt with bloodstains                                                        and did very well.    It is simply a question
    on the front.     He grabbed him,   took him                                                      of traffic flow, and there is no way you can
    into the police station, and while that lad                                                       get hundreds of quarts into a pint p o t . We
    was not the one who wielded the knife, he                                                         said that we must look radically at traffic
                                                                                                      arrival patterns and routes,      and we put
                                                                                                      forward a traffic management     scheme which
                                                                                                      would divert most of      the through traffic
                                                                                                      around Stevenage.     The scheme would have
                                                                                                      cost the organisers £20,000 and they did not
                                                                                                      want to pay for it, so they went elsewhere.
         "/ H I a       A oat          o f        o p e s ic v tL o n        ta k o A       650
      p o lic e m e n       o v e /i     3       dayA. ..          thesie        ew e      1600       They paid us £39,000 for our policing costs,
      p o lic e m e n        in                    ...        ao        nobody.         haA       a   but that was only for policing costs inside
     w eekend              off.. .               p e o p le        w o /ik        12          b ji.   the ground.   I leave you with the thought
      A h if t A . . . .g ,e U u n g ,             p a id               o v e r tim e    . .. i t     that  is that morally    right.    That this
      c o a   I a   a   g y ie a t     d e a l    o f   m o n e y ,".                                 tremendous burden of policing all those
                                                                                                      problems outside the park should fall on the
                                                                                                      ratepayer,  when somebody   is promoting an
                                                                                                      event to make a very large amount of money,
                                                                                                      albeit for the enjoyment of many people.


    was one of the three that had been involved
    in the attack.     Within three hours we had
    the other two in custody,     and within 24                                                                        RULE CHANGE
    hours  they were all charged with murder.
    One was    convicted of    murder,  one was                                                       The following notice of motion proposes a
    convicted of causing an affray,       and the                                                     minor rule change, and is submitted to the
    other got off.   But  I have to say to you                                                        Annual General Meeting by the Executive
    that this was one of those strokes of luck                                                        Council,  arising from its meeting on 2 9 th
    that policemen pray for.   If we had not had                                                      February, 1988.
    that stroke of luck we would have been faced
    with writing off to all the police forces in                                                      Minute 3.2
    the land to have the drivers and occupants                                                        It was resolved to recommend to the A n n u a l
    of 35,000 cars and 694 coaches interviewed,                                                       General Meeting the following rule change:-
    to see if they could have told us anything
    about this murder.       We would still be                                                        "Rule 4(c):-
    doing it today, 14 months further on.                                                             A member who has not served the Institute s-:
                                                                                                      Chairman, but who has nevertheless s e r v e :
    The cleaning    up operation hindered our                                                         the Institute with distinction,      may '°e
    enquiry, because they had this huge vacuum                                                        nominated as Vice-President,  in lieu of a
    cleaner  type apparatus,  which just sucked                                                       nominee in (b) above."
    everything up.
                                                                                                      The existing Rule 4(c) becomes 4(d).
    Nevertheless off the     people  went;  the
    barriers   were   taken   down;  the stage                                                        R .M .Chapman
    dismantled; the camp-site cleared;  the car                                                       Honorary Secretary.

    22                                                                                                                      Vol:   34   No.   5   IN S P E ^ '
E n t e r t a in m e n t L ic e n s in g in London            a requirement this was to cause problems.
A C a s e To C o n s id e r
                                                              *hen the boxing started we had a licensee, Steunenberg
By H o w a r d D a v i e s , E d ito r                        and his delegated assistant Penterman. Both Dutch with
                                                              no experience of boxing functions and Mr Holland, an
On the demise of the Greater London Council the               experienced boxing promoter.'Unfortunately things ran
responsibility for entertainments licensing in its            away with the management, mainly because of lack of
various forms added further duties to the London              experience.
Boroughs* In Hammersmith and Fulham these extras were
placed on the shoulders of the Environmental Services         During the evening the duty officer of the London Fire
team which consists of members of the ETA. The                Brigade attended the scene and, owing to what he saw,
complexity of these functions will be dealt with in an        the police were called. When the police duty officer
article or a series of articles at a later date. In           arrived he called for seven van loads of police to be
this piece I would like to describe om occasion and its       on hand in case of trouble. Their concern was caused
results.                                                      by finding that the permitted number was being exceeded
                                                              by what appeared to be large numbers. As a result the
On the 2nd of November 1987» an application was made          gangways were obstructed and people were standing in
by the General Manager of the Ramada Inn West, Lillie         front of the fire exits. Along one side of the room a
Road, Fulham, S,W,6 for an Occasional License for a           ledge about four to five feet high and one foot deep
boxing tournament to be organised by a promoter, Mr           runs along the wall. People were standing on the ledge
Harry Hoiland-who would be hiring the banqueting rooms        to get a better view.
for the event.
                                                              The event was being recorded by the B.B.C. for later
All the necessary inspections and enquiries were made         broadcast and when the recording was later viewed it
and the license was issued subject to the usual               was possible to see the obstruction of gangways and
conditions. Amongst other things the conditions               exits and also the people standing on the ledge. It was
included the maximum number of customers allowed, in          also possible to hear the Master of Ceremonies asking
this case 1750, and requirements that all gangways be         the audience to be seated or to "sit on the floor".
kept clear and fire exits be unobstructed.
                                                              As a result of what was seen by the fire officer and
On the day of the event the premises were inspected and       the police Mr Steunenberg, Mr Penterman and Mr Holland
seat numbers checked together with gangway widths etc.        were all three told that they would each be reported
All was satisfactory. The General Manager, Mr Hendrick        for a number of offences with a recommendation that
Sieunenberg had been supplied with copies of the              Court action should follow.
conditions. He had delegated in writing the actual
overseeing of the function to his banqueting manager          Summonses were issued for a list of contraventions of
Mr Willem Penterman. I had seen Mr Penterman and he           licensing conditions and, after a number of delays,
had knowledge of the requirements. I had also seen Mr         they came up for hearing at West London Magistrates
Holland at the scene on the day and told him of the           Court on the 16th and 17th of November 1988* The B.B.C.
details of the conditions. Unfortunately he was not           had been subpoenad to produce their unedited film and
sei-ved with a copy of the conditions. Although it is not     this was shown to the court. Thp two days were taken up
                                                                                                                        17
                                                         16
by the prosecution evidence with vigorous cross                                                                            ‘   4.
                                                              the London Fire Brigade who had observed throughout
examination by defense councel.
                                                              said that, to his knowledge, it was the first case to
                                                              be brought under the legislation.
At the conclusion of the prosecution case the Stipendary
Mr Maitland-Davies found that Holland and Pentermans
evidence had gaps. He did not think that Holland had          Comments
reasonable cause to believe that the conditions would be
                                                              The case has been very informative and also confusing.
breached. In his opinion the responsibility is limited
                                                              Holland, the promoter was the only one who could have
to the people who have direct control of the premises
and he found no evidence that Holland had such control.       known what a fight crowd could be like. The others were
                                                              used to dealing with dances and dinners. Holland was in
Dealing with Penterman he said that he could not draw         charge. Once the people started to enter the other two
the inference that he had reasonable cause to suspect         could not have stopped events without a riot ensuing.
that the conditions were being breached. Although             Penterman was delegated in writing to run the hotel
Penterman said he was in charge from start to finish          side and yet was found not to have cause to believe
the direct evidence put him outside the hall at all           conditions were in breach. Considering the crowds etc
material times. He found that Penterman did not have          it is difficult to believe he should not have been
reasonable grounds to suspect license condition breaches.     aware of what was happening in his hotel.
He also found that Penterman had no effective power to
stop the event.                                               To prevent a similar happening as far as prosecutions
                                                              are concerned it would perhaps be adviseable to serve
The two were discharged. Hollands' application for            all persons having authority with a copy of the
costs against the Council was dismissed on the grounds        conditions applicable. With hindsight, if the three
that he had told the Council he was in charge of the          people in this case had been seen together and each
event and had therefore brought on his own prosecution.       given the copy of conditions whilst they were explained
A similar request by Penterman was refused but they           to them, would the case have turned out any other way?
were both awarded taxed costs against public funds.
                                                              This was the first case. It is not likely to be the
Steunenberg was adjourned to 21st February, 1989. On          last. We need to consider all the points raised to
that date, after much discussion between barristers he        be prepared next time.
pleaded guilty to the three main charges.

1. That the accomodation figure was exceeded.
2. All doors intended for exit were not kept free from
   obstruction.
3. Permitting persons to stdLnd and sit in gangways.

A fine of £200 was imposed for each offence with costs
of £ 1,500 to the Council. :

The fines were the maximum allowed. A senior officer of


                                                         18                                                           19
V




    J
Mr Lindsay


                                       cc: Mr   Hammer, DDG
                                           Mr   Hodgkins, SPD
                                           Mr   Eves, RPD
                                           Mr   McQuaid, RLSD
                                           Mr   Linehan, CIF
                                                            LAU

                                                         1SU
                                                         5PDA
                                                         )
                                           Mr Cavanagh, Entertain-
                                                 ment NIG
                                                       Disciplined
                                                       es NIG
                                                       AU
                                                       APAU
                                                        SPD D3
                                                       SPD C4
                                                        DE



OVERCROWDING - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND TRAGEDY

1.   You wrote on 19 April to              about          who has
had to return to Sheffield City Council to help deal with the
investigation at Hillsborough.   You copied the minute to Miss
        jwho copied it to me and we would simply comment that we
are sure HELA would like central approaches to continue in the
local authority enforced sector and therefore for the secondments
to APAU to continue.   We will wait and see whether       ZZ1 can
return to the APAU or someone else would need to be seconded.

2.   But that is not my real reason for writing.

3.   You ask at the end of your minute whether HSE/APAU should be
involved in the aftermath of this incident.  I note from the
'Times', that the crash barriers are to be sent to RLSD for
testing and I assume that APAU's involvement would be with the
suggested audit of the management of safety at sports grounds.   In
these areas I see very good reasons for HSE getting involved - it
has expertise and experience to contribute.  But what concerns me
a little is whether HSE is in any position to contribute to the
enquiry on the central issue ie. overcrowding and crowd control.
And should it be?

4.   My interest in the issue comes from 4 rather tangential
directions
     - Section 3 and demarcation lines between the HSW Act and
       other legislation
     - policy on the leisure industry
     - violence at work
     - policy for the disciplined services.

Section 3

5.   The Section 3 review SPD D carried out last year was sparked
off by the Bradford fire - another tragedy at a football ground,
but where barriers were not present and spectators were more
readily able to escape from danger.                 P r e P a r in g
follow-up to the Section 3 review for the Commission and will be
covering any demarcation issues which arise from the Hillsborough
tragedy; the lead on Hillsborough is very clearly with the Home
Office, but we ought to be clear what, if any, supplementary
responsibilities we have and ensure that we fulfil them.

6.   Other crowd related issues arose on the Section 3 periphery.
One was prompted by the German air show disaster where, if I
remember correctly, the plane which crashed was flying over the
watching crowd.   We checked to see if HSE was responsible for
enforcing at U K air shows.  It is not - the CNAA are and they do
not allow crowds beneath flight paths.   But we did wonder about
crowd control at, for example, stock car or Grand Prix racing.

7.   Other Section 3 'peripheral' areas arose with the railways,
        drew our attention to the problems of over-crowding on
London Underground and I understand the Clapham Junction enquiry
will look at the contribution over-crowding may have had to
injuries and fatalities.  I understand that         is pressing RI
to undertake some work in this area.

Leisure Industry

8.   Section 3 links very much with HSE's responsibilities for
enforcing in the leisure industry (and the responsibilities of the
local authorities which are to be increased under the proposed
revision to the Enforcing Authorities Regulations). Football is
not of course, the only form of mass audience entertainment -
there are marathons, discos, indoor and outdoor pop concerts and
fairgrounds.

Violence towards employees including the disciplined services

9.   There is also the connection between over-crowding and
violence towards staff; on the underground and railways, incidents
have been recorded where anxious and threatened (or disruptive)
members of crowds have turned on Underground staff trying to
control them.  I assume the same is true for the police and other
disciplined services - at least this has been alleged at
Hillsborough.  There are also connections between crowd control
and the abuse of alcohol; policy on the use of alcohol at work is
MD's responsibility.
HSE Involvement

10.  Returning to my questions in para 3, is HSE in a position to
contribute to the debate on over-crowding and crowd control, and
should it be? I don't know the answer to the first part.
Certainly I don't feel in a position to do so, despite our
(limited) interest.   I do not know of any advice or guidance or
research which addresses the issues, except the Home Office Green
Guide for Sports Grounds.   I wonder if recipients, particularly
RLSD, know of any work which has been done, especially on the
psychological or design aspect of crowd control.   As to the second
part, I fear the answer is yes.   This issue seems to be one of
growing public concern and perhaps justifiably so.   The trade
unions are I understand concerned about the problem in the
railways.  It is perhaps likely to be a politically live issue.
Overcrowding seems to me to be a serious work-related hazard and
possibly a growing one partly because of the growth in "non-
traditional" sectors.

11.  To float a thought, the sort of contribution HSE might
possibly make would be to commission some appropriate academic to
do some work for us.  This would mirror our contribution to the
Violence debate, where HSE itself did not have much expertise, but
commissioned Tavistock to produce general guidance, which we then
adopted.  The work involved for HSE was not high, and the results
have been well received so far.

12.  I have taken the liberty of copying this minute widely to
anyone I can think of who might have an interest;  I hope you will
excuse my exploiting the opportunity of your minute.  I have done
so because, although one or two people have indicated that they
share my unease^I am not at all sure of the general concensus
within HSE.  I would be interested to hear others' views.  I
realise the implications of suggesting someone should explore the
problems of overcrowding.  I would be very happy to be told that
someone has work in hand or is willing to take it up.




LINDA DERRICK
SPD D

28 April 1989
I




    j
#
                                                                243 6650




Mr D Brumell
Treasury Solicitor's Department
Queen A n n e 's Chambers
28 Broadway                                          ADO/GPJ/3/18
SW1H 9JS
                                                         21 April 1989




    Dear

    HTT.T.SBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY

    You telephoned me yesterday to enquire about HSE's role (if any) in
    this matter.

    I explained that although the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974
    was widely enough drawn to be relevant (see ss.3 and 4) the position
    was primarily governed by the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975,
    under which the local authority have specific functions, including
    those relating to enforcement.

    Our view here (given judicial approval in the Bradford fire case) is
    that provided it is agreed where the demarcation should be made as to
    overlapping functions, it is correct in law to regard the authority
    having responsibilities under the specific legislation as being the
    relevant body involved.

    However, HSE has offered its services on the forensic side and I have
    faxed to you today a copy (further copy enclosed) of our Deputy
    Director General's letter of 20 April to Mr R Whalley at the Home
    Office who I understand is acting as Secretary to the Inquiry.  This
    should give you the information you were seeking about whom to
    contact on the progress of any scientific research that HSE may be
    requested to carry out.

    Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.

    Yours sincerely




    A D OSBORNE
    SOLICITOR HSC/E
J
LAs     Safety of Sports Ground Act


Under the Safety of Sport Ground Act in England and Wales, County
authorities and Metropolitan authorities (using their county
powers) and London Boroughs may issue certificates.      The Act
extends to Scotland where the regional or island authorities will
be responsible for the issue of certificates [S17].


The certificate "shall contain such terms and conditions as the
l.a. consider necessary or expedient to achieve reasonable
safety".     (Sector 2)     Sectors 2(2) then deals with essentially
numbers, access, egress, means of escape, crush barriers.


The certificate is not restricted to a sports activity but may
include a number of activities SI ((3)(a).


LAs, district councils, London Boroughs and Metropolitan
Authorities, also have powers under the Local Authority
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act to licence pop concerts.      These
licenses may also typically cover the Safety of Sports Ground Act
S 2 (2) areas.   There is therefore a risk of duplication.




[SGA]


LAs do have additional powers under local acts e.g. the Isle of
Wight Act to control pop concerts and other gatherings.


There is a tension in that under the Safety of Sport Grounds Act,
the certificate is issued by the county/regional/islands authority
but health and safety is enforced by the district authority.
This does not apply in the case of Metropolitan Authorities and
the Greater London Borough Councils where they will be the
licensing authority, the authority for the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act certificate and enforcers of health and safety
legislation.     Under the Section 3 overlap agreement on public
safety, HSE will not enforce public safety.      This will fall to
LAs from 1 April under the Enforcing Authority Regulations 1989.
Taylor's recommendation 6, Annex 1   does not allude to the
extremely complex enforcement regulations which exist^ btrfc~only—
spprfcing activities.— -


Pop concerts present a different order of risk and may require
separate, special, treatment.


If the FLA is to exercise the power proposed by Taylor, sections
of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act may need to be repealed.


There is, however, clearly a need for co-ordination and HELA is
ideally placed to pick this up.


It may be worth advocating a HELA model with the presence of FLA.
FLA will, however, introduce a new complexity into the area and it
may be better with our technical and inspectorate's expertise to
give HSE the work to do, either as principals, or as agents.
