                                   Health &        Research and Laboratory
                                                   Services Division
                                                   Broad Lane
                                   Safety          Sheffield S3 7HQ


                                   Executive       Telephone 0742 768141
                                                   ext
                                                   Telex 54556 (HSE RLS G)
                                                   Facsim ile 0742 755792




   Professor L Maunder                             Y o u r reference
   Dean of Faculty of Applied Science
   Stephenson Building                             Our reference       SMR/343/235/01
   The University
                                                   Date
   NEWCASTl^-UPON-TYNE                                                 10 August 1989
   NE1 7RU


   Dear Professor Maunder

   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY

   Now that the Interim Report has been issued I would like to describe how the
   details of HSE's contribution will be reported and invite you to consider
   requirements for additional work.

   It is my intention to produce a compilation report, similar in style and format
   to the first HSE report, covering the following areas: testing of turnstiles;
   metallurgical assessment of barrier 124A; strength of crush barrier
   calculations; finite element stress analysis of barrier 124A; calculation of
   crowd capacity in Pens 3 and 4; further crowd density estimates in Pens 3 and 4
   (including the 1988 semi-final); noise level measurements.

   A length of wrought iron tube, from barrier 129, will be tested to establish
   the flow stress but, since the calculations explain adequately the collapse of
   barrier 124A, it does not at this stage seem necessary to commit further
   resources to the testing of a complete barrier. I would welcome your views on
   this matter and on any further work which may be required from HSE in the
   second phase of the Inquiry. For example, do you foresee any HSE involvement
   in the revision of the Green Guide?

   In our internal discussions, a number of relevant areas in which information
   appears to be lacking have been identified. These include: the relationship
   between crowd density and surges; stresses induced in crush barriers by crowd
   pressure; the height of crush barriers; methods of testing crush barriers.
   Staff in HSE could, if required, be involved in the discussion of these topics
   and it may be appropriate for research to be commissioned by the Home Office.

   I am now on leave until 29 August. Please contact Mr Waterhouse or Mr Heyes if
   any urgent matters arise before then.

   Yours sincerely




fl/3 DR C E NICHOLSON
I' Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1

   cc Mr R Whalley, Home Office
      Dr A Jones, D/SEL
