ANNEXE 4
Dr C E Nicholson



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - CROWD DENSITIES AND PRESSURES


1   Further to ray note of the 1 May.         I have been able to make some progress with
    ray enquiries and discuss these below.


A   The capacity of the terraces
2   In correspondence obtained from Dr Eastwood it appears from his report to the
    directors of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd and from the application he
    made on their behalf for a safety certificate dated 12/1/79 and 17/1/79, he
    proposed that the numbers of persons using the Leppings Lane terraces should
    be restricted to 7,200.     This is 10% less than the maximum that could be
    allowed in the area using the Green Guide figure of 54 persons to 10 sq m.
    The 10% being deduced because there were no gangways within the terrace area.


3   The rough figures used to calculate the area of the terraces to obtain the
    crowd capacity are also on the file and from these it is possible to plot on
    drawing 1610/64E the area that was considered in making these proposals.           This
    is the drawing I have been given as showing the current position of the
    terrace capacity.   This drawing indicates that the total capacity of the same
    areas of terraces referred to in the January 1979 correspondence is still
    7,200.


4   From drawing 1610/64E the areas of the pens and the numbers of persons who
    could use them at 54 persons per 10 sq m less 10%, are shown in the table
    below together with the capacities given on drawing 1610/64E.


                                                                             Numbers given
                                                                             on drwg 1610/64E

S.W. corner pen               532.6 sq m             x5.4x0.9=     2588             2600

Central pen                    198.8 sq m(190.8)          "      966(927)    )
                                                                             )total 2200
Central pen                    201.6 sq m(192.4)          "      979(935)    )

N.W. end pen                   322     sq m               "     1564                1600

N.W. (lower) corner pen       206.7 sq m                  "     1004                 800

Total                         1461.7                            7101(7018)          7200
5   The difference in the area from that given in the correspondence and that
    worked out from the drawing in the above table is partly accounted for by the
    corridor now in place between the central pens and the NW pen.     From drawing
    1610/64E this has an area of 26.6 sq ra.


6 It should also be noted that the calculated areas of the central pens have
    not been reduced to deduct the areas at the mouth of the tunnel hatched on
    site in yellow.    Presumably this area is so marked to keep it clear of
    spectators.    Therefore the figures in brackets in the table would be the
    areas if this hatched section of terrace was ignored,


7 From the table it can be seen that the capacities of the two central pens has
    been overestimated by nearly 12% on the basis of Dr Eastwood's original
    figures (or 18% if the hatched area is deducted).     However the basis of these
    original figures, particularly the 10% arbitrary reduction, is questionable.


8 Advice given in the Green Guide and also apparently reinforced at a seminar
    given by the Home Office when the Guide was launched in 1972, is that those
    barriers which do not meet the Guide standard should be ignored when
    calculating the area available for viewing.     Although the Green Guide
    only mentions spacing and strength in this respect, Mr Stickley says he
    included references to height in his seminar.


9 On terraces which slope at around 15°, as at the Leppings Lane end terraces,
    and where the barriers have been tested to the 6 KN/m proof load, then an
    area extending 3.8 m max behind the barrier should be used in the
    calculation.


10 Working from the Ralph Brade and Associates drawing 1340/02, the drawing of
    their survey of the central terraces, this shows many barriers are far below
    the Green Guides recommended height of 1.02 - 1.1 m.     If those barriers which
    are lower than 0.92 m high are ignored i.e. allowing barriers up to 100 mm
    low by Green Guide standard, the usable terrace are is 119.51 sq m and
    135.14 sq m which at the full 54 persons/10 sq m would only allow 645 and
    729 persons respectively to use the terraces.


11 Therefore by generously applied criteria, using the Green Guide as a basis,
    the designated numbers were 60% more than those which could be regarded as



                                         2
     acceptable even when considerable latitude had been given.   For instance if
     only those barriers which meet the Green Guide recommendations were used in
     this calculation, the allowable numbers of persons able to use the central
     terraces would drop to 389 and 540.


12   A search through the correspondence may throw more light on how the
     designated numbers were chosen and accepted, and on why other barriers were
     installed at later dates as shown in the revision notes on drawing 1610/64E.


13   It is probable that a member of the Safety Committee attended the Home Office
     Seminar in 1972 referred to in para 16 and should therefore have been quite
     clear how the Green Guide was to be applied even though the Guide itself is a
     little ambiguous.   I hope to obtain the delegate list of those who attended
     the Seminar.


14   It is clear that some barriers have been removed from the central pens over
     the last 10 years when Dr Eastwood made his original proposals.   If left in
     place some of these could have increased the area calculated in paras 9, 10
     and 11, which could be designated for spectators.   Further searches will have
     to be made to find out their detail and the history of their removal.


15 All which I have said above assumes that the barriers are perfectly adequate
     to carry their loads, and ignores the effect of connecting a downward sloping
     tunnel, of the length noted at Hillsborough, directly into the terraces.


16 From conversations we have had so far with Dr Eastwood I query whether the
     test procedures used, could categorically guarantee the reliability of the
     barriers.   That is whether the tests would pick up all the weaknesses in the
     barrier.


17   It appears that the test procedure was only nominally as required by the
     Green Guide i.e. in loading the barriers three times.   I do not believe at
     the moment this would be very significant, as the required procedure seems a
     little excessive.   However as an indication of the state of affairs, it seems
     that Dr Eastwood and his staff thought they were implicitly following the
     Guide.




                                         3
18   The Drocedure as I presently understand it, could have resulted in the end
      frame in bay 1, not being measured for permanent deflection.   (See the notes
      of my telephone conversation with Dr Eastwood, 5/6/89 in reply to
      question 3).


B    The recommendations of the Green Guide in respect of the barriers and
     crowd densities
19    I have had discussions with Brian Stickley of the Home Office Prison Service.
      He is the structural Engineer who worked out the structural provisions in the
      Green Guide and is probably the most informed person about what was intended
      to be in it and what research or other information was available as a basis
      for those provisions.


20    Mr Stickley clearly believed that both the provisions of the Green Guide were
      exceeded and had they been complied with, then the number of injuries could
      have been greatly reduced, if not avoided altogether.   The basis of this
      comment was not just that the designated crowd densities were too high
      because of the position, number and height of the barriers, but also that the
      Guide's recommendations on stewarding were not followed.   Clearly a huge
      influx of fans down the tunnel, whatever the level of occupancy of the
      terraces, was potentially hazardous.


21    However there are certain inconsistancies with his comments.   Mr Stickley has
      agreed that many of the provisions of the Guide are vague, almost ambiguous.
      (This is further discussed in Appendix 'A' giving abstracts from the Guide
      with comments).   He stated that this was deliberate because there are so many
      grounds with widely different characteristics that it would be impossible to
      give definitive clauses without either unnecessarily penalising some and
      being too lenient with others.   However it was expected in the Guide that the
      engineer working for the club would use the background philosophies from the
      Guide and relate these to any particular ground.   Hence when the Guide was
      launched in 1972 a seminar was organised by the Home Office for members of
      the safety committees, in which Mr Stickley explained how the engineering
      provisions of the Guide should be applied, in particular how to work out the
      safe number of persons who should use the terraces.


22    While this may seem reasonable, a problem could have been caused because the
      Green Guide does not clearly describe the difference between its general



                                          4
(
*x




          philoso^ihj and practical provisions (so much so that those   dealing with the
          spacing X height of barriers are not stated as being the absolute minimum).
           It is therefore difficult to see how competent engineers like Dr Eastwood,
          can be criticised too much for not strictly following the Guide or because
          they were too liberal in interpreting its recommendations.


     23   In addition, Mr Stickley is now giving support to the Institution of
          Structural Engineers working party which is writing guidance called the
           'Appraisal of Sports Grounds', expressly to give less ambiguous guidance to
          engineers.   This suggests some degree of recognition of the Green Guide's
          shortcomings.


     24   The references in the Guide to restraining crowd surges suggests that its
          authors considered its recommendations would prevent these.    Although the
          heights of barriers must have a big influence on this, heights are only
          mentioned in para 110.   However the paragraph only proposes its the
          recommended height to enable the body to tolerate the crowd pressure.    There
          are other opportunities to refer to height when discussing crowd safety but
          only position and strength are mentioned e.g. paras 118, 221, 226, 227 and
          the preliminary to Chapter 9.


     25 From the video pictures it is quite clear that there was a considerable
          amount of sway or surge in the crowd.   This seemed to be related to the crowd
          density, layout of the barriers and presumably barrier height.


     26 It is also quite clear that at Hillsborough the barriers failed to break up
          the crowd pressure as recommended in para 21.   However the use of barriers to
          control the exit from an area as recommended in the Guide could allow surges
          in the crowd as the two recommendations may not be compatible.    This
          contradiction also appears in paras 113, and 114, leaving considerable
          discretion to the licensing authorities.


     27   In a similar way the design of a layout to help a crowd to disperse when an
          event finishes may result in increasing crowd pressures where there is a
          sudden ingress of people.   The fanning out philosophy for persons moving in
          one direction can easily form a steadily restricting funnel when they move in
          the opposite way.   In general, ingress will normally be at a trickle so that




                                              5
(

        the funnelling effect is of little consequence, while egress will nearly
       always be in mass when the fanning out effect is highly desirable.


    28 The guide is reasonably firm about the height of the barriers although the
       stress on the idea that it is a "voluntary code" and "should be interpreted"
       at the beginning of the Guide could weaken the importance of having barriers
       at the correct height.    The Wheatley Report, from which the Guide was drawn,
       expresses the height recommendations much more strongly e.g. the height of
       crush barriers should preferably be 3'-6" above the ground".     In all cases
       they should be between 3'-4" and 3'-8'".     Clause 23.5 'Report of the Inquiry
       into Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds' by the Rt Hon Lord Wheatley.


    29 The recommendations concerning height appear to have been determined "In order
       to locate the top rail against that part of the body most able to tolerate
      pressure" (para 110).     There seems some evidence that depending on the density
       of the crowd, a low barrier allows a body to bend over the barrier, passing
       the force it is subjected to, to those in front.     This action could make low
      barriers largely ineffective.


    30 The testing of barriers described in Annex "C" fails to make a recommendation
      about the maximum deflection.    Strict interpretation could result in barriers
      that move 1 mm yet fail to recover 0.5 mm being failed, while those that move
       100 mm and recover 75 mm being passed.     Although the examples given ara
      extreme they do illustrate that without skilled examination and interpretation
      of the results, the tests could encourage the acceptance of weakened barriers,
      while rejecting others that were satisfactory.      Paragraph 6 of the Annex does
      point out that barriers should be examined if any doubt exists about their
      strength, but the lack of more positive advice could easily lead to a wide
      variety in the quality of barriers across the country.


    31 Paragraph 6 of Annex "C" says that detailed investigations should be carried
      out where there was doubt about the safety of the barrier, such as might be
       indicated by the distortion of connections.     Quite a few of the barriers now
       show distortion and I question when this occurred.


    32 When referring to the packing density on terraces in para 221, little or no
      guidance is given on the criteria which should be used to govern the variation
      between 27 and 54 persons per 10 sq metres.



                                            6
(
     33 In the 1946 Hughes Report on the disaster at Bolten Wanderers Football ground
          a maximum packing density of 6.5 persons per metre was recommended.      This was
          reduced to 5.4 in the Wheatley Report.   Dr Eastwood has suggested that average
         densities of around 8.5 were achieved immediately post war,,which is similar
         to that which must have occurred on the terraces at Hillsborough.


    34    Examination of the videos appear to show an increasing variation in density
         from the back to the front, while those at the centre of the terrace do not
         appear to be unduly worried by their situation.   Initial estimates from the
         video suggest the density varied from about 6 to 10 or 11 persons per sq
         metre, so that those in the centre were at around 8 persons per sq metre.


    35 This raises the question of what are suitable densities?       If 6.4 was
         acceptable in 1946 and 5.4 in 1972, should the Green Guide's criteria be
         revised again?   It might be that people today are generally larger and more
         restless, requiring more space, apart from any trend towards the public
         expecting more comfortable conditions.


    Further work
    36 The maximum crowd densities for various situations should be more adequately
         researched.   Some work might be possible from the photographs and videos of
         Hillsborough, counting the number of persons in the situations where they are
         obviously a) contented, b) overcrowded and c) in distress.    This work could be
         reinforced by packing people into given areas and counting the number of
         teenagers, women and mature men that will accept various densities.


    37 Work should be undertaken to check out suitable heights and construction of
         barriers, in particular measuring the most effective height that will stop or
         suitably reduce a crowd surge.


    38 Finally, research should be undertaken into modelling the pressures and
         densities in the crowd at Hillsborough so that alternative layouts can be
         tried out and the most suitable layout of barriers and exits can be
         discovered.   I originally considered that a hydraulic model might be suitable




                                             7
{
\


       but having seen the videos, which appear to show a variation in density across
       the terrace, I am now not so sure.   I will try to obtain further advice on
       this.




    M JAMES


    6 June 1989




                                            8
APPENDIX A

REVIEW OF THE CLAUSES RELEVANT TO CONTROLLING THE DENSITY OF SPECTATORS ON
TERRACES FROM THE "GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS" (THE GREEN GUIDE)

I   This booklet provides guidance to ground        The guide continually
    management, local authorities and technical     stresses its voluntary nature
    specialists such as engineers on measures for   and that a considerable amount
    improving spectator safety at existing sports   of interpretation is
    grounds. It is a voluntary code and has no      permissible or even
    legal force.                                    desirable.

4   The problem of crowd safety at sports grounds
    is complex and cannot be solved simply by       Once again great stress is
    ensuring that each component of a ground,       laid on the need for
    such as stairways, passages or sections of      intelligent assessment of the
    terracing, is satisfactory in itself. The       guide's provisions.
    inter-relation of these and other components
    is essential: none of them can be considered
    in isolation without consideration of its
    effects on the others, and they should all be
    compatible and combine to form a balanced
    unit.

6   Deviations from individual guidelines are
    possible without necessarily detracting from    As above.
    the overall safety of the ground. The
    variety of type, function and layout of
    sports grounds and the inter-relationship of
    the different parts of them means that a
    flexible approach should be maintained to
    take account of the particular circumstances
    at individual grounds, for these reasons the
    Guide does not attempt to set a minimum
    standard which would be acceptable for a
    well-attended stadium but excessive for a
    smaller, sparsely-attended ground; or which
    would be an appropriate standard for the
    latter but insufficient for the former.

8   It should be borne in mind that, when using
    the Guide to assess whether existing
    circumstances provide adequately for the
    safety of spectators, the criterion to be
    aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of
    safety. It would be unreasonable, even if it    Such terms are meaningless,
    were practical, to seek the absolute safety     how many injuries are
    of everyone attending a ground.                 acceptable?

II ....... the guide is an aid to, not a
   substitute form, professional judgement and
   common sense.

13 It follows thfljfin general in a ground where
   it is propsed to retain a high spectator
   capacity, the measures needed to be taken to
   accommodate safely such large crowds are
   potentially more extensive.
16        The second type is far more important and
          involves crowd pressures. When large crowds
          are present and densities are high, pressures
          build up within the crowd either through
          motion or swaying which make it difficult, or
          even impossible for individuals to control
          their wen movements. Under these conditions
          crowd pressures can escalate to a dangerous
          level and if a person stumbles or falls the
          crowd cannot adapt to avoid him or to stop to
          help. Since this type of danger arises from
          crowd pressures its remedy lies in their
          removal or restraint within safe limits.
          These dangers arise in particular on terraces   To some extent there is a
          and exit routes, and so careful attention       conflict of interests in
          must be paid to restraining surges and          "restraining surges" but
          similar pressures on the terraces and to        "ensuring free movement"
          ensuring free movement throughout the exit      through the exit systems.
          systems. Such free movement is dependent        Comments about the height of
          upon the capacity of all the various sections   barriers would have
          of the exit systems and interactions between    been particularly useful
          them.                                           here.

     21         Barriers not only serve to break up       Gaps in barriers which will
          crowd pressures but also assist in              allow filtered approach to the
          controlling movement off the terraces by        exits can allow crowd surges
          regulating the rate of arrival at exits to      to develop.
          suit their capacity, and encouraging the
          formation of queues so that spectators arrive
          at exits in an orderly fashion.

     Prelim, to Ch. 8 - Terraces and Viewing Slopes

          Arrangements should be made to encourage the    It seems quite clear that the
          even distribution of the crowd on the           layout at the Leppings Lane
          terraces to provide ease of access and          terraces discouraged an even
          egress: to control and facilitate movement,     distribution of people,
          particularly if a local emergency should        encourage is a rather weak
          arise during the event; and to contain          requirement, this provision is
          pressures before they reach dangerous           essential.  If the provisions
          proportions. The provisions set out here        will only assist then
          will assist in achieving these conditions       additional engineering input
          (i.e. paras 89-109).                            is required IN ADDITION TO THE
                                                          GUIDES RECOMMENDATIONS.
          The aim should be to ensure that every
          spectator on the terraces is within 12 metres
          of a gangway or exit, so that spectators can
          move quickly on to exit routes at the end of
          an event or in the event of emergency. ...

     99   Where sinking gangways, lateral or radial, is   "advised" by signs is rather a
          not thought to be practical, their boundaries   weak piece of advice.
          should be highlighted with paint and
          spectators advised by signs not to stand
          there.
    Each of the major sections should be            To minimise sway etc., the
    subdivided by such means as gangways and        barriers must be of a suitable
    crush barriers, arranged so as to minimise      height.
    the sway and surge of spectators.

Prelim, to Ch. 9 - Crush barriers and handrails

    Many of the hazards arising from crowd
    pressure on terraces can be eliminated by
    provision of well constructed, correctly
    positioned and properly mounted crush
    barriers (paras 110-119).

110 In order to locate the top rail against that    If this is so then there is no
    part of the body most able to tolerate          excuse for allowing barriers
    pressure, the height of crush barriers should   of other heights.
    be between 1.02 metres and 1.12 metres above
    the nosing of the step immediately behind the
    barrier, with a preferred height of
    1.1 metres.

111 .... Although a barrier with a top rail of
    50 mm internal diameter tube has been           Again if this is so then a
    favoured at many sports grounds, research has   programme of modification
    shown that there would be advantage in the      should be advocated.
    use of a flat rail of 100 mm vertical depth.

113 Ideally,.crush barriers should be provided      If full length barriers are
    along the full width of a terrace, with gaps    ideally the best they should
    only at the radial gangways.                    be forcefully recommended.

114 Where barriers are not continuous between
    radial gangways, the alignment of gaps in
    successive rows of barriers on a terrace,
    should form an angle of less than 60° to the
    barriers. There should be no more than 2
    consecutive gaps in any line of gaps.

115 Where there are gaps in the line of crush
    barriers these should be at least 1.1 metres
    and not more than 1.4 metres in width.

117 .... The peak viewing areas are particularly
    associated with football grounds and are
    typically behind the goal areas.....

118 Existing crush barriers and handrails should
    be capable of resisting the forces indicated
    in the existing test load columns of Table 2
    overleaf when applied in a test as described
    in Annex C ......
4

    c
        :C6   Crcvd movement on terraces should be strictly
              controlled in order to give the police the
              fullest opportunity for crowd control. Less
              problems occur when terraces are subdivided
              as far as possible into sections by use of
              both radial and lateral barriers or railings
              which should comply with the strength
              requirements set out in Ch. 9 ......

    209       Access to the pitch must be made as difficult
              as possible in normal circumstances ....

    215             Gates or other access points (minimum
              width 1.1 metres) should nonetheless be
              provided for use in an emergency ....

    217                Thissection   suggests a method of
              calculating the number of people that can be
              safely accommodated when taking into account
              interactions between these individual
              features and where there are deviations from
              the guidelines. The following paragraphs
              contain as of necessity generalised guideline
              in view of the wide variety of types, sizes,
              configurations of sports grounds, their use
              and condition.

    221       Where crush barriers meet the strength and
              spacing guidelines of Ch. 9 the capacity of a
              terrace or viewing slope should be assessed
              from the area available for standing by
              allowing a packing density of between 54 and
              27 persons per 10 sq metres depending upon
              the condition of the terrace or slope.....

    222(b) 27 persons per 10 sq metres when it
           materially deviates from the recommended
           guidelines, so as to constitute a possible
           hazard to individuals closely packed.

    223                Whenthepositioning and length of
              gangways do not meet with the recommendations
              of Ch. 8, paras 96-100, an appropriate
              reduction should be made to the area
              available for standing.

    224       Even distribution of spectators on the
              terrace may be difficult to overcome
              notwithstnaidiig the measures in this guide,
              because spectators may prefer to gather in
              certain parts or parts of a terrace. Ground
              management should therefore take such factors
              into account when assessing safe capacity
              levels.
V




r
    226   When the strength of crush barriers conforms    No reference to the height
          with the guidelines but the spacing of such     of the barriers.
          barriers does not, the capacity is calculated
          from the provision of crush barriers in the
          area available for standing (as defined in
          para 221) as follows:

          (a)   Where a terrace contains either "peak
                viewing areas" only or "other viewing
                areas", by multiplying the total length
                of the crush barriers by an appropriate
                distance between barriers (as given in
                Ch. 9, paras 116-117) or the existing
                distance, whichever is the   less, and
                multiplying by the appropriate
                packing density.

      227 Crush barriers which do not meet the
          guidelines on the strength set out in Ch. 9
          should in...gane-r-al , be discounted for
          calculation purposes, although where crush
          barriers are well constructed, consideration
          may be given to allowing a lower packing
          density figure for the purpose of the
          calculation.
