Mr Hodgkins                                      cc




HILLSBOROUGH : REPORTING OF ACCIDENTS UNDER RIDDOR


1.   I thought I should let you know about a potential
embarrassment that might arise over the reporting of the
accidents at Hillsborough under RIDDOR.

2.                  took a call from              the Area
Director at Sheffield about whether Sheffield Council had reported
the fatal and reportable accidents that occurred at the
Hillsborough Football disaster to the LAU. They had not.

3.   The position as I see it and        has confirmed with the
Solicitor and the Home Office is as follows. The Safety of Sports
Ground Act does not contain any accident reporting requirements.
The demarcation with the Home Office in relation to Sports Grounds
where the Safety of Sports Ground Act applies, is that HSE will
not enforce the HSWA provisions in relation to public safety as
there is more specific legislation viz. the Safety of Sports
Ground Act. This does not mean the HSWA does not apply but merely
that there is an administrative agreement that HSE will not
enforce. As regards employee safety FOD were the enforcing
authority at the time of the disaster. The accidents were
reportable within the terms of RIDDOR and should havebeen
reported to FOD. They were not reported.

4.   This has now come to light as a result of Stats Branch
trying to get the figures into the Annual report and neither of
the databases contain the information.

5.   We are apparently not a position to go back to the Sheffield
Wednesday management, as employers, to obtain the accident reports
because FOD notified the Coroner that they were not the enforcing
authority and had no interest in the Inquest. As they were the
enforcing authority, under the Coroners Act they should have been
represented at the Inquest. They were not and the Inquest is
therefore ultra vires [shades of the Castle Donnington fatal
accidents inquest in 1988], FOD say they were acting on the
instructions of the Solicitor [Mr Osborne and the Chief
Inspector]. It is unlikely that Mr Osborne considered the
implications of RIDDOR.

6.   We reported the accidents to members of the public
killed at—Kings—err03S~-and--wlsG at Bradford .4We may have some
problems in explaining why the Hillsboroughhdead were not counted
in the HSE 1989/90 Annual Report.              J



                                ^     1   C l^   0/   d /CyvA     J


sGPdD DeyriCk                                         JU^   19^
