                Football Spectators Bill [h .l .]
                          [AS A M EN D ED ON REPORT]


                                                                                  , ^ ‘U.


                                                                                                           2 IA P i< !9 89:-

                                                                                                           - 'i , n V " E


                                    \ -v       ' f w '' - v - a - r ' ?:0 a£i 1®'# ' S v i s g , E S , . \
                            , - ^     M V. p          a c ^ rfs ^ /v tp s ^ jjQ n ^ a o ifs H S ''            "




                                      Preliminary
Clause      \ \ .r,                  :;V‘                   -
   1.     Scope and interpretation o f this Part.

                      n    National Membership Scheme
   2.       Offences relating to unauthorised attendance at designated
                 football matches.         ^            ^      .  *
   3.       The Football Membership Authority.
   4.       N ational membership scheme: making, approval, modification
          ■■•■■■ etc.
   5.        N ational membership scheme: contents and penalties.
   6.        Phased application o f scheme.
   7.                                    ' -


                            Licences to admit spectators
   8.
   9.     Licences to adm it spectators: general.
  10.
  11.     The licensing authority.

                                           Part      II


                                      Preliminary                                      -i:v N
  12.      Scope and interpretation o f this Part.
                                                                                       .    .   5. ,   '



                                    Restriction orders
  13.      Restriction orders.
  14.      Effect o f order.
  15.
  16.      Inform ation.

                            Reporting agencies’functions
   17.     Functions o f agencies.
   18.     Exemptions from requirement to report as respects a match.
   19.     Functions of agencies: supplementary provisions.
         H L Bill 39                                             502
ii                                                        Football Spectators


                               Relevant offences outside England and Wales
Clause
     20.   Restriction orders arising out o f offences outside England and
            W ales.

                                                                      P a r t III
                                                                      G eneral

     21.   Further provision about, and appeals against, declarations of
             relevance.
     22.   Offences by bodies corporate.
     23.   Service o f documents.
     24.   Citation, commencement, consequential repeal and extent.

           Schedule:                                                             u » « ■ , --b-                           ....
                   Relevant Offences. .,
                                                             .i"!fir" : >                                                                                            ;.


      ■ •; •         ■                                                                                                                                    --      >
                         lij                                                         : E ?! i,'                 ‘                      ■' c J O i i S M S         - il

                                                                        . ::"i                   ■                                                                - -


                                                                                                                             ‘                                       i
m              l     .         Lv--’                 sill:.!::'
                                                                                                                                                   ‘ ■-       1    ■ '
                                                                                                                                                   vi

                         ■-■a;-            i                  i                  ;                     r                     f                 i                     C
                                                                                                                                                   -K"F't           .0



                                                                                     ■■ - V■■■■.■■■■■■■•. -                                                   -      ;


                                                                                                                                      ' „<>■ . ; . 1                 1:
               .■V                                   ">'GEOCV'G ;                     -      r        f         r     >      O    J                                  d ■
                                                                                                                     j s t f j -i'-                   -d l ”             ; !



                                                                          J5 /d
                                   Ok-:'       r p    -     O v v L                       •>.:       vo;-'          1 / d d      ^ v , s , : w 0 1
                                                      •>i                        ■




                                                                                                                                                                  - XL

                                                                                                                             oo:aoi’fioaojA.                               h




                                                                                                           ■_                     ; . : .r.,              ■
                         Football Spectators                        1




                                       A




                    [AS AMENDED ON REPORT]
                           '• ' INTITULED .. ■■

An Act to control the admission of spectators at designated              a . d . 1989.
  football matches in England and Wales by means of a national
  membership scheme and licences to admit spectators; and to
  provide for the making by courts and the enforcement by
                                                   on persons
  convicted of certain offences for the purpose of preventing
                                                                         W ^S-
                                                                          ' s-    •



      E IT EN A C TED by the Queen’s m ost Excellent Majesty, by and

     'a n d Commons, in this present Parliam ent assembled, and by the
authority o f the same, as follows:—
           ■   d        7:v/d; d 'lV;'V ■

                                    P art   I


                                Preiirninary
         ____________                                                    Scope and
matches played in England and Wales which are designated football int^rrta^on


  (2) “ Designated football m atch” means any such match o f a

order made by the Secretary o f State or a particular such match so
designated.


football matches wherever played or when played at descriptions of
ground or in any area specified in the order.

 (4)    The “ national football membership scheme” (or “ the scheme” )
means the scheme made and for the time being in force under section 4


     H L Bill 39                                              502
                    2                              Football Spectators


     Pa r t I          (5)   A person is, in relation to any designated football match, an
                    ‘‘authorised spectator” if he is a member o f the national football
                    membership scheme or is otherwise authorised by the scheme to attend
                    the m atch and a person is not to be treated as a “ spectator” in relation to
                    such a m atch if the principal purpose o f his being on the premises is to
                                 -    -               •‘ ‘       v*      '       ; on it.

                         (6); A “ licence to adm it spectators” is a licence granted in respect o f any




                      (7)     Each o f the following periods is “ relevant to ” a designated football
                    m atch, th a t is to say—
                             (a) the period beginning—
                                      (i) two hours before the start o f the match, or
                                       (ii) two hours before the time at which it is advertised to
                                    start, or

                                   the premises,
                                 whichever is the earliest, and ending one hour after the end of
                                 the m atch;
                             (b) where a m atch advertised to start at a particular time on a
                                 particular day is postponed to a later day, or does not take
                                 place, the period in the advertised day beginning two hours


                       (8) A person is a “ responsible person” in relation to any designated
                    fo o tb all;m atch a t any premises if he is a person concerned in the
                    management o f the premises or in the organisation o f the match.

                       (9) The power to make an order under subsection (2) above is
                    exercisable by statutory instrum ent which shall be subject to annulment
                    in pursuance o f a resolution o f either House o f Parliament.
                      (10) The im position under this P art o f this Act o f restrictions on the
                    persons who may attend as spectators at any designated football match
                    does not affect any other right o f any person to exclude persons from
                    admission to the premises at which the m atch is played.


                                               National Membership Scheme

Offences relating         2.—(1) If a person who is not, in relation to the match, an authorised
to unauthorised         spectator enters or remains on premises as a spectator during a period
attendance at           relevant to a designated football m atch that person commits an offence
designated              and so does a person who attem pts to commit an offence under this
football matches.
                        subsection o f entering premises.
                            (2) A person guilty o f an offence under subsection (1) above shall be
                        liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
                        one m onth o r a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale or to both.
                          (3) A constable who reasonably suspects that a person has committed
                        an offence under subsection (1) above may arrest him w ithout a w arrant.
                        ,
                                Football Spectators                              3


       3.—(1) There shall be a body responsible for the adm inistration o f the     P art I
     national football membership scheme which shall be designated for the      The Football
     purpose by the Secretary of State under the name (and herein referred to   Membership
                                                                                Authority.
     as) “the Football Membership A uthority” .
5      (2) The Secretary o f State may designate as the Football Membership
     Authority any body corporate formed for the purpose by the Football
     Association and the Football League or any body corporate formed by
     any other persons or, for the purpose, on his behalf.
       (3) The Secretary o f State may withdraw the designation o f a body
10   under this section, whether at the instance o f the body or at his own
     instance.
        (4) The functions o f a body as the Football Membership Authority
     shall be assumed or, on withdrawal o f its designation, divested on the date
     specified by the Secretary o f State when making or withdrawing the
15   designation but subject to subsection (5) below and w ithout prejudice to
     its duty under subsection (6) below.
       (5) N o date other than 1st June in any year shall be specified under
     subsection (4) above as the date on which functions are to be assumed or
     withdrawn, but this does not apply—
20        (a) to the initial designation o f a body as the Football Membership
                Authority, or
          (b) where the Secretary o f State withdraws the designation o f a body
              on the ground that the body has failed to discharge its duties as
              the Football Membership A uthority or is being wound up or
25            that a receiver or manager of its property has been appointed.
        (6) It shall be the duty of the Football M embership A uthority to make
     to the Secretary o f State a report on the discharge o f its functions during
     each period of twelve months beginning with 1st June in any year and the
     Secretary o f State shall lay a copy o f the report before each House of
30   Parliament.
       (7) Where a body assumes or is divested o f its functions as the Football
     M embership A uthority on a date other than 1st June subsection (6) above
     shall have effect as if it required a report to be made for such period as the
     Secretary of State directs.
35     (8) On the withdrawal o f the designation o f a body as the Football
     M embership A uthority, the scheme shall cease to have effect but the
     Secretary of State may, by order, provide for the transfer o f the body’s
     property, rights and liabilities under the scheme to its successor as the
     Football M embership A uthority on such terms and conditions as may be
40   determined by the Secretary of State.
        (9)    The power to make an order under subsection (8) above is
      exercisable by statutory instrum ent.” )

        4.—(1) The Football M embership Authority shall, as soon as                   National
      reasonably practicable after its designation takes effect, prepare a draft      membership
                                                                                      scheme:
45    scheme which fulfils the requirements o f section 5 below.                      making,
                                                                                      approval,
         (2)    The Football Membership A uthority shall, before exercising any       of
                                                                                      modification etc.
      its functions under this section, consult the Football Association and the
      Football League.
                 4                           Football Spectators


       P art I     (3) W hen the draft scheme is complete the Football Membership
                 A uthority shall submit it to the Secretary o f State for his approval and
                 the Secretary o f State may, if satisfied that the draft scheme fulfils those
                 requirements, approve it either as submitted or with any modifications
                 that may be agreed.                                                              5
                   (4) Where the Secretary o f State gives it his approval, the scheme shall
                 enter into force on such date as may be agreed between the Secretary o f
                 State and the Football M embership A uthority and the Secretary o f State
                 shall lay a copy o f it before each House o f Parliament.
                   (5) A t any time during the currency o f the scheme the Secretary o f         10
                 State and the Football M embership A uthority may agree—
                       (a) to modify the scheme, or
                      (b) to replace the scheme with another scheme,
                 in accordance with the requirements o f section 5 below.
                    (6) Where the Secretary o f State and the Football Membership                15
                 A uthority agree to modify the scheme the modifications agreed on shall
                 enter into force on such date as may be agreed and the scheme shall have
                 effect accordingly.
                   (7) Where the Secretary o f State and the Football Membership
                 A uthority agree to replace the scheme the new scheme shall enter into          20
                 force and the existing scheme shall cease to be in force on such date as may
                 be agreed.
                   (8) On the entry into force o f any modifications o f the scheme or on
                 the entry into force o f a new scheme made under subsection (5) above the
                 Secretary o f State shall lay before each House o f Parliam ent a copy of the   25
                 modifications or o f the new scheme.

National            5.—(1) The requirements for a national football membership scheme
membership       referred to in section 4(1) and (5) above are those specified in subsection
scheme:          (2) below.
contents and
penalties.           (2) The scheme m ust include provision—                                     30
                        (a) securing that the only spectators perm itted to attend at
                             designated football matches are authorised spectators;
                       (b) providing for tem porary membership o f the scheme, including (in
                            particular) the tem porary membership o f football club guests;
                      (c) providing for the admission as spectators at designated football       35
                           matches, without their being members o f the scheme, of
                                (i) disabled persons, and
                                (ii) accompanied children,
                 in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as are specified in
                 the scheme;                                                                     40
                      (d) securing that persons who are disqualified under section 7 below
                           are excluded from membership while so disqualified;
                       (e) providing for the exclusion from membership, for a period
                            determined under the scheme, o f persons who are, by reference
                            to circumstances specified in the scheme, determined under the       45
                            scheme to be unfit for membership;
                       (f) imposing pecuniary penalties on any persons having functions
                            under the scheme for failure to discharge those functions;
                                Football Spectators                            5


         (g) imposing requirements as respects the procedure to be followed            P art I
             in dealing with applications for membership o f the scheme;
       . (h) imposing requirements on responsible persons as respects the
              procedure to be followed and equipment to be used in relation
5             to any designated football match to secure that the only
              spectators adm itted to and permitted to remain on the premises
              are authorised spectators;
         (i) establishing and maintaining a central register of members o f the
              scheme;
10       (j) regulating the form and contents of membership cards; and
         (k) establishing a tribunal to hear and determine appeals from
              decisions made under the scheme refusing or withdrawing
              membership o f it, and in this subsection “ accompanied
              children” means persons under the age o f 10 years in the charge
15           o f an authorised spectator.

       (3) The scheme may make provision—
         (a) for the discharge o f functions under the scheme by persons
              specified in the scheme on such terms as may be agreed with the
              Football Membership A uthority and approved by the Secretary
20           o f State;
         (b) imposing charges specified in the scheme (including different
              charges for different cases) in connection with the issue of
              membership cards to persons becoming members o f the scheme;
              and
25       (c) providing for the admission as spectators at designated football
              matches, without their being members o f the scheme, of
              descriptions o f person specified in the scheme in such
              circumstances and subject to such conditions as are so specified.

        (4) The scheme may make            different provision for different
30   circumstances.”)

       (5) Inform ation obtained from persons under the national football
     membership scheme shall be treated as not obtained under an enactment
     for the purposes o f paragraph 1(2) o f P art II o f Schedule 1 to the D ata   1984 c. 35.
     Protection Act 1984 (which treats inform ation obtained under
35   enactments as fairly obtained).

       (6) Any person commits an offence who, for the purpose o f being
     admitted to membership o f the national football membership scheme—
          (a) makes a statement which he knows to be false or misleading in a
               material particular or recklessly makes a statement which is
40            false or misleading in a material particular, or
          (b) produces, furnishes, signs or otherwise makes use o f a document
              which he knows to be false or misleading in a material particular
               or recklessly produces, furnishes, signs or otherwise makes use
               o f a document which is false or misleading in a material
45            particular.

        (7) A person guilty o f an offence under subsection (6) above shall be
     liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the
     standard scale.
                   6                            Football Spectators


       P art I        6.— (1) The Secretary of State, in exercising his function o f designating
Phased             football matches under section 1(2) o f this Act as matches in relation to
application o f    which the national football membership scheme applies, shall have regard
scheme.            to whether it is desirable to achieve a phased application o f the scheme.
                       (2) F or this purpose—
                          (a) the Football M embership A uthority shall consider the possibility
                                o f a phased application o f the scheme and may make
                                recommendations to the Secretary of State; and
                         (b) the Secretary o f State shall have regard to any recommendations
                               so made.

Disqualification     7.— (1) Any person who is subject to an exclusion order under section
for membership     30 o f the Public Order Act 1986 (exclusion from prescribed football
o f scheme.        matches) whenever made is disqualified from becoming or continuing to
1986 c. 64.        be a member o f the national football membership scheme and while he is
                   so subject he shall not be adm itted as a member o f the scheme or, if he is
                   a member, his membership shall be withdrawn.
                      (2) Any person convicted o f a relevant offence is disqualified from
                   becoming or continuing to be a member o f the national football
                   membership scheme, and the following provisions o f this section have
                   effect in relation to such a person.
                     (3) The period during which a person’s disqualification under
                   subsection (2) above continues shall be—
                         (a) in a case where he was sentenced to a period o f imprisonment
                              taking immediate effect or o f detention in a young offenders
                              institution, five years, and
                       (b) in any other case, two years,
                   beginning with such date as may be determined under the scheme.
                     (4) During the period for which a person is disqualified he shall not be
                   adm itted as a member o f the scheme or, if he is a member, his membership
                   shall be withdrawn.
                     (5) The offences relevant for the purposes o f subsection (2) above are
                   those specified in the Schedule to this Act as relevant offences (with or, as
                   the case may be, w ithout a declaration o f relevance).
                      (6) In the application o f the Schedule to this Act for the purposes of
                   this P art o f this Act the references in th at Schedule to designated football
                   matches include in paragraphs (f), (g), (h) and (i) references to football
                   matches designated for the purposes o f P art II o f this Act.
                       (7) Where a court convicts a person o f a relevant offence, then—
                          (a) the court shall, except in the case o f an offence under section 2(1)
                               or 5(6) o f this Act, certify that the offence is a relevant offence,
                               and
                          (b) the clerk o f the court (in the case of a magistrates’ court) or the
                               appropriate officer (in the case o f the Crown Court)—
                                    (i)     shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) give to the
                                  adm inistrator o f the scheme and to the chief officer o f police
                                  for the police area in which the offence was committed notice
                                  of the conviction and sentence and o f the giving o f any
                                  certificate that the offence is a relevant offence, and
                                 Football Spectators                             7


                    (ii)   shall send a copy o f the notices to the person who was P art I
                  convicted o f the offence.
         (8) A person in relation to whom a probation order was made under
      P art III o f the Powers o f Criminal Courts Act 1973 shall, notwithstanding    1973 c. 62.
5    anything in section 13 o f that Act (convictions to be disregarded for
      purposes o f disqualification), be treated as having been convicted o f the
      offence for the purposes o f this section.
        (9) In this section and the Schedule to this Act—
          (a) “ declaration of relevance” , in relation to an offence, means a
10             declaration that the offence related to football matches;
          (b) “im prisonment” includes any form o f detention (or, in the case
               o f a person under twenty-one years of age sentenced to custody
               for life, custody); and
          (c) the reference to a clerk o f a m agistrates’ court is to be construed
15             in accordance with section 141 o f the M agistrates’ Courts Act        1980 c. 43.
                1980, reading references to that Act as references to this section.

                             Licences to admit spectators
       8.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, if persons are adm itted as            Offence of
     spectators to, or permitted to remain as spectators on, any premises             admitting
                                                                                      spectators to
20   during a period relevant to a designated football m atch without a licence
                                                                                      unlicensed
     to adm it spectators being in force, any responsible person commits an           premises.
     offence.
        (2) Where a person is charged with an offence under this section it shall
      be a defence to prove—
25         (a) th at the spectators were adm itted w ithout his consent; and
           (b) th at he took all reasonable precautions and exercised all due
               diligence to avoid the commission of such an offence.
        (3) A person guilty o f an offence under this section shall be liable—
           (a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding the statutory
30              maximum; or
           (b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine or to imprisonment for a
                term not exceeding two years, or to both.

        9.— (1) The licensing authority may, on an application duly made by a Licences to
      responsible person, grant a licence to adm it spectators to any premises for admit spectators:
35    the purpose o f watching any designated football m atch played at those general.
      premises.
        (2)    An application for a licence in respect o f any premises shall be
      made in such manner, in such form and accompanied by such fee as may
      be determined by the Secretary o f State.
40      (3) A licence to adm it spectators to any premises may authorise the
      admission o f spectators to watch all designated football matches or
      specified descriptions o f designated football matches or a particular such
      match.
        (4) A licence to adm it spectators shall be in writing and shall be
45    granted on such terms and conditions as the licensing authority considers
      appropriate.
           8                           Football Spectators


Pa r t I     (5) It shall be a condition o f every licence that any authorised person
           shall be entitled, on production, if so required, o f his authority—
                (a) to enter at any reasonable time any premises on which a
                     designated football m atch is being or is to be played;
                (b) to make such inspection o f the premises and such inquiries             5
                     relating to them as he considers necessary for the purposes of
                     this Part o f this Act; or
                (c) to examine any records relating to the operation of the national
                     football membership scheme on the premises, and take copies of
                     such records.                                                         10

             (6) A licence to adm it spectators shall, unless revoked or suspended
           under section 10 below or surrendered, remain in force for a specified
           period.
              (7) Subject to subsection (8) below, the licensing authority may at any
           time, by notice to the licence holder, vary the terms and conditions o f the    15
           licence.
              (8) The licensing authority shall not vary the terms or conditions of a
           licence w ithout—
                (a) notifying the licence holder o f the proposed alterations or
                     additions;                                                            20
                (b) giving him an opportunity to make representations about them
                     within the period o f twenty-one days beginning with the service
                     o f the notice; and
                (c) taking any representations so made into account in making his
                     decision.                                                             25

              (9) In taking any decision under this section the licensing authority
           shall have regard, among the other relevant circumstances, to the
           following matters or to such o f them as are applicable to the decision, that
           is to say—
                (a) whether the premises and the equipment provided and                    30
                    procedures used at the premises are such as to secure that only
                    authorised spectators are admitted to designated football
                    matches;
                (b) whether and to w hat extent the requirements imposed for that
                    purpose by the national football membership scheme on                  35
                    responsible persons have been complied with;
                (c) whether the equipment provided, procedures used and other
                     arrangements in force at the premises are such as are reasonably
                     required to prevent the commission or minimise the effects of
                     offences at designated football matches; and                          40
                (d) such other considerations as the Secretary o f State determines
                     from time to time and, where he is not the licensing authority,
                     notifies to the licensing authority.
              (10) Subject to subsection (11) below, if any term or condition o f a
           licence is contravened any responsible person commits an offence.               45

             (11) Where a person is charged with an offence under subsection (10)
           above it shall be a defence to prove—
               (a) th at the contravention took place w ithout his consent; and
0

                                     Football Spectators                               9


             (b) that he took all reasonable precautions and exercised all due                 P a rt I
                 diligence to avoid the commission of such an offence.

            (12) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (10) above shall be
         liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the
    5    standard scale.

           (13) In this section—
              “ authorised person” means any person authorised by the Secretary
                   of State, the licensing authority or the Football Membership
                   Authority;
    10       “specified” means specified in the licence; and
              “ vary” , in relation to a licence, includes the addition o f further terms
                   or conditions;
         and the fees charged on the issue o f a licence may be fixed so as to
         reimburse the Secretary of State and the licensing authority their expenses
    15   of administering and enforcing this P art of this Act.


            10.—(1) The licensing authority may, subject to subsections (2), (3) and        Licences to
         (4) below, at any time, by notice in writing to the holder of a licence to         admit spectators:
         admit spectators, revoke the licence or suspend the licence indefinitely or        revocation and
                                                                                            suspension.
         for such period as the authority considers appropriate.

    20     (2) The licensing authority shall not suspend or revoke a licence under
         this section unless satisfied that it is necessary to do so having regard to
         the m atters which are relevant for the purposes of this section.

           (3)     The matters which are relevant for the purposes of this section
         are—
    25       (a) the matters specified in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of section 9(9)
                   above; and
              (b) such other considerations as the Secretary of State determines
                  from time to time and, where he is not the licensing authority,
                  notifies to the licensing authority.

    30    (4) The licensing authority shall not revoke or suspend a licence to
         admit spectators without—
              (a) notifying the licence holder of the proposed revocation or
                   suspension and of the grounds for it;
              (b) giving him an opportunity to make representations about the
    35             m atter within the period of twenty-one days beginning with the
                   date of the service of the notice; and
              (c) taking any representations so made into account in making the
                   decision.

             (5) The licensing authority may, if satisfied that the urgency of the case
    40    so requires, suspend a licence under this section without observing the
          requirements of subsection (4) above but the authority shall, as soon as
          is practicable, notify the person to whom the licence was granted of the
          grounds for the suspension.

            (6)         A licence suspended under this section shall during the time of
    45    suspension be o f no effect.
                 10                              Football Spectators


       P art I      (7)   Where a licence has been suspended under this section the person
                 to whom the licence was granted may at any time apply to the licensing
                 authority to terminate the suspension and the licensing authority may
                 terminate the suspension if it appears to be appropriate to do so having
                 regard to the relevant m atters and after taking into account any         5
                 representations made by the applicant.

The licensing      11.—(1) The functions in relation to licences conferred or imposed by
authority.       sections 9 and 10 above shall be functions—
                      (a) of the Secretary of State, or
                      (b) if the Secretary of State appoints a person to discharge those          10
                           functions on his behalf, of the person so appointed for so long
                           as the appointm ent continues in force;
                 and references in this Part o f this Act to the “licensing authority” shall be
                 construed accordingly.
                   (2) The appointment of a person to be the licensing authority shall be         15
                 on such terms as may be agreed between the Secretary of State and that
                 person and specified in the appointm ent and the Secretary o f State may—
                      (a) by notice in writing to the licensing authority, terminate the
                           appointment at any time;
                      (b) give directions, whether general or specific, to the licensing          20
                           authority as to the discharge of the authority’s functions; and
                      (c) require the licensing authority to furnish to the Secretary of State
                           such information and produce such documents relating to the
                           discharge of the authority’s functions as the Secretary o f State
                           may reasonably require.                                                25
                    (3) It shall be the duty of the licensing authority to comply with any
                 direction given or requirement made under subsection (2) above.
                   (4) In the event of the term ination of the appointm ent of a person as
                 the licensing authority, that person shall—
                      (a) send to the Secretary o f State all copies of licences granted, and     30
                           all documents relating to any decisions in relation to licences
                           granted, before the termination; and
                      (b) furnish to the Secretary of State such other inform ation relating
                           to the discharge of the licensing authority’s functions as the
                           Secretary of State may require.                                        35


                                                          Part     II
                            F o o tball   m a t c h e s o u t s id e   England   and   W   ales

                                                       Preliminary
Scope and           12.—(1) This Part of this Act applies in relation to football matches
interpretation   played in any country outside England and Wales which are designated             40
o f this Part.   football matches and the following provisions have effect for its
                 interpretation.
                   (2)    “ Designated football m atch” means any such match of a
                 description for the time being designated for the purposes of this P art by
                 order made by the Secretary of State or a particular such match so 45
                 designated.
                                 Football Spectators                             11


        (3) The power to make orders under subsection (2) above is exercisable         P art II
     by statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulm ent in pursuance
     o f a resolution of either House o f Parliament.
       (4) A “ restriction order” means an order of a court under section 13 or
5    20 below requiring the person to whom the order applies to report to a
     designated reporting agency on the occasion of designated football
     matches.
       (5) The offences “relevant” for the making by a court of a restriction
     order are those specified in the Schedule to this Act as relevant offences
10   (with or, as the case may be, without a declaration of relevance).
        (6) In the application o f the Schedule to this Act for the purposes of
     this P art of this Act the references in that Schedule to designated football
     matches are references to football matches designated for the purposes of
     Part I of this Act except that in paragraphs (f), (g), (h) and (i) they include
15   references to football matches designated under subsection (2) above and
     section 1(7) above applies for the interpretation of references to periods
     relevant to designated football matches.
       (7) A person is a “ designated reporting agency” if that person is
     specified in an order made by the Secretary of State by statutory
20   instrument; and an order under this subsection may designate a person as
     a designated reporting agency for all areas or only for the area or areas
     specified in the order and make provision, where that person is not a body
     corporate, for the discharge of the agency’s functions.
        (8) An order under subsection (2) above may, in relation to any
25   description of football match or any particular football match specified
     in the order, direct that reporting is obligatory for all persons subject to
     restriction orders or that reporting is obligatory only for such persons
     subject to restriction orders as are required to report under section
     17(7)(b) below.
30     (9) In this P art of this Act—
          “country” includes territory;
          “declaration of relevance” , in relation to an offence, means a
              declaration that the offence related to football matches; and
          “imprisonment” includes any form o f detention (or, in the case of a
35            person under twenty-one years of age sentenced to custody for
              life, custody), “prison” includes any place where a person is
              detained or in such custody and “ discharge” from prison does
              not include tem porary discharge.

                                   Restriction orders
40      13.—(1) A court by or before which a person is convicted of a relevant Restriction
     offence or, if a person convicted of such an offence is committed to it to orders.
     be dealt with, the Crown C ourt on dealing with him for the offence, may
     make a restriction order in relation to him.
       (2) N o restriction order may be made unless the court is satisfied that
45   making such an order in relation to the accused would help to prevent
     violence or disorder at or in connection with designated football matches.
        (3) A restriction order may only be made—
          (a) in addition to a sentence imposed in respect of the offence of
              which the accused is (or was) convicted; or
                                                                                                              f

                    12                          Football Spectators


       P art II          (b) in addition to a probation order.

                      (4) A restriction order may be made as mentioned in subsection (3)(b)
1973 c. 62.         above notwithstanding anything in sections 2 and 13 of the Powers of
                    Criminal Courts Act 1973 (which relate to probation orders).

                      (5) A restriction order shall specify the designated reporting agency to      5
                    which the person subject to the order is to report initially and the place at
                    which or place at which and person to whom he is to report; and in
                    specifying the agency the court shall have regard to any order under
                    section 12(7) above specifying the areas or area for which reporting
                    agencies are designated.                                                        10

                      (6) The court shall, on making the order in relation to the accused,
                    explain its effect to him.

1968 c. 19.           (7) In section 10(3) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968 (appeals against
                    sentence by Crown Court), in paragraph (c), after sub-paragraph (iii)
                    there shall be inserted “ or                                                    15
                                   (iv) a restriction order under section 13 o f the Football
                                 Spectators Act 1989;” .


Effect o f order.     14.—(1) Subject to subsection (3) below and section 15 below, the
                    period for which a restriction order has effect in relation to a person
                    convicted o f a relevant offence is—                                            20
                         (a) in a case where he was sentenced in respect of that offence to a
                              period of imprisonment taking immediate effect or of detention
                              in a young offenders institution, five years, and
                         (b) in any other case, two years,
                    beginning with the date o f the making o f the order.                           25

                      (2) The duty to report imposed by a restriction order on the person
                    subject to the order is a duty—
                         (a) to report initially for the purposes o f registration to the
                              designated reporting agency at the place or at the place and to
                              the person specified in the order within the period o f five days     30
                              beginning with the date of the making of the order; and
                         (b) subject to any exemption to report on the occasion o f designated
                              football matches when required to do so under section 17(7)
                              below to the designated reporting agency to which he reported
                              initially or to which he is transferred under subsection (3) or       35
                              which is substituted for that agency under subsection (5) of that
                              section, as the case may be.

                      (3) The duty to report shall, in the case o f a person sentenced to or
                    serving a term of imprisonment, be suspended until his discharge from
                    prison and the order shall have effect, if he is discharged more than five      40
                    days before the expiry of the period for which the order has effect and he
                    was precluded by his being in prison from reporting initially, as if it
                    required him to report initially to the designated reporting agency within
                    the period of five days beginning with the date of his discharge.

                      (4)    A person who, w ithout reasonable excuse, fails to comply with the          45
                    duty to report imposed by a restriction order commits an offence.
                                 Football Spectators                            13


        (5)    A person guilty of an offence under subsection (4) above shall be P ar t II
     liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
     one m onth or to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale or to
     both.


5       15.—(1) A person in relation to whom a restriction order has had effect Application to
     for at least one year may apply to the court by which it was made to terminate
     term inate it.                                                             restriction order.


       (2) On such an application the court may, having regard to the
    person’s character, his conduct since the order was made, the nature of
10 the offence which led to it and any other circumstances o f the case, either
    by order terminate the restriction order (as from a date specified in the
    terminating order) or refuse the application.

      (3) Where an application under this section is refused, a further
   application in respect of the restriction order shall not be entertained if
15 made within the period of six m onths beginning with the day o f the
   refusal.

        (4) The court may order the applicant to pay all or any part o f the costs
     o f an application under this section.

        (5) In the case of a restriction order made by a magistrates’ court, the
20   reference in subsection (1) above to the court by which it was made
     includes a reference to any magistrates’ court acting for the same petty
     sessions area as that court.

       (6) Section 63(2) of the M agistrates’ C ourts Act 1980 (power to              1980 c. 43.
     suspend or rescind orders) does not apply to a restriction order.


25      16.—(1) Where a court makes a restriction order, the clerk of the court Information.
     (in the case o f a magistrates’ court) or the appropriate officer (in the case
     of the Crown Court)—
          (a) shall give a copy of it to the person to whom it relates;
          (b) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy of it to the
30             designated reporting agency specified in the order;
          (c) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy o f it to the
               chief officer of police for the police area in which is situated the
               place at which the person subject to the order is to report
               initially; and
35        (d) in a case where the person subject to the order is sentenced by the
               court to or is serving a term of imprisonment shall (as soon as
               reasonably practicable) send a copy of it to the governor of the
               prison or other person to whose custody he will be committed
               or in whose custody he is, as the case may be.

40     (2) W here a court terminates a restriction order under section 15
     above, the clerk of the court (in the case of a magistrates’ court) or the
     appropriate officer (in the case of the Crown Court)—
          (a) shall give a copy of the terminating order to the person to whom
              the restriction order relates;
                   14                            Football Spectators


      P a r t II          (b) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy of it to the
                               designated reporting agency to which (but for the terminating
                               order) it would be, or would on his discharge from prison be,
                               that person’s duty to report on the occasion of designated
                               football matches;                                                       5
                          (c) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy of it to the
                               chief officer of police for the police area in which is situated the
                               place at which (but for the terminating order) it would be, or
                               would on his discharge from prison be, that person’s                duty to
                               report on the occasion of designated football matches;              and 10
                          (d) in a case where the person subject to the restriction order is
                               serving a term o f imprisonment, shall (as soon as reasonably
                               practicable) send a copy o f the terminating order to the
                               governor of the prison or other person in whose custody he is,
                               as the case may be.                                                    15
                     (3) W here a person subject to a restriction order is discharged from
                   prison and, in the case of a person who has not reported initially to an
                   agency, is discharged more than five days before the expiry of the
                   restriction order, the governor of the prison or person in whose custody
                   he is, as the case may be, shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) give          20
                   notice of his discharge to the designated reporting agency to which it is his
                   duty to report.
                     (4) References in this section to the clerk of a magistrates’ court shall
1980 c. 43.        be construed in accordance with section 141 o f the M agistrates’ Courts
                   Act 1980, reading references to that Act as references to this section.            25


                                            Reporting agencies’functions
Functions of          17.—(1) A designated reporting agency shall have the following
agencies.          functions as respects any person subject to a restriction order who reports
                   initially to the agency or is transferred to it under subsection (3) below.
                        (2) On a person reporting initially to the agency, the agency—                30
                          (a) shall register him as a person who must report to the agency on
                               the occasion o f designated football matches; and
                          (b) may, by notice in writing to him, impose such requirements as
                              appear to the agency to be necessary or expedient for giving
                              effect to the order.                                                    35
                      (3) If a person who is registered with the agency changes his place of
                   residence or his place of work to another area for which the agency is not
                   a designated reporting agency he may apply to the agency to be
                   transferred to an agency which is a designated reporting agency for that
                   other area and the agency may, by notice in writing to him and to a                40
                   designated reporting agency for that other area, grant him a transfer to
                   the other agency specified in the notice to him.
                     (4) Where a person subject to a restriction order is granted a transfer
                   under subsection (3) above from one agency to another agency—
                          (a) it shall be that person’s duty to report for the purposes of            45
                               registration to the other agency;
                          (b) on his doing so his duty to report to the transferring agency shall
                               cease; and
                             Football Spectators                             15


     (c) his registration with the transferring agency shall be cancelled as
          from the date of his registration with the other agency;
and subsection (2) above shall apply to that other agency as it applies
where a person reports initially to it.

  (5) W ith the written agreement of the agency with which a person is
registered and for a period specified in the agreement, the duty of that
person to report on the occasion of designated football matches may be
discharged by his reporting to an agency so specified which is a designated
agency for another area (“ the substitute agency”).

  (6) The agency shall, in taking any decision under subsection (5)
above, have regard to any guidance issued by the Secretary of State under
section 19 below.

  (7) D uring the currency of a restriction order in force in relation to any
person registered with it, the agency shall perform the following functions
on the occasion of any designated football match, that is to say—
     (a) where the m atch is one for which reporting is obligatory for all
         persons subject to restriction orders, the agency shall, by notice
         in writing to that person, require him to report to the agency or,
         as the case may be, the substitute agency at the time and at the
         place specified in the notice or at the time and at the place and
         to the person specified in the notice;
     (b) where the m atch is one for which reporting is obligatory for such
         persons only as are required to report under this paragraph, the
         agency shall—
              (i) consider whether or not to require that person to
            report; and
              (ii) if they so decide, by notice in writing to that person,
            require him to report to the agency or, as the case may be, the
            substitute agency at the time and at the place specified in the
            notice or at the time and at the place and to the person
            specified in the notice.

   (8) The agency shall not require a person to report under subsection
(7)(b) above unless it is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient to impose
the requirement in order to reduce the likelihood o f violence or disorder
at, or in connection with, the designated football match.

  (9) The agency shall, as regards any decision to be taken under
subsection (7)(b) above—
     (a) if it is not itself the police force for any area, consult the chief
          officer of police for the area for which the agency is designated;
          and
     (b) shall have regard to any guidance issued by the Secretary o f State
          under section 19 below.

  (10) A person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with
any requirement imposed on him under subsection (2)(b) above or under
that paragraph as applied by subsection (4) above shall be guilty of an
offence.

   (11) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (10) above shall be
liable on summary to a fine not exceeding level 2 on the standard scale.
                    16                               Football Spectators


      P ar t II          18.— (1) A person who is subject to a restriction order may—
Exemptions
from
requirement to             (a) as respects a particular designated football match, or
report as
respects a match.
                           (b) as respects designated football matches played during a period,

                    apply to the designated reporting agency with which he is registered to be
                    exempt from the duty to report as respects that m atch or matches played                       5
                    during that period.


                      (2)    The agency to whom an application is made by a person under this
                    section shall exempt him from the duty to report if he shows to the
                    agency’s satisfaction—

                           (a) that there are special circumstances which justify his being so                    10
                                exempted; and

                           (b) that, because of those circumstances, he would not attend the
                                m atch or matches if he were so exempted.


                      (3)    The agency shall, in taking any decision under subsection (2)
                    above, have regard to any guidance issued by the Secretary of State under 15
                    section 19 below.


                      (4)    Where an exemption is granted by the agency to a person under
                    subsection (2) above the duties o f the agency under section 17(7) above
                    and of that person to report shall be suspended as respects the m atch or
                    matches to which the exemption applies.                                   20


                      (5)     A person who is aggrieved by the refusal of the agency to grant him
                    an exemption under subsection (2) above may, after giving the agency
                    notice in writing o f his intention to do so, appeal to a magistrates’ court
                    acting for the petty sessions area in which the agency is situated.


                      (6) O n a n y a p p ea l under su b sectio n (5) a b o v e the cou rt m a y m a k e su ch   25
                    order as it th in k s fit.



                      (7)    The court may order the appellant to pay all or any part of the costs
                    of an appeal under subsection (5) above.


                      (8)    Any person commits an offence who, in connection w ith an
                    application under this section to be exempted from a duty to report— 30

                           (a) makes a statement which he knows to be false or misleading in a
                               material particular or recklessly makes a statement which is
                               false or misleading in a material particular, or
                                Football Spectators                           17


         (b)             produces, furnishes, signs or otherwise makes use of a document
                                                                                    P art II
               which he knows to be false or misleading in a material particular
               or recklessly produces, furnishes, signs or otherwise makes use
               o f a document which is false or misleading in a material
5              particular.
        (9)   A person guilty of an offence under subsection (8) above shall be
     liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the
     standard scale.

       19.—(1) The Secretary o f State may issue to designated reporting Functions of
10   agencies such guidance as he considers appropriate for the purposes o f the agencies:
                                                                                 supplementary
     exercise o f their functions under sections 17 and 18 above.
                                                                                   provisions.
        (2)   The Secretary of State shall make such arrangements as he
     considers appropriate for publishing the guidance issued from time to
     time under subsection (1) above.
15     (3) The Secretary o f State may make regulations regulating the giving
     by designated reporting agencies to persons subject to restriction orders
     registered with them of notices under section 17 above imposing
     requirements to report to them; and it shall be the duty of every
     designated reporting agency to comply with the regulations.
20      (4) Regulations under subsection (3) above may exclude the operation
     o f section 23 below.
        (5)   The power to make regulations under subsection (3) above is
     exercisable by statutory instrum ent which shall be subject to annulment
     in pursuance of a resolution of either House o f Parliament.
25     (6) Where any notice is given under section 17 above by an agency in
     accordance with regulations under subsection (3) above, the notice shall
     be taken to have been received by the person to whom it was addressed
     unless he proves that he did not receive the notice and did not know and
     had no reasonable cause to believe that he had been required to report to
30   the agency.
       (7)    Where any notice is given under section 17 above by an agency in
     accordance with section 23 below, subsection (6) above shall apply as it
     applies to such a notice given in accordance with regulations under
     subsection (3) above.
35    (8) The Secretary o f State may, out of money provided by Parliament,
     pay to designated reporting agencies any expenses incurred by them in
     exercising their functions under sections 17 and 18 above.

                    Relevant offences outside England and Wales
       20.—(1) Her Majesty may, by Order in Council, specify offences              Restriction
40   (“corresponding offences”) under the law o f any country outside England      orders arising
                                                                                   out o f offences
     and Wales which appear to Her to correspond to any offence specified in
                                                                                   outside England
     the Schedule to this Act.                                                     and Wales.
       (2)          U pon an inform ation being laid before a justice of the peace for any
     area that a person who resides or is believed to reside in that area has been
45   convicted of a corresponding offence in a country outside England and
     Wales, the justice may—
           18                          Football Spectators


P art II        (a) issue a summons directed to that person requiring him to appear
                     before a magistrates’ court for that area to answer to the
                     information; or
                (b) subject to subsection (3) below, issue a w arrant to arrest that
                     person and bring him before a magistrates’ court for that area.       5

              (3) N o w arrant shall be issued under subsection (2) above unless the
           inform ation is in writing and substantiated on oath.

              (4) Where a person appears or is brought before a magistrates’ court
           in pursuance o f subsection (2) above, the court, if satisfied that—
                (a) he is ordinarily resident in England and Wales, and                    10
                (b) has been convicted in the country outside England and Wales of
                     the corresponding offence,
           may, unless it appears that the conviction is the subject of proceedings in a
           court o f law in that country questioning the conviction, make a restriction
           order in relation to him.                                                       15

              (5) N o restriction order may be made under this section in relation to
           a person unless the court is satisfied that making such an order in relation
           to him would help to prevent violence or disorder at or in connection with
           designated football matches.

              (6) In proceedings under subsection (4) above, the court shall have the      20
           like powers, including power to adjourn the proceedings and meanwhile
           to rem and the defendant on bail (but not in custody), and the proceedings
           shall be conducted as nearly as may be in the like manner, as if the
           proceedings were the trial o f an inform ation for a summary offence.

             (7) Any person aggrieved by the decision o f a magistrates’ court             25
           making a restriction order under this section may appeal to the Crown
           C ourt against the decision.

              (8) Sections 13(3) to (6) and 14 to 19 above shall apply in relation to
           a person subject to a restriction order under this section as they apply in
           relation to a person subject to a restriction order m ade by a m agistrates’    30
           court under section 13.

             (9) A n O rder in Council under subsection (1) above relating to any
           country may include provision—
                (a) specifying the authority in that country which is to certify the
                     conviction o f a person in that country o f a corresponding           35
                     offence, the nature and circumstances o f the offence and
                     whether or not the conviction is the subject o f proceedings in
                     that country questioning it; and
                (b) prescribing the form o f such certificates.

              (10) A certificate in the form prescribed by an Order in Council under       40
           subsection (1) above shall be admissible in any proceedings under this
           P art o f this Act as evidence o f the facts stated in the certificate.

              (11) Any statutory instrum ent containing an Order under subsection
           (1) above shall be subject to annulment in pursuance o f a resolution of
           either House o f Parliament.                                                    45
                                 Football Spectators                           19


                                      P a r t III

                                      G eneral

       21.— (1) A court may n o t make a declaration o f relevance as respects       Further
     any offence unless it is satisfied that the prosecutor gave notice to the       provision
5    defendant, at least three days before the first day of the trial, that it was   about, and
                                                                                     appeals against,
     proposed to show that the offence related to football matches.                  declarations of
                                                                                     relevance.
       (2) A person convicted o f an offence as respects which the court makes
     a declaration o f relevance may appeal against the making of the
     declaration o f relevance as if the declaration were included in any
10   sentence passed on him for the offence, and accordingly—
          (a) in section 10(3) o f the Criminal Appeal Act 1968 (appeals against
                sentence by Crown Court), in paragraph (c), after the sub-
                paragraph (iv) inserted by section 13(7) above there shall be
                inserted “ or
15                   (v) a declaration o f relevance under the Football
                   Spectators Act 1989;” ;
          (b) in section 50(1) o f that Act (meaning of “ sentence” ), at the end
               there shall be inserted the words “ and a declaration o f relevance
                under the Football Spectators Act 1989” ; and
20        (c) in section 108(3) o f the M agistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (right of
                appeal to the Crown Court), at the end there shall be inserted
                the words “ and also includes a declaration o f relevance under
                the Football Spectators Act 1989.”

        (3) A restriction order made upon a person’s conviction o f a relevant
25   offence shall be quashed if the making o f a declaration o f relevance as
     respects that offence is reversed on appeal.


       22.— (1) Where an offence under this Act which has been committed by Offences by
     a body corporate is proved to have been committed with the consent or bodies
     connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of, a corporate.
30   director, manager, secretary or similar officer o f the body corporate, or
     any person purporting to act in that capacity, he, as well as the body
     corporate, shall be guilty of th at offence and be liable to be proceeded
     against and punished accordingly.

       (2)         Where the affairs o f a body corporate are managed by its members,
35   subsection (1) above shall apply to the acts and defaults o f a member in
     connection with his functions o f management as if he were a director of
     the body corporate.


        23.—(1) Any notice or other document required or authorised by or by Service o f
     virtue o f this Act to be served on any person may be served on him either documents.
40   by delivering it to him or by leaving it at his proper address or by sending
     it by post.

       (2)    Any notice or other docum ent so required or authorised to be
     served on a body corporate or a firm shall be duly served if it is served on
     the secretary or clerk of that body or a partner o f that firm.
                 20                           Football Spectators


     P art III     (3) F or the purposes o f this section, and o f section 7 o f the
1978 c. 30.      Interpretation Act 1978 in its application to this section, the proper
                 address o f a person, in the case o f a secretary or clerk of a body corporate,
                 shall be that o f the registered office or principal office o f that body, in the
                 case o f a partner o f a firm shall be that of the principal office of the firm,    5
                 and in any other case shall be the last known address o f the person to be
                 served.
                    (4) This section, and the said section 7 in its application to this section,
                 is subject to section 19(4) and (7) above.

Citation,             24.— (1) This Act may be cited as the Football Spectators Act 1989.            10
commencement,
consequential      (2) Sections 2 and 8 and 12 to 20 above shall come into force on such
repeal and       day or days as the Secretary o f State appoints by order made by statutory
extent.          instrum ent, b u t otherwise P art I and this P art o f this Act shall come into
                 force on its passing:
1986 c. 64.        (3) Sections 30 to 37 o f the Public Order Act 1986 (which provide for            15
                 exclusion orders) shall cease to have effect on the date appointed under
                 subsection (2) above for the commencement of section 2 of this Act except
                 for the purposes o f the making under section 33 o f that Act of
                 applications after that date to terminate exclusion orders and the
                 communication o f term inating orders under section 34(2) o f that Act.             20
                      (4) This Act extends to England and Wales only.
                                 Football Spectators [h .l .]                            21




                                   SCHEDULE                                                    Sections 7(5),
                                                                                               12(5) and 20(1).
                                     R el ev a n t O ffences

       The offences relevant for the purposes o f sections 7(2) and 13(1) o f this Act are
     the following—
5         (a) any offence under section 2(1) or 5(6) o f this Act;
          (b)   any offence under section 2 o f the Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol        1985 c. 57.
                etc.) Act 1985 (alcohol containers at sports grounds) committed by the
                accused at any designated football match or while entering or trying to
                enter the ground;
10        (c) any offence under section 5 o f the Public Order Act 1986 (harassment,           1986 c. 64.
               alarm or distress) or any provision o f Part III o f that Act (racial hatred)
               committed during a period relevant to a designated football match at
               any premises while the accused was at, or was entering or leaving or
               trying to enter or leave, the premises;
15        (d) any offence involving the use or threat o f violence by the accused
               towards another person committed during a period relevant to a
               designated football match at any premises while the accused was at, or
               was entering or leaving or trying to enter or leave, the premises;
          (e) any offence involving the use or threat o f violence towards property
20             committed during a period relevant to a designated football match at
               any premises while the accused was at, or was entering or leaving or
               trying to enter or leave, the premises;
          (f) any offence under section 1 o f the Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol
               etc.) A ct 1985 (alcohol on coaches or trains to or from sporting events)
25            committed while the accused was on a journey to or from a designated
               football match being an offence as respects which the court makes a
               declaration o f relevance;
          (g) any offence under section 5 o f the Public Order A ct 1986 (harassment,
               alarm or distress) or any provision o f Part III o f that Act (racial hatred)
30            committed while the accused was on a journey to or from a designated
               football match being an offence as respects which the court makes a
               declaration o f relevance;
          (h) any offence involving the use or threat o f violence by the accused
               towards another person committed while one or each o f them was on a
35            journey to or from a designated football match being an offence as
               respects which the court makes a declaration o f relevance;
          (i) any offence involving the use or threat o f violence towards property
               committed while the accused was on a journey to or from a designated
               football match being an offence as respects which the court makes a
40            declaration o f relevance.
            Football Spectators Bill [H .L .]



                                   A

                          B I L L

               [AS A M EN D ED ON REPORT]

                           INTITULED

     An Act to control the admission o f spectators at
      designated football matches in England and Wales
      by means o f a national membership scheme and
      licences to admit spectators; and to provide for the
      making by courts and the enforcement by
      designated agencies o f orders imposing restrictions
      on persons convicted o f certain offences for the
      purpose o f preventing violence or disorder at or in
      connection with designated football matches played
      outside England and Wales,



                        The Lord Hesketh




            Ordered to be Printed, 13th April 1989




                               LONDON
                         Prim ed a nd published by
                     Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
                    Printed in T he United Kingdom at
                         The Parliamentary Press

                              £3-60 net

     H L Bill 39                ( 403999 )              50/2




cO
