                                                                                b'vj   K C \ . ia a

                                                                                              /l

                                        ASSOCIATION                                                         IbMr- \ V
                                                       Of
                                   CHIEF AMBULANCE OFFICERS
                                          ttorvt"AmbuLan« Scrvirc Hudguartcrs
                                                     Rmfwp<( Read
                                                       ^tUwartfc
                                                Nr "Rinmvd PH24 2$P                                  V. NJottffc
                                              Trlrpfoni frmdcmi (010£lS96lll                       National Stnt&nj
H a ft Srrviflr Am£uirwt Sfrnor*


         YOUR REF:FEP/90 35/35/1
         OUR REF: VNJ/VN



        Mr
        G2 Division
        Room 920
        Home Office
        Queen Anne's Gate
        London
        SW1H 9AT



        Dear J

        GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ("GREEN GUIDE”)

        Further to your letter of 10th April in connection with the above, please find
        enclosed our submission for inclusion for reprint of GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS
        GROUNDS.

        Yours sincerely




        National Secretary

        Enc
                 GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ("(SEEN GUIDE")



Paragraph 23 page 12 line 5

       should read as follows

"fire, police and ambulance officers will help management"

Paragraph 29 page 14 sub paragraph x.

       should read as follows

To consult with the ambulance authority to ensure there are adequate medical
and first aid facilities, qualified ambulance personnel and first aid staff.


A new chanter 1ft Titled Medical Services

Where large numbers of spectators congregate there is always the possibility
of illness or injury arising due to many factors, therefore there should be
close liaison between the police and ambulance authorities to ensure adequate
facilities are provided with suitably qualified staff.

235.

Ambulance vehicles and personnel should be provided to ensure the sick and
injured are transported to further medical care as quickly as possible.

236.

Trained first aid personnel should be available to render assistance to the
spectators within the confines of the ground.

237.

Ccmnuni cat ions should be established and maintained during the event between
key medical and ambulance personnel and police control centre.

238.

A medical practitioner should be available to give treatment and assist
ambulance personnel in medical treatments.
                                                  All correspondence must be
                                                  addressed to the Chief Constable

                                                  X Department

                                                  P 0 Box 4 7 (S W est PDO)
                                                  Chester House
                                                  Boyer Street
                                                  Manchester M 1 6 OSD
                                                  Telephone W061I U8 5w 5w   -
                                                  Fax 061 8 7 2 4 1 4 5    2 °9 2

                                                  Our reference    XA1/PJH/DL
Mr Alan Brown
G2 Division                                       Your reference
Room 920                                          When calling or telephoning
Home Office                                       please ask for
Queen Ann's Gate
LONDON                                            Date      25th June 1990
SW1H 9AT




Dear Mr Brown

GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS

Further to my letter dated 11th June, 1990, on behalf of the Chief
Constable concerning the revision of the Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds.

Please find enclosed a synopsis of observations received from the Chief
Constables of England and Wales since responding to your letter initially.

I trust this late submission will not cause too much inconvenience.

Yours sincerely




Enc
                          A SYNOPSIS OF OBSERVATIONS
                         CONCERNING TOE GUIDE TO SAFETY
                               AT SPORTS GROUNDS




Chapter 1      INTRODUCTION


Paragraph 6    Should read - Deviations from individual guidelines are not
               permitted as they will detract from the overall safety of the
               ground.



Chapter 2      MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY


Paragraph 29   Insert new sections.


               (xviv)      Publish information on tickets which is unambiguous,
                            simple and clear and it should correlate absolutely
                            with the information provided in respect of each
                            match, both outside and inside the ground.               Retained
                            ticket stubs should contain information necessary to
                            guide spectators once inside the ground and indicate
                            the time by which they should have passed through
                            the     turnstiles.       Any     such     information       should
                            correspond      with     the     planned     arrangements       for
                            admitting spectators to the ground.


               (xw)        Ensure    that   all    matches    where     capacity    or    near
                            capacity crowds        are expected        for either home or
                            visiting     sections,     are    designated     "All    Ticket"
                            Batches after consultation with the Police.                    The
                            percentages     of     tickets     allocated    to     home    and
                            visiting supporters should also be deliberated at
                            this time.


               (xwi)        Ensure that all "All Ticket" matches,                tickets for
                            that match for any area of the ground will be issued
                            and sold prior to the date of the fixture and the
                            club shall NOT issue or sell tickets on the day of
                                           - 2 -


                                 that match.       Maximum publicity should be given to
                                 this fact, prior to the match, utilising the media
                                 where practicable.


                   (xwii)        Consult with the police and consider the increased
                                 use of the early or Sunday kick-off, especially for
                                 high-risk matches.


                   (xwiii)       Notify at the earliest opportunity,        the Chief of
                                 Police, when a natch is to be arranged, rearranged,
                                 cancelled, or postponed.




Chapter 5          INGRESS


New paragraph
48                 Access to more than one section of the ground should not be
                   possible after passing through a set of turnstiles.




Chapter 8          TERRACES AND VIEWING SLOPES


Paragraph 101      (Line 7) should refer to both soccer and rugby grounds.


Paragraph 105      Viewing slopes are not considered to be suitable for football
                   and rugby stadia, but may be suitable for other sports.




Chapter 11         FIRE SAFETY


Paragraph 169      Insert ’Prior to every event commencing or ending during the
                   hours of darkness, the emergency lighting shall be tested by
                   operation.




Chapter 12         COMMUNICATIONS


Paragraph 19^(i)   Insert    ’key points    to be    considered;   turnstiles,   steward’s
                   control point, secretary’s office, referee’s room, advertising
                   board control, chief fire marshal,         stadium lighting control.
                                              - 3 -


                       match doctor,      casualty clearance points and first aid room.
                       There should be a minimum of two external telephone lines for
                       the control rooms'.


             194(vi)   Insert ’the C.C.T.V. system shall be maintained in good working
                       order to the satisfaction of the police*.




Chapter 13             STEWARDING


Paragraph 197          Insert ’ideally aged between 18 and 55 years'.         Also ’no person
                       shall be employed as a steward unless he/she has                   received
                       proper training and instruction*.        The training should include:


                         (i)   Recognition of signs of distress and crowd dynamics in
                                terraced areas.


                        (ii)    Emergency procedure      for any emergency including the
                                evacuation of a pen, area or stadium.


                       (iii)    All aspects of stewards' responsibilities.


Paragraph 199          Commence paragraph with - 'Regular exercises relating to the
                       above   emergency    procedures   will   be   held   during    the     month
                       preceding    the    start   of    each   football/rugby       season     and
                       thereafter at least once every 3 months'.


Paragraph 199          Insert at the end of the paragraph - 'At least 14 days' notice
                       of the intention to hold such exercises and training sessions,
                       should be given to the Police Match Commander, the Licensing
                       Authority    and    Fire    and   Ambulance    Services,      to     enable
                       representatives to attend'.




Chapter 15             PITCH PERIMETER FENCE/WALL


Paragraph 215          Insert at Line 11 - 'Each gate in the perimeter fence which
                       affords access to the pitch should be manned by a steward when
                       the pen or enclosure is occupied'.
                                                 - 4 -


    Paragraph 215      Add to the end of the paragraph - ’All gates to the pitch
                       should be kept fully open during the period when spectators are
e
                       in the pens or enclosures, whenever the Police Match Commander
                       feels that this can be safely done.                    Whether they be fully
                       open, partially open or closed, they should be kept unlocked
                       throughout the period when the pens or enclosures are occupied.


    Annex B - STEWARDING should also include:


                       1.   The monitoring of the crowd throughout the ground for signs
                            of distress and overcrowding in terraced areas and the
                            notification of such, to the nearest police officer who can
                            authorise access onto the pitch in an emergency.


                       2.   Maintenance of crowd segregation and the monitoring of the
                            movement of spectators           between    areas     of    the ground    to
                            ensure capacities are not exceeded.


                      3.    Control     of   turnstiles,     gates     and     exits    including    the
                            closure of turnstiles when the capacity for a particular
                            area is about to be reached.              The Police Match Commander
                            may also authorise the closure of the turnstiles.


                      4.    The diverting of spectators to other areas of the stadium
                            when the capacity for that area is about to be reached.
                            (The   Police     Match      Commander     may     also     authorise    the
                            diversion of spectators).


                      5. Manning of all exits including each perimeter fence gate.


                      6. The safe evacuation of spectators from any                       area in the
                            stadium or the whole of the stadium should the need arise.


                      7.    Prevention of pitch invasion.


                      8. Manning      of     parking areas     to      ensure     all      approaches,
                            emergency    exits    are kept    clear     and     that     vehicles    are
                            correctly parked in club car parks.
                                             - 5 -


                     9.   Use of the emergency cutting equipment at the direction of
                          the police.


                     10. Assisting the police to identify spectators who are banned
                          from the ground by the club,         those persons who do not
                          possess   tickets   at     "All Ticket" Batches   or persons    in
                          possession of forged tickets.


                     11. Dealing with breaches of ground regulations.


                     The police should assist stewards with these tasks             at the
                     discretion of the Police Commander.




Additional Points:


                     Differentiation    is    necessary   between   the   requirements   for
                     various stadia,    for example,      the implementation of seating.
                     There should also be a differentiation of mandatory elements
                     from the limits of flexibility for discretionary elements.


                     Any recommendations or directions should include a reference to
                     relevant building or other regulations.


                     The maximum limit of 660 persons per hour as a notional flow
                     rate per turnstile in Recommendation 10 Lord Justice Taylor's
                     Report and Chapter 5, paragraph 47 of the ’Green Guide’ should
                     include a figure of 500 as a median unless             the certifying
                     authority approves to the contrary upto the proposed upper
                     limit of 660 persons per hour.
                                                  All correspondence must be
                                                  addressed to the Chief Constable

                                                  X Department

                                                  P 0 Box 4 7 (S W est PDO)
                                                  Chester House
                                                  Boyer Street
                                                  Manchester M 1 6 OSD
                                                  Telephone 061 8 5 5
 AND                                              Fax 061 8 7 2 4 1 4 5 2892

                                                  Our reference    XA1/PJH/DL
Mr
                                                  Your reference
G2 Division
Room 920                                          When calling or telephoning
Home Office                                       please ask for
Queen Ann's Gate
LONDON                                            Date     11th June 1990
SW1H 9AT




Dear :

GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS (GREEN GUIDE)

The Chief Constable has asked me to reply to your letter dated 10th April,
1990, concerning the revision of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
(Green Guide).

Enclosed is synopsis of observations received from the Chief Constables of
England and Wales in response to your request which confirms the details
conveyed in a telephone conversation between Inspector             m d Mr


Yours sincerely




Chief Superintendent
                             A SYNOPSIS OF OBSERVATIONS
                         CONCERNING THE GUIDE TO SAFETY
                                 AT SPORTS OttXJNDS




All the recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor’s Final Report which
add to or amend the current      ’Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds' should be
incorporated into the revised edition.    Inclusion of the recommendations of the
Technical Working Party (Appendix 3 of the Final Report) are also recommended
for consideration, together with The Engineering Appraisal of Sports Grounds by
the Institute of Structural Engineers.




CHAPTER 1


Paragraphs 5 and 6


The guide should apply to a minimum standard for all sports stadia and not
primarily football stadia.


A separate section should be allotted to football stadia.


Any deviations from minimum standards should be subject to approval of Advisory
Groups.




CHAPTER 2


To include Role of Local Authority as the enforcement agency for Safety at
Sports Ground Act 1975 etc., legislation in respect of designated grounds and
regulated stands.


Paragraph 23


Ground Management responsibility for spectator safety is in urgent need of
scrutinising and revision in wake of Hillsborough.


Statement of Intent has been drawn up and care needs to be taken in re-draft to
ensure overall responsibility for safety of public inside the ground continues
to be rested in those who stage the event and administer the ground.
                                          - 2 -


Paragraph 29(i)


Needs to emphasise the safety officer should have no other commitments when a
stadium      is   in   use,   which   would   detract   that   person   from   his/her
responsibilities.


The Safety Officer Bust wear apparel which readily identifies him to persons
using the stadium, e.g. Tabard or Ann-band.


The job description should also be included in an annex to the guide.




CHAPTER 3


Additional paragraph to include the local authority and police must be informed
of the erection and placement of new and proposed structures,            temporary or
permanent.




CHAPTER 4


Paragraph 42


To include:


ensuring all ingress, egress, emergency exits and routes are not obstructed by
permanent or temporary structures and buildings, e.g., mobile catering vehicles.




CHAPTER 5


Guidance is required for       turnstile lay-out and advice on maximising flows
through turnstiles, e.g., requirements for exact money.        No restrictions before
turnstiles.


Paragraph 5


Should apply to all grounds - being necessary to ensure ground capacities are
not exceeded.
                                            - 3 -


CHAPTER 6


To include:


Design criteria required to ensure sufficient egress points from moats to place
of safety.


To ensure the construction of a moat does not disadvantage the police and
stewards by way of different observation levels from the spectators at egress
points for maintaining control.


Advice on the installation of electro-magnetic locks on exit gates from central
control.




CHAPTERS 8 AND 16


1)   The extent to which 'free-flow'          at sports grounds affects the basis of
     calculating safe capacity should be considered in detail:


     a)      The relationship between covered and uncovered parts of the ground in
             adverse weather conditions.


     b)      Movement throughout the game, especially at half-time.


2)   Use    of   playing   surface   for   non-sporting   events,   e.g.,   pop   concerts.
     Methods of free flow and calculation of spectator densities.




CHAPTER 16


Paragraph 2 2k    should refer to Local Authority for calculating safe capacity
levels, not the Ground management.
                                             - 4 -


CHAPTER 10


Paragraph 124


  (i)        Should include, the seats should be of such durable style and material
             and fixed in manner that they cannot be readily removed and used as a
             weapon or missile.


 (ii)        Areas   of   seating   should   be   spaced   as   to   afford   access   without
             hindrance to the emergency services.




Paragraph 131


External factors such as wind forces are only briefly referred to in this
section, for temporary stands and structures.


It would assist if a safe wind force limit for structures could be specified for
the construction of stand roofing and the safety of spectators.


Also, a specified wind force for consideration to be given to postponement of an
event or evacuation of a stadium.




CHAPTER 12


INCLUSION OF GROUND REGULATIONS


Paragraph 193


Minimum specification should be suggested which would accommodate equipment and
personnel necessary to effectively manage and monitor crowd safety and control
in both normal circumstances and in the event of an emergency.                     It should
incorporate Recommendation 43 of Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report.


Paragraph 194


To include:


Must refer to all designated sports grounds.
                                           - 5 -


  (i)   To read to complement radio communications, there should be a completely
         separate system of land lines with telephone links between the police
         control room and key points at the stadium.


 (ii)   There should be available in the police control room, the record of any
        electronic or sechanical counting of numbers at turnstiles or of numbers
        admitted to any area of the ground.


(iii)   A public address system to communicate with individual areas inside and
        outside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground.
        Important announcements should be preceded by a local signal to catch
        the attention of the crowd, despite high level of noise in the ground.
        This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme
        sold for every match.


        Adding the word 'independently' after 'addressing messages to each major
        section of the ground'.


        Additionally


  (i)   A new paragraph to include:


        A plan of the stadium should be published in every programme for every
        match,    indicating all    the emergency exits,        egress    routes and exits
        available for use during the course of an event.


 (ii)   There should be a suitable room available for the briefing of all police
        officers and stewards prior to the commencement of an event.


(iii)   The power supply to the Control Room should be such as to enable it to
        continue to operate in an emergency or a failure of power.


  (v)   There    should be   a   command   channel   reserved    solely    for   the Police
        Commander to communicate with his senior officers round the ground.


 (vi)   There should be available in the police control room the results of all
        closed circuit television monitoring outside and inside the ground.              It
        should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground,
        within concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas,                  to be
        monitored before, throughout and at the end of an event.
                                            - 6 -


CHAPTER 13


Wearing of fluorescent jackets of different colours denoting stewards,                  fire
marshals,    including    the emergency services,       i.e..   Police,   Fire,   Ambulance,
should be stipulated.


Paragraph 197


Should specify physical fitness, suitability and capability.


Annex B


To include     stewards being conversant with Club Ground Regulations and                the
enforcement of same.




CHAPTER 14


Should also refer to advising clubs to advertise in programmes and on notices
the transferring from one section to another within the stadium is prohibited.


Paragraph 210


Should read:


At all designated sports grounds and other stadia, particularly where there has
been   a record   of     frequent   crowd   trouble,   secure   detention   rooms   must be
available for use by the police.
                                         - 7 -


CHAPTER 15


Advice on type of perimeter fencing.


To include:


Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be available for immediate use
where there are perimeter fences to permit the removal of enough fencing to
release numbers of spectators if necessary.        An employee of the stadium should
be trained in the use of the equipment.           The decision to use the cutting
equipment should be a decision of the Police Stadium Commander.


Paragraph 215


It would be helpful to distinguish between a fence or wall which serves to
separate the playing area from spectator accommodation and, a perimeter fence
which acts as a barrier to discourage access to the playing area.




NEW CHAPTER TO INCLUDE:


Emergency Services


  i)   A     chief police   officer   should   liaise with   the management   of each
        designated sports stadia and local authority in respect of the safety
        and control of crowds.


ii)    The police, fire, ambulance and stewards employed in the stadia should
       wear distinctive jackets/tabards with a colour code that identifies each
       service.
                                                            ^BAVV
                                                          °vtfDTD 'S®


                              THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lytham St Annes, Lancashire, F78 1)0 Telephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                            Secretary ). D. Dent




5/8100                                                                                                          30th May, 1990.




         \ Esq.,
92 Division,
Roan 920,
Hare Office,
Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON,
SW1H 9AT.


Dear

       Thank you for your letter of 10th April.

      Please find enclosed our comments and suggestions on the revision of
the Green Guide. These represent first thoughts on the subject and we would
value the opportunity to see and carment on the draft of the revised Guide
in due course.


                                                   Yours sincerely,




                                                         Secretary.
Enclosure.




             All correspondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
                         THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED

          COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE REVISION OF THE GREEN GUIDE

The Green Guide

      In the joint FA/FL submission to Taylor, we reccrrmended that certain
parts of the Green Guide should be made mandatory. The Technical Working
Party set up by Lord Justice Taylor saw serious difficulties in giving the
Green Guide legal force, but reccrrmended that a much higher degree of
standardisation than presently prevails should be sought in practice.
Despite this, perhaps we should still be pressing for the Guide to carry
more weight than it does at present. It is highly desirable, from a club's
point of view, that whatever guidance is put out carries sufficient detail
and information for the club’s professional advisers to be able to perform
their functions without the problems of interpretation that are currently
experienced. Where there are variations, examples of best practice should
be included in the Guide.

      We feel that, in order to give the Guide greater emphasis, a new title
for the Guide should be considered. We would suggest 'Advice on the Safety
and Control of Spectators at Sporting Events'.

       Where we speak about individual responsibilities in the Guide, these
should be clearly defined. This is an area where we consider the
recarrmended letter of intent should have prominence and maybe the Guide
should contain a specimen letter of intent. In the light of the fact that
there still appears to be no model for a safety certificate and bearing in
mind the introduction of the Football Licensing Authority, it is considered
that a model safety certificate should be included in the Guide.

      Appreciating the fact that the League and FA have accepted Lord
Justice Taylor's recormendation to establish an Advisory Design Council, it
is considered that the Government should also make available the expert
advice that they have within their own departments and offer this in the
Guide.

Seating/Standing

      Whilst accepting the safety factor of seats, a seated area is still no
guarantee for good behaviour and is more difficult to police. People
standing can move away frcrrt troublemakers; people in seats cannot.

      The Football League, would favour the retention of a percentage of
safely-constructed standing areas at grounds. We feel that rather than
having to achieve all-seater status, clubs should have to meet a given
percentage of seats within their ground. This point was made in the FA/EL
submission to Lord Justice Taylor.

      We understand that new monitoring equipment is now available to
measure the stress applied to crush barriers at matches. We would like to
see further evidence on the capabilities of this monitoring equipment.

Seating

      Any section in the new Green Guide on seating should contain firm
guidance on design and construction.

                                    - 1 -
C a p a c itie s

      This has already been ccximented upon by Lord Justice Taylor in his
Final Report, but we feel that any section dealing with capacities should be
clearly written and unequivocable. We have already experienced various
interpretations since the publication of the final Taylor Report and this is
an area that is crucial to the whole subject of crowd safety and control.

      We note the view expressed by Taylor's Technical Working Party that
the lower packing density figure of 2.7/m2 should be abolished. We feel it
should be made clear, hcwever, that if a terraced area does not meet the
higher figure, then it does not automatically mean that the area's capacity
should be 0. We feel that this point should be clarified in the revised
Green Guide.

      We note that clubs have new got to be able to exit people onto the
pitch in an emergency as quickly as people vrould leave the ground under
normal circumstances. We feel that the emergency exit arrangements should
include sideways exit frcm the terraces (where this is possible) as well as
going forwards onto the pitch.

Separation of viewing areas and pitch

      If it is acknowledged that the preservation of the playing area is an
important aspect of ground safety and crowd     control, then we feel that the
Guide should say so and the Guide should equally give guidance on the types
of measures that should be taken, again to ensure standardisation throughout
the country.

Crush Barriers

      The Guide must contain advice on the siting of crush barriers that
cannot be rrdscontrued and this should not be related to the average numbers
of spectators, but the maximum numbers likely to be in any area.

Stairways and ranps

      We feel it is important to emphasise the difference between stairways
and ramps on stands as opposed to stairways     and rampsleading up to stands.
We note that this point is picked up in the     TechnicalWorking Party Report.

Ingress

      As turnstiles will open l£ hours prior to kick-off, we feel that 1§
hours should be the timescale against which the maximum notional flow-rate
of turnstile admissions should be measured. We also feel that a higher
maximum notional flow-rate should be allowed f a r all-ticket matches, as
speed of entry is always quicker when there is no cash changing hands. We
would suggest a figure of 750 as a higher notional flow-rate.

Egress

      We note that the Technical Working Party recatmends that, where
reservoir areas cannot be renoved frcm egress routes, a lower density of 35-
40 persons per 10 sq. metres be substituted for the current figure. Vfe feel
that clarification is needed on the removal of reservoir areas and on why
there should be a further lower figure.

                                    - 2 -
M ed ic al F a c i l i t i e s

      It is our opinion that the Guide should contain minimum standards of
first aid facilities; it being appreciated that these are already
incorporated in the majority of safety certificates. In an attempt to
standardise this situation the League has set up a Medical Working Party who
are currently looking at this issue.


                                                             30th May, 1990.
        _ Cyngor                                   W             —   The Sport}
        Chwciraeon                                                   Council For
          Cymru                                                          Walcj
Cadeirvdd/Chairman: John H. ftjwell OBE MC                            Gerddi Sophia/Sophia Gardens.
Cyfarwyddwr/Director: Linford Tatham                                  Caerdydd/Cardiff CF1 9SW.
                                                                      9 0222 397571
Ein Cyf/Our Ref                              Eich Cyf/Your Ref        Dyddiad/Date



         SCW9/18/A                                                                   18 May 1990


        G2 Division
        Room 920
        Home Office
        Queen Anne’s Gate
        LONDON
        SW1H 9AT

        Dear

        GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS (’GREEN GUIDE *)
        Thank you for your letter of 10 April 1990.

        At this stage it seems appropriate to confine comments to matters
        of general principle and to review details on receipt of your
        draft.

        In submitting evidence to Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry the Sports
        Council for Wales discussed the role of the Green Guide and
        recommended it be expanded to embrace other relevant sports
        facilities and pressed for its advice to be mandatory.        Lord
        Justice Taylor thought local discretion overrode that argument. A
        local authority may impose Green Guide advice as a provision of
        its Safety Certificate, indicating whether compliance is to be
        absolute or discretionary. Taylor recommended that the inclusion
        of some of the Green Guide provision in the Safety Certificate be
        obligatory.

        Lord Justice Taylor noted:

        "Such flexibility is obviously highly desirable in relation to
        some    aspects of the guidance.      Butflexibility   can become
        degraded.    Where a local authority has chosen to incorporate the
        criteria of the Green Guide into a Safety Certificate there has
        been scope for considerable deviation from provisions which ought
        to command standard adherence. Thus, for example, at Hillsborough
        where the Safety Certificate required compliance with certain
        Green Guide recommendations anda departure was shown to have
        occurred, the defence was that the Guide expressly provided for
        flexibility so that a deviation from its provisions was a matter
        of legitimate discretion.”

                                                                                     contd/.
- 2 -

18 May 1990

Mr   \
The Sports Council for Wales agrees wholeheartedly with this
analysis of the problem but would respectfully disagree with the
solution recommended. While there remains a ready defence for
non-compliance the risk of complacency will remain with it.   If
compromise is required on this issue it might be appropriate for
local authorities to obtain written consent from the Football
Licensing Authority for any deviation from the Green Guide. This
would provide the flexibility desired by Lord Justice Taylor
without weakening safeguards.

I hope these comments are of assistance to you.
Yours sincerely




Senior Planning Officer
 Royal Institute of British Architects 66 Portland Place London W1N 4AO ® 071-580 5533
 MJV/S/1625/BCC                                30 May 1990                  ext 4245
 Your ref : FEP/90 35/35/1




 Room 920
 G2 Division
 Home Office
 Queen Anne's Gate
 London SW1H 9AT




 Guide to safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide)

 I write with further reference to your letter dated 10 April, and
 my acknowledgement of the 3 May in respect of the above matter.

 The Institute's Building Control Committee, Chairman Mr Sydney E Bell,
 met on the 22 May and considered the request contained in your letter
 for constructive comment on matters they would like to see addressed
 in the revision of the Green Guide.   I attach for the Division's
 consideration a copy of the relevent minutes of the Committee's
 meeting, which it is hoped will be of assistance.

 We look forward to receiving a copy of the draft revised Guide in
 due course, and if in the intervening time it is thought that we may
 assist the Division further then pleae do not hesitate to get in touch
 with me.




Secretary!
Building Control Committee




Fax: 071-2551541   Telex: 262433 MONREF 6 quoting ref 2931            Printed on recycled paper
 5.      Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide)

 5.01    The Committee noted the Home Office's invitation for comments, in the
         light of Lord Justice Taylor's final report on the inquiry into the
         Hillsborough Stadium Disaster which recommended that the content of
         the Green Guide be reviewed, to assist the Department in preparing a
         revised Guide and which would be made available to interested consultees
         prior to publication latter this year.   The Committee recognised
         that the subject matter concerned concentrations of people, and where
         they were accomodated in grandstands - buildings for people.

 5.02 Dr Marchant welcomed the opportunity to consider the content of the
       Guide, declaring his interest by being concsned with the four Ibrox
       stands.

 5.03    It was noted that the Guide provided guidance to ground management,
         local authorities and technical specialists on measures for improving
         spectator safety at existing grounds. It set, para 7, minimum
         standards which new grounds would be expected to meet, although the
         scope offered by new design work should lead to better standards than
         can be achieved at grounds already built.   The Guide had developed out
         of the Wheatley Report on Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds, 1972. Football
         stadia were covered.

5.11    Egress was considered to be a significant factor. Earagraph 56 reported
        research indicated that when it took more than seven minutes to vacate
        a defined area of terraced spectator accomodation, the crowd flow tended
        to become turbulent.   In those conditions the rate of flow might be
        reduced and individuals could loose control of their own movements.   The
        Guide recommended that exits from each area of spectator accomodation
        should be so designed that all spectators could leave that area, and if
        desired, pass into a free flowing exit route system in eight minutes or
        less.

5.12    The Committee believed more guidance should be given thereon. The movement
        of people should be further considered and help given on the effect of
        obstacles - changes in direction - on the flow of people.   It would be
        helpful for designers, and others, to have reassurance that the period of
        eight minutes, rather than seven minutes, remained justifiable, with
        the research source given as a footnote.

5.21    The Committee remains concerned that there should be adequate control
        into the ground. It recognises that greater problems may arise in
        inner city situations where because of restricted space around the
        ground there is a tendency for bunching of people to occour, sometimes
        on a massive scale,, and that the police will have greater difficulties
        in crowd control, and need to sort out those with and without tickets.
        It therefore needs to be recognised that facilities for control at the
        turnstiles need to be considered in relationship to the possible external
        controls.

5.22    The Committee consider greater guidance should be given on the arrangement
        of terraces, which may well be with us at least until the close of the
        century.   Fourth division clubs may face the greatest problems in meeting
        the recommendations of the final report, but as the report states, para
        140, the safety of spectators cannot be left to depend upon the
        affluence        dub.    It is considered from a safety point of view that
        long thin terraces are preferable, segregated horizontally, to arrangements
        where many tiers are incorporated in one enclosure.   But the Guide gives
        little guidance thereon.
 5.23   The Committee noted paragraphs 16.1 - 172 of the final report concerning
        the maximum density allowable on terraces.    Therein attention is called
        to the behaviour of people when excited, if they sway to and fro then
        there is a tendency for a person to occupy more space - especially at
        the perimeter of a group - and if one end of the area is a better
        viewing point than another.   The Guide sets a maximum density of 54
        people per 10 square metres, a figure which as demonstrated can under
        some circumstances be a high density.    The report calls into question
        paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Guide wherein a packing density of between
        54 and 27 persons per 10 square metresf depending upon the condition
        of the terrace or slope is given.    Whilst the final report calls for a
        13% reduction in density, it also calls into question the retention of
        the lower, 27, figure considering it could be a dangerous suggestion.
        The Committee recommends that the Home Office should review the content
        of the Guide, give clearer guidance, and in doing so take note of the
        practices adopted in other European Countries which are referred to in
        the final report.

5.31    The Committee considered that in recommendation 50 of the final report,
        concerning the possibility of early kick-off, especially for high-risk
        matches, (or playing on Sunday)the significance was not clear.   It was
        important in the case of high-risk matches to give consideration to where
        to hold it, what alternative neutral venues were possible, and alternatively
        whether there were advantages in playing the match in the evening.
        Clearly a wide range of matters should be taken into consideration,
        especially if the clubs grounds in question were located in town centres.

5.41    The Committee noted the reference in the final report to the strength
        of crush barriers, and the guidance given thereon in the Guide. It is
        considered that the guidance should be more clearly expressed, and that
        it should extend to recommendations for periodic re-inspections and test
        to determine that the barriers were still satisfactory after a period of
        use and exposure to the climatoic elements.   Advice on methods of test
        should be given.

5.51    The Secretary was asked to communicate the Committee's views to the
        Home Office.




Building Control Committee
Royal Institute of British Architects
22 May 1990                                                        MJV/S/BCC
FAX NO 081-579-6872                                  LONDON DISTRICT
                                                  SURVEYORS ASSOCIATION
Mr
G2 D i v i s i o n Room 920
Home Office
Queen A n n e 's Gate
London SW1H 9AT


                                                                                                                         DIRECT
Your Ref                   My Ref                           Date                 Please ask for                          LINE

                           L D S A .8                     27.4.90                                                    081-840-4793




Dear

GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS                                    ('GREEN GUIDE')

I refer to our recent telephone conversation and your letter of 10th
April 1990.

I can now confirm that the Association has nominated Mr|
of London Borough of Richmond upon Thames to participate                                                                   in     the
above working party.

Please notify Mr          direct of the relevant meeting dates.                                                                   His
address: is Civic Centre, 44, York Street, Twickenham, TW1 3 B Z .

I have been asked by the Association's Working Party on Safety of
Sports Grounds to draw your attention to the following items which
it is considered should be addressed during the review:

1.       EMERGENCY LIGHTING -                          SPECTATOR VIEWING AREAS

             It is felt that the minimum level of illuminance provided by
             emergency lighting in covered spectator viewing areas should
             be in excess of the    'normal' standard used for exit routes.
             Paqragraph 166 of the "Green Guide" refers to BS.5266: Part 1
             only and contains no additional commentry or advice in respect
             of these areas which, in the event of failure of bright
             floodlights, might not be adequately served by the low level
             of illumination provided by an emergency lighting       system
             meeting BS criteria for auditoria, etc.


C o n t 'd




                     President- KJ. Mullins, P.P.IJLS,F.IJLS,M.I.B.C,PO Box 52. Civic Centre. Enfield, EN1 3XD.
                 Hon. Secretary:- P.S. Johnson, A.R.I.C.V,M.IA.S,Crvic Centre, 14-16 Uxbridge Road, London W 5 2TH
        The Association's Mechanical and Electrical Sub-Committee are
        to prepare a paper on this subject and I will, of course,
        forward a copy of this in due course.     In the meantime, I
        would request that the issue     of levels of illuminance  of
        emergency lighting to spectator viewing areas be addressed in
        the forthcoming review of    the Guide and would welcome  the
        opportunity to contribute further should you feel that this
        might be useful.

2.      FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY - SAFETY CERTIFICATE

        Members   of  the   Association's   Safety  of   Sports   Grounds
        Committee have considered the production of guidance in the
        form of a "model certificte" with a vie w to achieving a degree
        of uniformity in the content of Certificates issued in London.
        Such  an   objective   would  clearly  require  the   use   of   a
        substantial proportion of      the resources available to      the
        Committee and it occurs to      me that this might anyway be a
        duplication of work that is to be carried out by the F.L.A.

        I would be pleased therefore if you could confirm whether or
        not it is your intention that the F.L.A. will produce a "model
        certificate"  or other similar document for individual Local
        Authorities to use in connection with grounds designated under
        the 1975 Act.

In order that the A ssociation can progress the issue of guidance to
member authorities an early indication of your intentions in respect
of   (2) above would be greatly appreciated.


Yours sincerely




Hon.   Secretary
                                                                                                                       BUILDING CONTROL

                                                                                                                       Extension:   7346




                                                                                                 Our ref:              BC/LMH/CW/SSG

                                                  LONDON DISTRICT                                Your ref: FEP/90 35/35/1
                                               SURVEYORS ASSOCIATION
                                                                                                 25th June 1990



For the attention of Mr

Fire and Emergency Planning Department
The Hone Office
Queen Anne's Gate
London   SW1H 9AT



Dear

Review of the Green Guide

I thank you for your letter of 12th June 1990 and confirm that I shall be
attending the meeting on 2nd July 1990.

It is noted that you wrote to various interested parties as long ago as 10th
April 1990 asking for suggestions to improve and update the present Green
Guide but regret to say that I cannot trace the receipt of your letter by the
LDSA.

In the hope that it is not yet too late I attach a schedule of items which
might be put before the working party for consideration.

Yours sincerely




Please reply to:

Convenor, Sports Grounds Committee
c/o London Borough of Richmond
Civic Centre, 44 York Street
Twickenham, Middlesex, TW1 3BZ


WP0809S




              President- KJ. Mullins. P.P.lJk.S.F.IA.S.M .I.e.C.PO Box 52. Civic Centre. Enfield. EN1 3XD.
       Hon.   S e c r e t a r y : , p.s. Johnson, A.R.I.C.C.M.I.A.S.Civic Centre. 14-16 Uxbridge Road. London WS 2TH
              Schedule of Items for Green Guide Review




R eferen ce                    ^ninmenfs


                  The guide is inconvenient to use and could be better
                  presented if published in similar size and format to
                  the Approved Documents supporting the Building
                  Regulations 1985.

                  More use should be made of drawings and diagrams to
                  illustrate the text. This could also serve to reduce
                  the need for lengthy written explanation and could
                  present the recommendations in an early understood
                  manner.

                  The guide is surprisingly silent on the facilities to
                  be provided to ensure adequate first aid
                  arrangements. The term "advanced first aid" also
                  needs an authoratative definition.

                  A typical safety certificate should be incorporated as
                  an appendix to the guide. If it is not felt possible
                  to provide this then at least a list of standard
                  clauses could.be provided to cover such items as
                  routine structural surveys, electrical installations
                  and testing etc..

                  The guide should provide a clearer indication of those
                  clauses thought in*appropriate for the assessment of
                  "Regulated Stands".

                  An index should be provided.

                  An appendix should be provided indicating the relevant
                  legislation appliable to sports grounds with a resume
                  of its purpose and content.

Chapter 5         The flow rate through turnstile should now be reduced
Cl. 47            to 660 persons per hour but it is suggested this rate
                  could be increased where spectators are only
                  presenting tickets for checking and money is not
                  changing hands.

Chapter 7         The dimensions of steps should equate with Building
Cl. 73            Regulations. The guide accepts risers as high as
                   190mm whereas Approved Document K stipulates 180mm as
                   the maximum acceptable.
Reference                   r.nmments


Cls. 122 and   Confusion still exists as to the difference between
183/188        the normal evacuation time and the emergency
               evacuation time. It is suggested that an emergency
               evacuation time of 5 minutes should never be exceeded
               in any circumstances and that greater emphasis should
               be placed on the need to agree times of between 2.5
               and 5 minutes with the appropriate Fire Authority.

Cl. 127        Radial gangways are not restricted as to their length
               between landings. It has been suggested that there
               should be no more than 16 risers to a flight as the
               Approved Document K recommends for stairways. This
               may be unnecessarily harsh in those situations where
               the slope of the terracing is shallow. This has
               fundamental implications for the basic design of
               stands because the introduction of a landing breaks
               the line of slope of the stand.

Cl. 130        The Chapter relating to stariways and ramps is 7 - not
               4.

Cl. 162        The type of "electrical fire warning system to alert
               staff" needs clarification. Does it mean a full
               blooded fire alarm system or something more demure
               which would not agitate spectators?

Cl. 166        It has been suggested that the levels of lighting
               complying with BS 5266 : Part 1 may be too low when a
               sudden failure of the floodlights might plunge the
               ground into semi-darkness. Spectators eyesight would
               not be able to acclimatize quickly enough to the
               changed circumstances. The Mechanical and Electrical
               Committee of the LDSA is preparing a report on the
               subject which will be submitted for consideration as
               soon as it is available.

Cl. 194iii     Reference needs to be made to the "warning tone" to be
               used before public safety announcements.

               Reference needs to be made to the siting of the
               emergency telephones at strategic points of the ground
               in accordance with the recommendations in L J Taylors
               Final Report.

Chapter 13     Should L J Taylors remarks re the age and ability of
Stewarding     Stewards be included in the guide?

               Should it not be made clear that the Senior Police
               Officer has the power to cancel the game or at least
               to delay "Kick Off" for reasons of safety?

               Reference should be made to the need for,a written
               statement of intent between Management and Police.
   Reference                    Comments


   Chapter 16      The number of people who can be safely accommodated is
                   now also controlled by the number who can gain access
                   to an area through the turnstiles etc., within a
                   period of one hour. The guide should reflect this
                   additional condition.

   Cls. 221, 222   The figures require revision in the ligiht of L J
                   Taylor's Final Report.

                   The guide does not address the problem of providing
                   access and facilities for disabled spectators.




VP0810S
                              The A ll England
                    Lawn Tennis & Croquet Club Wimbledon
                                   C h u rc h R o ad W im b le d o n
                                        L on d on S W 1 9 5 A E
                                    Telephone 0 1 -9 4 4 1066
                                   T elex 265180 a / b A E L T C
                                     Facsimile 01 -9 4 7 8752




CJG/LC


31st May 1990


Mi
G2 Division
Room 920
Home Office
Queen Anne1s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT                                                               Sent by Fax


Dear Mr

Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds ('Green Guide')

The Lawn Tennis Association received a letter from you dated 10th April on the
above subject.    A copy of your letter was posted on to us at The All England
Lawn Tennis Club as they suggested that we, as organisers of The Wimbledon
Championships, may wish to make comments regarding the Green Guide as you have
requested.     I would therefore like to mention the following points for
consideration:

i)       In the time available and due to the proximity of our Championships, we
         have been unable to study the Green Guide in detail but, even if we had
          done so, I am sure we would find little fault with it.

ii)      Our main point, however, is that it should be emphasised that the Green
         Guide is only a guide, albeit an important one, and that other
          solutions to safety problems may be available with proper consideration
          in differing situations.

iii)     We do not believe that the Green Guide should apply equally to all
         sports and/or venues.     For example, there are many aspects of The
         Championships, Wimbledon, which are quite different from other major
         sporting events and perhaps this point should be clarified in a
         preamble.

iv)      Is it correct that the responsibility for safety at a national event
          lies with a Local Authority, or should it be the responsiblity of the
         Home Office, who might be more consistent in their interpretation of the
         Green Guide?

                                                                                     Cont'd...



                         Chairman J A H C u rrv C hief Executive C J G orringe
v)    There is little or no mention of terrorism in the Guide.    Should this
      not be covered in discussing evacuation procedures as it may well be
      different from evacuating in the event of fire or crowd disturbance? In
      the event of a bomb or terrorism, should this be a matter for the Home
      Office with their greater degree of experience than the Local
      Authority?

I hope these comments will be seen in a constructive light.

Yours sincerely




Chief Executive



                  The Lawn Tennis Association
