                                                             Reference




               Mr Rimington                                     cc:      Mr Hammer
                                                                         Dr McQuaid




                                                                         Dr Jones
                                            f
                                                          /A
               HTT.T.SBOROUGH - COURT OF INQUIRY

               1.   On the basis of advice from SPD D, I sent you the attached
               minute stating HSE's involvement in the Inquiry and giving
               details of the Home Office evidence.
               2.    I have now received a minute from Dr Nicholson (copy
               attached) which clarifies the position further. Although I ana
               SPD D correctly stated that initially HSE had been asked to
               only to provide technical assistance to the Court, once contact
               had been made by RLSD with the Court and SheffieldCouncil,
               Dr Nicholson was told that he would be expected to present his
               report in court and this he will do in the week c o m m e n c i n g 26
               June. However, he has been informed that before he presents h
               report, Counsel will explain to the court that HSE were h^r®
               to provide technical assistance only and that Dr Nicholson l
               not there representing HSE and will not answer any questions on
               HSW' A etc. His report deals only with the technical aspects of
               the Hillsborough incident (Crush barriers etc) as I stated in
               my earlier minute.
               3.   Dr Nicholson's minute also explains the ph            asing
               inquiry and he has told me that he would expect to         be        *°
               provide technical information to the second phase          as RLSD has
               built up a large amount of information on such;Oi          ngs as
               turnstile counting systems which have obvious
               any general recommendations the Court may make to          the Home
               Office on ground safety generally.
               4    Although it is expected that Dr Nicholson's technical
               report will cause grea? press interest, I have discussedjjhe^
               matter with Dr Nicholson,             and ^        ■„ rlrevious
               concluded that my recommendation in paragraph 4 of my p
               minute that there is no current need for high level briefing etc
               as at^r^dford is correct._______




               HSE Secretjiri^E-^
                    June 1989



               TF GH\RHCOI

CODE   18-77
