*                                                   .»   .   fitatUVUt? 4\X^k --------" ----------
^                                                            fyf^ Qr(%ts 2)A zZ-
    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INOUIRY - HSE CONTRIBUTION                 "               ^   r-   ___
                                                                             ^    /fr$ ?      rS
    Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report on the Hillsborough Stadium
    Disaster, issued in early August, generously acknowledges the part
    played by HSE staff in the investigation. Those not directly connected
    with the investigation may be surprised to learn the extent of HSE
    involvement during the fourteen weeks between the incident and the
    publication of the Interim Report.

    The Sheffield Area Office contacted Sheffield City Council to offer
    assistance immediately after the incident on 15 April and staff from
    FAID, RLSD and TD attended the scene on Sunday 16 April. Specialists
    from TD and RLSD carried out examinations on site on Monday 17 April on
    at least six occasions subsequently. The Inquiry team was appointed on
    17 April and HSE was asked to provide technical assistance to Professor
    Maunder, the Technical Assessor. The HSE team was led by Chris
    Nicholson, Deputy Director of RLSD's Safety Engineering Laboratory,
    and, initially at least, our remit covered the following areas:
    turnstiles; gates; barriers; signs and walls.

    As with any major incident priorities changed when new evidence emerged
    and advice was sought from HSE in many other areas. Hence we were also
    called upon to consider crowd densities and their measurement, noise
    levels in the stadium, and other more esoteric aspects such as
    crowd flow dynamics.

    The Public Inquiry was held at Sheffield Town Hall and, since it
    occupied normal working hours, it was necessary to hold meetings in the
    evenings at the Sheffield Laboratories. This enabled presentations and
    reports on progress to made at short notice to members of the Inquiry
    team. West Midlands Constabulary was responsible for the gathering of
    evidence and we worked closely with the Police Team. This provided an
    interesting insight into how another organisation conducted a major
    incident investigation. At times, we were astonished by the speed with
    which information was made available to us and how quickly our
    suggestions were acted upon.

    A crowd packing test was described to the Inquiry during one of the
    evening briefing sessions. Lord Justice Taylor and most of the Inquiry
    team immediately expressed the wish to participate in a repeat test.
    This test took place a few days later with the assistance of volunteers
    from RLSD and under the watchful eye of South Yorkshire Ambulance
    Service. Thus the Inquiry was given first-hand experience of crowd
    densities similar to those which had occurred at Hillsborough on 15
    April.

    HSE's report was submitted     to the Inquiry on 13 June and subsequently      [I _ ’ )
    released to the.,.media. The   main findings were as follows:                  M "    <

    a) Some of the crush barriers in Pens 3 and 4, and the perimeter gates
    in Pens 3 and 4, did not comply with the requirements of the Home Office
    Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.

    b) The broken barrier in Pen 3 had been made from wrought iron tube and
    mild steel angle section, and it was at least sixty years old. The
    discovery of a newspaper dated 24 October 1931 in the tube from this
    barrier helped to confirm its age. This barrier was corroded severely in
    some areas.

                                        -   1   -
*   *



    I   c) There was a fault in the counting mechanism on one of the turnstiles
        serving the West Terrace. This may have resulted in about 400 people not
        being counted as they entered the ground.

        d) The best estimate of the total number of people who entered the
        ground during the three openings of Gate C and through the West Terrace
        turnstiles (A-G) was 9734, with a maximum of 10124.

        e) Calculations showed that the capacity of Pens 3 and 4, in which
        fatalities occurred, should have been 1015 and-.jLfl36j.respectively if all
        the crush barriers had complied with the Guide. However the barriers did
        not comply and the capacities should have been 8-2-2 at'id 87T’rusrpci,tivo

        f) The best estimate of the number of people in Pen 3 around the time
        of the incident was 1576. Hence Pen 3 was overcrowded by considerable
        amount.

        Perhaps the biggest tribute to the many staff who contributed to the
        HSE report was that its findings were accepted unanimously by the
        Inquiry and the nine QCs representing interested parties. Much to our
        surprise HSE staff were not required to give evidence, although Chris
        Nicholson was asked to sit with and advise Mr Andrew Collins, Counsel to
        the Inquiry, during the examination of key witnesses.

        There was considerable media interest in HSE's activities during the
        investigation and, although no interviews were permitted at the time,
        both BBC and ITV documentary teams were allowed into the Safety
        Engineering Laboratory to film material for programmes to be broadcast
        after the issue of Lord Justice Taylor's final report. Footage on
        barrier examination, stress analysis, crowd packing, and the techniques
        for estimating crowd numbers was filmed.

        Discussions on how HSE may be involved in the longer term aspects of the
        Inquiry are currently underway. Whatever else we are asked to do, there
        can be no doubt that HSE's willingness to participate in this
        investigation thus far, and the dedication of its staff, will raise
        substantially the public profile of the organisation. All HSE staff
        involved in the investigation were grateful for the opportunity to
        assist in establishing the causes of this major disaster, which occurred
        so close to home.




        RLSD
        Sheffield
        14/8/89
\\&   ■
