                                            St. Annes House
                             Health &       University fload
                                            Bootle L20 3MF
                             Safety         Merseyside

                                            Telephone Direct Line 0 5 1-9 5 1
                             Executive      Swtcnooard 0 5 1-9 5 1 4000




The Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 30Y                                                     13 February 1990




Dear Sir

   write on behalf of     Mr A C Barrell,      Director of                 Technology
Division, Health & Safety Executive.

I was advised by Inspector Eggleston (of your force) to write to
you for authorisation    for a photograph of the Hillsborough
disaster to be released for HSE use.

To explain; Mr Barrell     is presenting a paper on Management of
Safety at a top level conference to be held in April of this year.
The audience will comprise mainly of directors of major British
industrial companies. He intends to speak about recent major
incidents such as Clapham Junction and the Kings Cross Fire, to
name just two, and wishes to emphasise points made by the use of
general pictures (35 mm slides), of each incident.

I must stress    that it is not the intention to re-appraise these
incidents but,   rather to highlight the lessons learnt as laid down
in the enquiry   reports, for the benefit of those who are required
to address the   question of safety in their organisations.

Although photographs for other incidents will probably be obtained
through a press agency I think the Police (after watching the
"First Tuesday"   documentary)   are best placed to provide the
photograph we require      ie. a general picture  of the incident
showing the crowded enclosures and the overspill on to the pitch
area at Hillsborough.

If you are agreeable to this request I should be grateful if you
would arrange for a picture, or preferably a slide, to be sent to
me at the address below as soon as possible

    Health & Safety Executive
    Technology Division
    Room 315
    St A n n e 's House
    University Road
    Bootle
    Merseyside L20 3RA
  f you require any other information, or are unable to meet this
 request I would be grateful if you would arrange for me to be
 notified by telephoning 051-951-3540 in order that I can review
 the situation.

 Yours faithfully




 Directors Office - Technology Division




FEB/BK13
Im
