               3GPC3
               IjAU

cc


TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AT SPORTING EVENTS

1. I have received the attached letter on safety of temporary
structures at sporting events from the Association of County
Councils and I writing to seek your help with the reply.

2.              I believe you are working on some guidance on
           temporary
           structures - if so, is it far enough advanced to
include in the reply? Also I understand you are a member of the
National Outdoor Event group working on a proposed British
Standard for events of this type. Should it be referred to in
this draft?

3.                              suggested you may be able to offer me
a contribution o n t h e a p p l i c a t i o n of the Home Office 'Green
Guide' to such events.

4. Finally,              I should be grateful for your advice on
enforcement responsibilities.

5. If you could try to let me have your contributions by next
Tuesday, (26 June) I should be grateful.




LAU
19 June 1990
                                                                           Secretary:   r g   WENOf




                                                    ■4V
              Association of County Councils
EATON HOUSE-66aEATON SQUARE-LONDON SW1W 9BH Telephone*071-2351200
                                   FACSIMILE TRANSCEIVER ONLY 071-235 8 4 5 8

 OurRef3B/W/F&EP 32/6                     Yo u r R e f:                   Date: 18 June          1990




Health and Safety Executive
Baynards House
LONDON
W2 4TF




Dear

TEMPORARY STRDCTDRES AT SPORTING EVENTS

This Association has recently given consideration to the
Hillsbrough Inquiry Report during the course of which reference
was made to the disparity of standards existing between permanent
and temporary structures at sporting events.

The view was expressed by certain of our advisers that safety
standards at 'hospitality villages' at major sporting events and
trade shows require the same stringent conditions applying to
them in view of the large number of persons in attendance.  I am
not entirely certain what legislation would operate in such
circumstances in order to maintain satisfactory public safety but
I have been asked to bring the problem to the attention of the
Health and Safety Executive in order that proper consideration
can be given to the matter.

It would I think be helpful if you could let me know whether this
issue has been brought to your attention on a previous occasion,
if it is one that falls to be dealt with by the Health and Safety
Executive and if so what steps have been taken to give
consideration to the problem.  I await hearing from you in due
c ourse.

You^s sincerely____________




  This m atter is b«ing dealt with by
                                                                                erp
