     I




*h                   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                                    of the

                       Policy and Resources Committee

                               16th March, 1999



*P        PRESENT:   Councillor Peter Millea, Chair;
                     Councillors Chris Curry, Jimmy Gouldbourne,
                     Chris Newby, Bill Roberts, Jack Spriggs,
                     Len Tyrer and Peter Tyrrell.



                     Councillors Joe Devaney and Frank Prendergast
                     also attended.



*N                   An apology for absence was received from
                     Councillor Alan Dean.




*M *7.    Minutes of Last Meeting

          The proceedings of the last meeting of the Working Party
          held on 23rd September, 1998 were submitted for information
          and the Working Party placed on record:-

           (a)   its absolute support for the decision made at that
                 meeting, as later confirmed by the City Council, for
                 the secondment of the Working Party Solicitor to the
                 Hillsborough Family Support Group to continue; and

           (b)   its sincere thanks to the Working Party Solicitor for
                 the professional manner in which she has performed
                 her duties on behalf of the Family Support Group
                 throughout her period of secondment.



                 Following a request from the "Hillsborough Justice
                 Campaign", the Chair agreed to clarify at a future
                 date the terms of reference of the Working Party
                 which had been referred to in the Minutes of the
                 previous meeting.




         al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/A160399
*8.     Private Prosecutions

        The Working Party considered, subject to "sub judice"
        restrictions, the general progress of matters related to
        the private prosecutions initiated by the Family Support
        Group against the two most senior police officers on duty
        at the Stadium on the day of the Disaster and in particular
        the action taken by the Group to challenge the funding of
        the Defendants by South Yorkshire Police Authority.

        Resolved that the information submitted to the meeting be
        noted.


*9 .    Hillsborough Stadium Memorial

        The Working Party considered matters relating to the recent
        announcement by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club that they
        will be erecting a permanent memorial to all the victims of
        the Disaster in a prominent location immediately outside
        their Hillsborough Stadium.

        Resolved that the announcement by Sheffield Wednesday be
        noted a n d :-

         (a)   clarification be sought as to whether the proposed
                memorial will be sited on Sheffield Wednesday or
                Sheffield City Council land;

         (b)   the role of this Working Party in actively working
                for the memorial over a number of years be noted; and

         (c)   with regard to the suggested boycott by Liverpool
               Football Club fans of the fixture at Hillsborough on
               May 8th 1999, the Working Party expressed its view
               that it was a matter for individual supporters to
               decide whether or not they should attend the match or
               not.




       al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/A160399
