The Chair of the Hillsborough Working Party has prepared an interim
report on the findings and recommendations contained in Lord Chief
Justice Taylor's Interim Report of Inquiry into the Hillsborough
Stadium Disaster of 15th April 1989.

                             -   o 0 o -

   "As you look around Hillsborough you will appreciate why it
   has been regarded for so long as the perfect venue for all
   kinds of important matches."

           Bert McGee: Chairman of Sheffield Wednesday F.C.,
           from the match programme for 15th April 1989.


       Members will be aware that Phase I of the Inquiry
  concentrated on identifying the causal factors, their
  influence and significance, that led to the death of 95
  Liverpool football supporters and over 730 injured on and
  about the central sections of Hillsborough's West Terrace.
  L.J. Taylor's findings led to 43 interim recommendations of
  which 28 were required to be implemented before the 1989/90
  Football League programme commenced.

       The Hillsborough Interim Report was published by the
  Home Secretary on 4th August 1989. The limited scope of the
  Report's proposals constitute a 'holding exercise' and may,
  in the light of evidence submitted to Phase II of the
  Inquiry, be subject to amendment or withdrawal in the full
  report which should be published in early 1990. The second
  phase of the Inquiry, based in London, will consider wider
  issues relating to post-Hillsborough football including: the
  needs of crowd control and public safety at sports events;
  membership schemes; identity cards; all seater stadia; super
  stadia; ticketless fans; ticket touts; and other specific
  matters such as excessive pre-match drinking.

       L. J. Taylor, 59, was appointed a High Court Judge in
  1980 and has been an Appeal Court Judge since 1987.   He
  prosecuted in the John Poulson corruption trial and led the
  prosecution team at the 1979 trial of Jeremy Thorpe, who was
  cleared of conspiracy and incitement to murder.

       During the course of the Inquiry, clear evidence of
  thoroughness, commonsense and a sensitivity to the way the
  football industry operates has characterised an approach
  commensurate to the task in hand.

       The Hillsborough tragedy was the fifth post-war soccer
  disaster involving multiple deaths.  (The others were at
  Bolton, Ibrox, Bradford and Haysel.)  Each possessed three
  indisputable ingredients; human failings; inadequate stadia;
  and flawed pre-match planning. What distinguishes each
  disaster is the fatal mixture of these ingredients.


  KC1AB0
     The Taylor report concludes:   the worst disaster in the
history of British football directly happened because pens 3
and 4 on Hillsborough's West Terrace became 'grossly
overcrowded' and was subject to fatal crushing upon the
opening of Gate C, to ease the unrelieved pressure at the
seven West Terrace turnstiles, sometime after 2.52 p.m. The
failure of the Police to block-off the central tunnel
accessing pens 3 and 4, combined with an absence of
monitoring to these pens and control to the numbers entering
them, allowed a series of fatal surges to occur through
poorly laid out crash barriers leading to the collapse of
two sections of barrier 124a in pen 3 after 2.52 p.m.

     At the heart of the disaster is human failing.   L.J.
Taylor's document grimly identifies and documents human
failing on the day, in pre-match arrangements, and in the
supervision of Hillsborough's General Safety Certificate. A
combination of these wholly avoidable failings led to the
deaths of 95 people at a stadium declared a 'premier venue'
by the Football Association.

     Throughout the document, L. J. Taylor applies the term
'piecemeal' to describe his view of the impact of enforced
and voluntary changes to Hillsborough and the management of
human traffic at football matches. This can be extended as
a living metaphor for an industry - and its practices -
which, as it enters the 21st century, can accommodate live
satellite transmissions of its product under conditions that
starkly contrast private affluence and public squalor.

     The piecemeal way Footballs' vested interests have
accommodated successive judicial representations for change
in safety practices is underpinned by Governmental
indifference.   Safety should no longer be subject to
arbitrary targetting .and the hidden hand of the market.
Government's responsibility should no longer be shirked.

     The conditions prevailing at Hillsborough on April 15th
neither occurred in a vacuum nor in isolation. The poverty
of official thinking and institutionalised (mal)practices
within the football industry remains undiminished less than
two weeks into the new soccer season. In many ways
Hillsborough is football in miniature. The fundamental
malaise that afflicts the English game, condensed into the
events of that one afternoon, illuminates the task in hand.

     At a Press conference prior to the Inquiries
preliminary hearing, L.J. Taylor stressed his investigation
would not be about apportioning blame. Yet the course and
contents of the Inquiry's account of the events led him to
conclude: "The main reason for the disaster was the failure
of Police control.”



KC1AB0
     On August 5th, the day after the reports publication,
Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield, the officer
commanding, was suspended on full-pay. Moreover, the only
people yet to be dismissed for their conduct arising from
the disaster has been a civilian Press officer with the
South Yorkshire Police, and a junior ambulanceman.

     With 801 officers under Duckenfield's overall command,
to control a crowd of some 54,000, the collapse of effective
leadership compromised the lives of many people in the small
turnstile enclave on Leppings Lane and, with fatal
consequences, the lives of innocent spectators corralled
into pens meant to secure their safety. A similar number of
Police Officers were deemed necessary to prevent some 500
'hippies' assembling at Stonehenge intent on celebrating the
summer solstice. That spring afternoon, at a Hillsborough
bathed in sunshine, British football reached its lowest
point.  It has yet to creep out of its Victorian sewer.

     The Taylor document uniquely places a multi-agency
crowd management and decision-making process under the
microscope. Weeks of planning, years of experience and
decades of neglect are copiously examined. Taylor's verdict
on the events (of that spring afternoon on April 15th) forms
a blistering catalogue of the bankruptcy of thoughts and
deeds that characterise the culture and procedures of those
self-regulating 'interested parties' who administered,
policed and licenced the Hillsborough Stadium.

     In unravelling the complex chain of events and
influences at Hillsborough, L. J. Taylor highights four
salient factors which can be replicated across football:-

1.   The extent to which judicial recommendations are
     compromised by reason of cost, indifference and
     complacency;

2.   many of the 'Green Guides' safety provisions are
      defined in general terms and are consequently subject
      to minimal interpretations.   Guidance must become
      mandatory and be subject to a regular, annual review,
      based on a clearly defined 'report-back' process;

3.   the degree to which 'hooligan hysteria' permeates deep
      into the occupational culture and operational
      practices of major police forces at football matches^
      places safety consideration to the vagaries of security
      and segregatory practices effectively promoting a
      cavalier disregard for football spectators as citizens
      and consumers;

4.   the need for what Lord Hailsham - the creator of the
      post of Minister of Sport in 1962 - called "a coherent
      body of doctrine, perhaps even a philosophy of govern­
     ment encouragement."

KC1AB0
       From the statements gathered by the Hillsborough
  Working Party and those advanced to this office from the
  F.S.A., a clear picture emerged quite quickly in our reading
  of fans eye-witness accounts.   Coupled with a review of the
  Inquiries, 3,800 plus pages of transcript, the reports
  findings are consistent with our evaluation of the oral,
  written and visual evidence available to the Hillsborough
  Working Party.

       L. J. Taylor's reconstruction of events and causal
  interpretation is wide-ranging and comprehensive given his
  terms of reference.   Consequently, Parts I and II of his
  document should be considered an authorative and stimulating
  account of the tragedies long-term, short-term and immediate
  causes. However, issue is taken with two points of
  interpretation identifiable in paragraphs 205-207 and 208.
  Wider observation and criticisms of Parts III and IV form
  the remainder of this Working Party's Interim Report.

       Phase I of the Inquiry lasted a total of 34 days
  including the preliminary hearing and final submission from
  Counsel.  174 witnesses gave evidence, 65 of whom were
  police officers.  From its inception and beyond genuinely
  held fears and misgivings were expressed as to the
  objectivity, fairness and reliabiity of a departmental
  inquiry.  Fear of an Establishment cover-up, given the
  lamentable performance of South Yorkshire Police, and more
  pertinently, concern with a victim-blaming backlash,
  personified in Chief Superintendent's original account,
  reinforced many people's fears. These understandable
  anxieties were quickly dispelled in the course of the
  Inquiry and in its published findings.



Liverpool Supporters at 'Away' Matches:

       In paragraphs 205-207, L. J. Taylor briefly summarises
  and discusses a dossier, produced by South Yorkshire Police
  and presented as evidence, claiming to identity a pattern of
  ticketless fans, some with forgeries, in attendance at
  Liverpool 'away' matches.    Though Taylor rightly dismisses
  the claim that at Hillsborough this was a causal factor in
  the build-up to the disaster, his persistent and underlying
  logic throughout is that to attend or attempt to attend an
  'away' fixture without a ticket constitutes deviant,
  troublesome behaviour.    The assertion that ticketless fans
  are a problem, which is to be dealt with in Phase II of the
  Inquiry, involves a misleading understanding of the issue.

       The incidence of ticketless fans at major football
  matches is a product of a number of variables and is not



  KC1AB0
reducible to a single causal influence.   Indeed, those
people who point their finger at fans, including the F.A.,
have much to gain from locating blame with the fans alone.

     The dossier does not constitute the 'whole history' of
this particular problem nor does it offer a reliable account
of its incidence and causation.   As an account of
ticketless activity amongst Liverpool supporters it is a
fundamentally flawed argument and document.

     A brief non-comprehensive list of influences underlying
the problem are listed below:-

1. Liverpool F.C., like a number of major English clubs,
draws support from all over Britain.   Beyond the
impracticalities of purchasing tickets for fans living
outside the Merseyside region the market for Liverpool
tickets, especialy all-ticket games, is often
over-subscribed.   With Liverpool's huge following in the
Capital demand is always inflated when the Club play in the
London area. Games such as those detailed by L.J. Taylor
are often advertised in Liverpool as being sold-out, when in
fact seasoned fans know 'cash payment' gates are usually
available. And there are obvious difficulties for fans
outside of Liverpool.

2. The success of Liverpool has led to a corresponding
inflation in demand for tickets at all Liverpool games which
the Club cannot cope with given the capacity at Anfield (a
situation aggravated by the 15% cut in terrace capacities at
all grounds).   Existing stadia, including Wembley, cannot
accommodate peak demand, a fact exploited by ticket touts.
With all seated-stadiums and a compulsory football
membership scheme on the Government's sporting agenda,
stadium capacities will be further reduced.   It is the
Club's failure to invest, long-term, in its fixed assets
(i.e. stadia) that has created the situation.

3. The issue, moreover, from an 'away' fans perspective is
one of inconsistent ticket practices and plain exploitation.
Many clubs operate dual pricing regimes for visitors and
home spectators.   The F.A's humble turn-around, following
Hillsborough, on allocation policy did not happen from any
sense of justice.   It is cynical exploitation and
inherently unfair practices which fuels the problem.

4. The decision to attend an 'away' fixture is often
spontaneously taken with the practical knowledge that
legitimate entry can be gained to a match that is ticketted.
At Luton, on Saturday, August 26th, some 1,000 Liverpool
fans attended a ground which had unilaterally banned 'away'
supporters. As members of this Working Party have already




KC1ABO
   drawn attention to this issue in relation to L.J. Taylor's
   examples (para.206). It should be stated that it is not a
   criminal activity to attend an 'away' match ticketless, nor
   is it indicative of bad behaviour.

No Conspiracy:

       In football semi-final and final matches are, for the
   spectators, tense but festive occasions.   All are 'away
   fans', strangers for the duration of the game. Both
   ticketless fans and fans the worse for drink tend to be more
   noticeable at such neutral venue games. Considering the
   amplification of the problems associated with football and
   alcohol misuse in sections of the print-media it is a
   phenomenon not unknown to the authorities, least of all the
   Police in their operational planning.

       Given the incidence of multiple deaths in British soccer
   stadia and the intensification of social control efforts in
   the post-Heysel period, it is incumbent on the Police, more
   so at matches where all spectators are strangers to a venue,
   to legislate for every eventuality based on known criteria.
   Thus every crowd management regime must take into account
   all problems that are likely to arise.

       Paragraph 208 of the report clearly states that groups
   of ticketless 'fans' and a 'minority' who had drank too much
   "certainly aggravated the problems faced by the Police."
   Of all the ingredients at a turnstile facility, prone to
   congestion, which contained 23 turnstiles for 24,256
   ticket-holding spectators, the most predictable are the
   aforementioned.

       What aggravated 'the problem faced by the Police' was
   not this most foreseable of problems but rather the ruthless
   fixation of the South Yorkshire Police to keep rival
   spectators apart causing the closure of 12 North Stand
   turnstiles on the Pennistone Road, which had the resultant
   effect of exacerbating numbers accessing the Leppings Lane
   turnstiles, thus impairing the efficiency of the turnstiles
   devoid of a controlled filtration operation.

      However, disconcerting for people like John Carlisle,
  M.P., there was nothing noteworthy in the behaviour of
  Liverpool fans at the turnstiles area and within the ground
  on the day. What the Police did not legislate for was the
  likelihood that their operation could so compromise basic
  safety that it could lead to a disaster.

      It needs to be clearly stated that to the allegations of
  'mass drunkenness', and the looting of the dead's
  possessions, L. J. Taylor is frankly blunt:  "Not a single



  KC1ABO
  witness was called before the Inquiry to support any of
  these allegations, although every opportunity was afforded
  for any of the represented parties to have any witness
  called whom they wished.”


PART III - THE CONCLUSIONS:

       The degree to which the Hillsborough Report determines
  responsibility is of some concern.   Four organisations are
  clearly blamed for the tragedy yet L. J. Taylor's
  allocation of blame results in comparative marginalisation
  of the roles and obligations of the F.A., Sheffield City
  Council and Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs. All were
  causative agents.

       The slow accumulated effects of complacency,
  mismanagement and piecemeal deterrent led safety strategies,
  coupled with operational blunders on the day, compromised
  human safety to the point of indifference.   The findings of
  the Hillsborough Report and interim recommendations mirror
  that fact.

        The basic element of a first-class football match is
   that predictable, even identifiable numbers of people will
   assemble at a clearly defined location over a specific time.
   On such an irreducible fact, each Saturday, during the
   football season, varying concentrations of people enter into
   human traffic control systems based on the principles and
   the spirit of the Safety At Sports Grounds Act, 1975, and
   the voluntary provisions of its supplementary 'Green Guide'
   (Home Office Code for Safety at Grounds).   In theory, via a
   multi-agency approach, spectators access and take a position
   in a certificated controlled environment.   This supposedly
   structured approach to spectator safety has developed on the
   basis of lessons claimed to have been learned from the
   Bolton disaster onwards.   However, its application to all
   92 league clubs was not effected until the Popplewell Review
   of 1985.

   The Police:

      A remarkable feature of the document is the forthright
  manner in which Taylor demarcates responsibility.   His
  findings constitute a damning and unequivocal indictment of
  the manner in which the South Yorkshire Police operation at
  Hillsborough was planned, led and administered.   Even in
  their evidence to the Inquiry, L.J. Taylor conceded (para.
  279).   "Sadly, I must report that for the most part the
  quality of their evidence was in inverse proportion to their
  rank."

       Trained solely for a public order response, Police



  KC1AB0
operational orders on the day and the de-facto influence of
social control perceptions of safety compromised the lives
of 95 people and injured many others.   The document
testifies to L.J. Taylor's frustration in his most revealing
remark in the whole text (para. 285): "It is a matter of
regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions, the
South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede that
they were in any respect at fault in what occurred ....It
would have been more seemly and encouraging for the future
if responsibility had been faced."

     It is this attitude of mind, deeply engrained in the
operational culture of many major Police Forces in the
policing of football matches - highlighted in the terms and
conditions of the Operational Orders of the South Yorkshire
Police for April 15th which breeds a siege mentality and a
siege approach to spectator safety.   The Police, in effect,
have become the front-line for a Government slavish in its
advocacy of repressive football regulations.   On any other
terrain such a strategy would stimulate a national outcry.
How bitterly ironic that most major football stadiums now
resemble a Gulag.

     The Hillsborough Report's findings graphically detail
the dangers of a public order approaach rather than a public
safety approach to crowd control by the Police.   Taylor,
because of his strict terms of reference, is unable to
investigate whether this approach to crowd control is
adopted by most of the other Police Forces.   Evidence based
on the contemporary history of Hillsborough as a premier
venue' endorses the claim that crowd safety is not only a
patchworth quilt of half-measures but, in the hands of many
Police Forces, has become a hit-and-miss affair.  Indeed,
with some irony, it is the South Yorkshire and West Midlands
Police Forces that head the F.S.A's complaints list.

     L. J. Taylor's assertion that South Yorkshire Police
"have handled crowd problems sensitively and successfully" -
(para. 270) at a large number of football games and during
coal and steel strikes, is an interpretation - not a fact.
It is a misleading statement. One has to ask: Sensitivity
and success - by whose standards?

    A review of Hillsborough attendance figures for all
first-class matches over the last decade raises serious
doubts about operational experience and expertise against
a backcloth of average gates that fall far short of
capacity.  Semi-final ties provide the only consistent full
capacities at Sheffield Wednesday F.C., who on average have
less than one capacity gate for each season. A clear
example of the effect this has on safety strategy is
discernible in the dual policy of 'filling the terraces.'



KC1AB0
The practice of letting fans 'find their own level'
(para. 171) - within a terrace regime that mirrors a maze -
is borne out of inexperience and a disregard for the people
populating those terraces.

    The collapse of operational leadership occurred under
conditions that were entirely foreseable.   Under such
circumstances, how can internal monitoring of Police control
strategies for football be continued given the extent to
which the findings of the Hillsborough Report castigate
almost every feature of the Police operation?

     The Police operation at Hillsborough was the product of
an attitudinal approach formulated over recent years.   It
was, on the basis of the evidence, not the result of events
on the day. In total, the Hillsborough disaster was the
product of mistaken priorities and a mentality which
reflects the erosion of consensus over use of Police power
over football spectators.   This erosion, a development of
the 1980's, had its catalyst in the Heysel disaster.  Its
product has produced, amongst many senior and junior Police
Officers, a negative stereotyping of soccer supporters.

     When a group/category of people are viewed as a problem
to be restrictively and strongly policed, based on a
negative reputation, then correspondingly negative notions
of suspicion dominate interactions with spectators (ask any
'away' fani). This suspicion, on a practical level
compromises quite radically the facility of 'benefit of
doubt'.  On pens 3 and 4 on 15th April 1989, many people
were denied any benefit of doubt. That suspicion,
institutionalised and accumulated over the recent past, has
so permeated operational culture and practices that the
capacity of the Police not just to recognise suffering but
to understand and comprehend it, led to such a delay in
their response to the crisis confronting them in pen 3 and 4.

    Four specific points on Police tactics deserve to be
illustrated:-

1.   On the basis of Police operational orders for 1989, as
influenced by the 1988 fixture, L. J. Taylor summarises the
response of the Police to the immediate crisis on pens 3 and
4 thus: (para. 246) "Accordingly that prohibition (pitch
access) was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order by
being put into capital letters. The combination of no
instructions as to overcrowding and a strong prohibition on
opening the gates was likely to make Police recognition of
crushing slow and their response reluctant."

    This reductionist interpretation is later qualified:
(para 248) "Naturally one would hope that common sense and
humanity would make some officers cut through the rules and



KC1ABO
open a gate if fans were clearly in distress." This, of
course, was the logic initially behind the request for Gate C
to be opened in the face of unrelieved pressure to the West
Terrace turnstiles.  But common sense and humanity are so
constrained by Police rules and regulations and attitudinal
appraisals of football fans that, even when confronted by a
tragedy of epic proportions, the inadequate belated response
of officers was to call for fans to move backwards to ease
congestion at the front of the pens.

     Well in advance of the kick-off, spectators within the
West Terrace and the North Stand were signalling to Police
Officers and amongst themselves to the difficulties on the
central pens as early as 2.45. The Police were made aware
of the developing and increasing fears of fans well in
advance of their recognition and response to the situation
as an actual emergency.

2.   Through a public address system, video cameras,
personal radios, and a bank of television monitors - all
manned - the flow of the disaster was unheeded.    From an
elevated Police control box - crammed with audio-visual
equipment - events unfolded unrecognised.    L. J. Taylor
remarks: (para. 244) "... attempts could have been made to
alert Officers on the perimeter track to watch for
overcrowding and report their observations.    In the event,
pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took
place, fans   were showing and signallying distress. None of
this was seen or recognised in the (Police) control room."

3. The refusal to delay the kick-off was a decision left to
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.   At the corresponding
fixture for 1987 (Leeds United -v- Coventry City) the Police
delayed the kick-off because of the late-arrivals.  This
fact, not available to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,
raises questions about what did and did not influence Police
operationalorders and their  subsequent (non)amendment.

4.   On the   1988 fixture and the subject of policing to the
Leppings Lane turnstile approaches, L. J. Taylor comments
(para.  24) "There was a very large and consistent body of
evidence that, on the day, the Police in Leppings Lane
conducted an efficient filtering exercise, designed to keep
away those without tickets and control the flow of fans
towards the ground."   However, opposition from the Police
to this claim forces L. J. Taylor to conclude: (para. 215)
"I think, be that whilst the policy may have been no
different, in practice the policing in 1988 was more
efficient and was not put to the same test and strain as a
year later."

     With all the resources available to the Inquiry Team,



KC1AB0
   we find it very surprising on the basis of 'consistent
   evidence' that L. J. Taylor can only provide an opinion and
   cannot clarify whether there was a major policy difference
   between policing at the Leppings Lane in 1988 and 1989.


The Football Association:

      The F.A. escape relatively unscathed in the Report.
  Lord Justice Taylor criticises the choice of grounds and
  believes the F.A. in future will be more sensitive and
  responsive to reasonable representations about their choice
  of grounds for semi-finals.

      The F.A. received many complaints about the ticket
  allocation in 1988.   Their response in 1989 was to do
  exactly the same as in 1988, displaying considerable
  contempt for both Liverpool F.C., who made representations
  and their supporters.

      On the basis of Hillsborough's recent safety record, the
  F.A.'s belief that it was, prior to April 15th, a 'premier
  venue' defies belief.   As the Games Governing Body and as
  the designators of the match itself, their failure to
  acquaint themselves with Hillsborough's safety certificate
  is a startling failure of duty.   Post-Hillsborough, both
  the F.A. and the Football League have not introduced a
  mechanism to collate, assimilate and evaluate information on
  safety management at Football League grounds - nor do they
  intend to.   This is a dereliction of responsibility in the
  light of the Hillsborough findings.

       If Hillsborough personifies the best English Football
  can offer, then it says little for the standards and
  expectations of the -F.A. at Hillsborough and all other
  League grounds.  Standards of safety, comfort and spectator
  facilities are Dickensian compared to other fixed leisure
  venues, especially as football constitutes the country's
  national game.   Hillsborough should never have been chosen
  again as a neutral venue location on the basis of its pre
  1989 safety record.

       The West Terrace has long been criticised by supporters
  on Merseyside because of crushing problems and also the
  restricted views due to fencing.   Whilst those criticisms
  may not have reached the ears of the F.A. certainly the
  events at the 1981 semi-final between Spurs and Wolves did,
  when many Spurs fans were injured in a crush at the West
  Terrace.   On the next occasion (1987) the ground was used
  for a semi-final tie between Leeds and Coventry and this
  provoked complaints from Leeds fans who were allocated the
  West Terrace and experienced crushing problems. The



  KC1ABO
   kick-off at that game was also delayed due to the late
   arrival of supporters at the stadium.

        The issue, primarily for L. J. Taylor, on the choice of
   venue, ends, and the unfairness of the F.A.'s decision to
   play the semi-final in Sheffield for the second consecutive
   year was validated in the report on the basis that the 1988
   fixture "had been considered a successfully managed event",
   (para. 270),   Clearly, the Liverpool fans present at that
   fixture had not been privy to these considerations.   At
   that match severe overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 caused many
   fans to evacuate the terracing via the West Stand.   When
   this became uniform a little before kick-off time in 1988,
   the Police moved in to close-off the central tunnel.   The
   pictures of fans being hauled up into the West Stand, on the
   Inquiry's video, were similar to the 1988 incidents.


Sheffield Wednesday Football Club:

       L. J. Taylor's evaluation of the performance of the
  Club is brief but scathing.   Whist there is little to
  dispute in Taylor's remarks, the inconsistencies and
  failures highlighted reinforce the point that Hillsborough
  should never have been chosen as the venue for any game
  involving two 'away' sides.   This is not to be wise after
  the event; clearly, Hillsborough, on past performances,
  alone was not a suitable venue given the problems associated
  with the West Terraces.  If the Football Association had
  bothered to inspect the General Safety Certificate for
  Hillsborough, in discussion with the Club the problems with
  the Certificate would have been identified.  Indeed, it is
  remiss of the F.A. not to have done this as a matter of
  course following the 1981, 1987 and 1988 incidents.

       The Club's failure to provide meaningful, clear and
  distinct signposting is indicative of the neglect
  surrounding the Safety Certificate and the absence of
  effective critical monitoring.

       The crisis at the turnstiles was rooted in the lack of
  turnstile facilities in an enclave incapable of coping with
  the demand placed upon it. Congestion at turnstiles has
  become the norm in football, and the authorities have, in
  consequence, become immune to the inadequate ratio of
  turnstiles to customers.   It is intolerable that this
  situation should continue.

       The performance of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in
  respect of its ground safety should have been known by the
  F.A.   L. J. Taylor is unequivocal:
  "The Leppings Lane end was unsatisfactory and ill-suited to
  admit the numbers invited."



  KC1AB0
  Sheffield Wednesday's piecemeal attitude to safety
  management on the West Terrace was influenced by cost and
  South Yorkshire Police's power of influence.


Sheffield City Council:

        The poor performance of the local authority is
  more than "inefficient and dilatory".  (para 286). The
  former Licensing Authority's failure (South Yorkshire County
  Council) take account of the 1981 and 1985 alterations -
  which created the 'fixed' conditions of the disaster - was a
  serious breach of its responsibility to update the
  Certificate. That breach, and others, were compounded in
  the transfer of certification to Sheffield City Council.
  The failure of the local authority to review the history of
  the Certificate, certify the necessary amendments and
  enforce its responsibilities effectively negated the value
  of the Certificate. The failure to amend the Certificate
  on one point alone (i.e. proper maximum figures for each
  distinct pen) rendered the Certificate worthless.


        That the relevant authorities were fully informed by
   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club of notifiable ground
   alterations without effect to the Certificate reinforces the
   collective failure of responsibility between both
   certificating authorities.  In effect, the transfer of the
   Certificate involved a transfer of attitudes and practices.

       The failure of the local authority to diligently and
  effectively monitor and enforce their obligations through
  its statutory powers within the Certificate and in other
  areas meant a pro-active, constructive and structured
  approach to safety was lost from the outset.    The
  accumulative effect was to allow the South Yorkshire Police
  to effectively dominate the safety agenda.   Ironically, on
  the issue of the West Terrace's capacity, the Police
  appeared to be the lone voice of dissent within this ethical
  basement.




  KC1AB0
PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS

        In the preamble to the 43 recomendations, L. J. Taylor
   identifies the specific matters to be dealt with in Phase II
   of his Inquiry.    He dedicates the bulk of' this section to a
   rationale for delaying a decision on pitch perimeter
   fencing.   This is a mistake and cannot be justified on the
   basis of an appeal for "The need to consider further expert
   evidence." His selective quotation, from the F.S.A. (para.309)
   submission, is not the position of this Working Party and it
   is based on a falsehood; perimeter fences are not necessary
   for crowd control.   If they were, why have at least three
   major first-division clubs, pre Hillsborough, not erected
   pitch perimeter fences?

         The claim that fences, especially high perimeter
   fences, deter hooliganism is a fiction. What they do is
   contain people in a fixed area and their undesirability in
   the event of a disaster is well documented.

        During the Standing Committee stage of the Safety at
   Sports Ground Act (1975) it was recognised that a pitch
   provided the safest and easiest means of evacuating an area.
   It needs to be stressed that the Hillsborough fence goes
   against recommends;ions delivered in Popplewell's full
   report.   Indeed, in January 1986, Popplewell recommended
   and stressed "the importance of allowing full access to the
   pitch where this is likely to be used as a place of safety
   in an emergency."   At Hillsborough, the Police had
   determined that the pitch was inviolate.

        L. J. Taylor does not require further evidence to
   influence his thinking.   Following the Popplewell Report,
   the Institute of Structural Engineers set up a Report
   Committee, including a D.O.E. representative, to look into
   sports ground safety. Three years after its inception, the
   Institute's Report, originally to be subject to final
   approval of the draft on 9th May 1989, still awaits the
   Institute's acceptance. The Institute is due to compare and
   contract its own findings with those of the Taylor Interim
   Report on September 14th next, and the full document will be
   the subject of a seminar on October 26th next.

        The Government's public pronouncements on safety at
   football matches appears somewhat hollow when applied to its
   response to the Institution's request for funding to speed
   up the research project.

        Based on corroborated leaks to professional 'trade'
   journals, the findings of the Report constitute a clear
   rebuke for pitch perimeter fencing and expresses "strong
   reservation against the present design strength of crash



   KC1ABR
                            - 15 -
barriers."   The Report also examines the issue of 'traffic
control'.

     Quite clearly, the evidence currently exists to
challenge the continuation of pitch perimeter fencing at
football stadia. As Liverpool and Everton have shown, a
dry-moat is but one of the available means to improve
spectator safety in the event of a disaster.

     All of the Hillsborough reports feasible and sensible
proposals are to be welcomed.  L. J. Taylor's grasp of the
events at Hillsborough is discernible in his
recommendations. This can only be seen as encouraging.

     Recommendations 13-17 are clearly attributable to the
lamentable role of Sheffield City Council.   L. J. Taylor
advocates not only a review of existing practices and
procedures but introduces a new layer of checks and balances
in the form of an Advisory Group. That Group should have an
"effective procedure" which requires "regular visits to the
ground and attendance at matches." It is incumbent upon this
authority to accommodate these recommendations with the
proviso that we can never be over-vigilant with spectator
safety.

     From the F.A. and F.S.A's submissions to the Inquiry,
L. J. Taylor has adopted a number of the proposals advanced
by these organisations.   One proposal, by the F.A. for a
20% cut in terrace capacities was in fact moderated to 15%.
The F.A. had hoped that L. J. Taylor would make a positive
statement on travelling ticketless fans. But the only
football-led initiative he chose not to incorporate in his
report was that ticketless fans should not be allowed into
an all-ticket match.

     The test of quality and practicality in the 43
recommendations lays in their application. The response of
clubs so far, and other interested parties, is not
encouraging.   Hillsborough's lessons are already being
ignored.   By the season's opening day, all the clubs,
including Sheffield Wednesday, had satisfied their local
authorities that they met certification requirements in the
wake of the Hillsborough Report. Yet many clubs, including
Liverpool, are without a crucial Taylor recommendation: a
written agreement between club and Police, identifying
responsibilities for crowd management. Although at both
Liverpool Clubs, all other relevant recommendations have
been or are being carried out, the picture from around the
country is not so encouraging. According to one survey,
only 12% of grounds had a doctor and only 49% had cutting
equipment.




KC1ABR
     Already some clubs are prevaricating on the remaining
measures.   Prior to the season's opening day, the Secretary
of Manchester United, Ken Merret, is reported as saying:
"In our opinion, these were recommendations - we didn't
consider them mandatory."   From the country's richest club,
recently involved in a successful £20 million take-over,
these are prophetic words.

     A loophole exploited by many clubs is contained in a
Home Office circular to clubs following the publication of
the Hillsborough Report.   On implementing the Taylor
recommendations, it stressed "before the start of the new
season or immediately thereafter."   Voluntary
recommendations are already being voluntarily ignored.    For
all the pious words and sincere proposals advanced by
Taylor, they are worthless unless backed by legislation.




KC1ABR
                              - 17 -

INTERIM CONCLUSIONS:
       The Hillsborough report is not a radical document.   It
  offers a forthright account of the Hillsborough tragedy and
  includes findings and recommendations which reach far beyond
  the Hillsborough tragedy.   Its proposals deserve to be
  taken seriously by the Government and everyone connected
  with the game.

       On the evidence of the first two weeks of the 1989/90
  football season, this may be somewhat premature:  afterall,
  Lord Justice Taylor identifies his proposals as the "minimum
  necessary."   (para 315).

       The terms of reference for Phase II of the Inquiry may
  well disappoint many fans of the game who genuinely felt the
  observeable scale of official failure at Hillsborough should
  have warranted an inquiry with broader terms of reference.
  The promise of better things to come is not inspiring as the
  Football Spectators' Bill looms ever nearer.

       The disaster at Hillsborough is located in 66 years of
  official neglect.   As the lessons of the Popplewell review
  were compromised at Hillsborough it serves well to recount a
  passage from page 10 of Justice Popplewell's full report:


     "History of previous Inquiries:

        When my Interim Report was published, it might have
     been thought by some that the suggestions which I set out
     had only recently been considered.    It was said to be
     unfair to expect the football clubs to have taken earlier
     steps to arrange their affairs.    It was urged that they
     should now be entitled to more time and more money in
     order to deal with the problems of crowd control and
     safety at their grounds.   The problems of crowd control
     and safety had, so it was said, suddenly arisen.   I have
     to say that almost all the matters into which I have been
     asked to inquire and almost all the solutions I have
     proposed, have been previously considered in detail by
     many distinguished Inquiries over a period of sixty
     years."




  August 1989




  KC1ABR
