         L I V E R P O O L   C I T Y    C O U N C I L




     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY'S SUBMISSION TO


           PART II OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY


     ^          INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




                             -0O0-




NOVEMBER 1989




XR1AAR
sibilities adequately discharged for a prestigious
semi-final.

Clearly, if Hillsborough was an example of the best football
can offer, then the football industry requires a complete
review of its operation.


7.2: A Royal Commission of Inquiry should be recommended,
with the following terms of reference, to investigate -

     (i)   the financing of professional football;

    (ii)   the administration of professional football;

   (iii)   policing and public safety at football stadia;

    (iv)   medical, emergency and wider spectator facailities
           at Football League grounds; and

     (v)   the issue of effective fans' representation within
           football clubs and in the governing bodies which
           administer the game of football.




                             -0O0-




Officer Contact:

  Mr. T. Smith,
  Hillsborough Working Party Research Officer
  051-225 2333




                             -10-
XR1AAX
   establishing responsibility for crowd managememt inside the
   ground.  It is your position that the primary responsibility
   lies with the police both outside and inside the ground
   which enables the official Interim Report to conclude that
   the main reason for the Hillsborough disaster was the
   failure of the police to control the crowd.  In coming to
   this conclusion, you establish a catalogue of mistakes and
   errors of judgment from the police briefing through to their
   operational response to the first indications of trouble.
   It would appear to be appropriate to establish effective
   procedures for consultation between the police and all other
   interested parties.


   6.4: In line with Lord Scarman's recommendation that the
   police should establish close links with the community, we
   propose an extension of these links to include regular and
   major sports events.   Existing Advisory groups on Ground
   Safety offer an appropriate forum for such consultation to
   take place. Their membership includes local councillors,
   club officials, fire officers, St. John's Ambulance, the
   ambulance service, the Football Supports' Association; and
   the Supporters' Club. We propose that the police present an
   operational programme, including planned responses to all
   foreseeable circumstances, to the advisory group pre-season.
   The agreed programme should be reviewed at subsequent
   meetings during the season with reports on any issues of
   substance. The police should respond to comments and
   assessments from other members of the Advisory Group. They
   should inform the Group of any special arrangements planned
   for major fixtures.   At the end of the season, there should
   be a report issued to the Group by the police which should
   evaluate the agreed programme and its operation.

         The local councillors on the Advisory Group should be
   able to refer issues of concern to the Police Authority for
   its consideration.   In that sense, the policing of football
   and other events would be brought under the Police
   Authority's remit to maintain an adequate and efficient
   police force.   It would also respond to the spirit of Lord
   Scarman's recommendations on community consultation.



A ROYAL COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO FOOTBALL

  7.1: Following the scale of mismanagement, complacency,
  neglect and misplaced priorities detailed within your
  Interim Report, we believe all aspects of the football
  industry should be subject to a Royal Commission of Inquiry.
  This is particularly warranted given that pre-Hillsborough
  the Police, F.A., Sheffield City Council, and Sheffield
  Wednesday Football Club all considered their respon-

                                -9-

   XR1AAX
POLICING, ACCOUNTABILITY AND COMMUNITY CONSULTATION

  6.1: Since 1979, the debate over police accountability and,
  in particular, police/community relations has been of major
  significance.    This period of controversy is in marked
  contrast to the previous fifteen years, since the passing of
  the 1964 Police Act, during which time little was published
  or researched on the matter.    The inner-city disturbances
  in Southall 1979, St. Paul's 1980, and in other major cities
  during 1981 changed the level of debate.    Throughout the
  late seventies, there had been much discussion of the Devon
  and Cornwall model of community policing and its potential
  for other areas.



  6.2: Two major factors emerged from the period of
  controversy, research and publication of the early 1980's.
  First, the police made it quite clear, via the Association
  of Chief Police Officers (A.C.P.O.) that on 'operational
  matters' involving force strategy, practices and priorities
  the Chief Constables' decision was absolute.   The 1964
  Act's brief to police authorities to provide an 'adequate
  and efficient' police force would not extend to operational
  policies or practices. This has become the accepted
  convention.  Second, following Lord Scarman's Report,
  community consultation became governed by statute in the
  1984 Police and Criminal Evidence Act. Scarman had called
  for effective consultation and not 'talking shops'.
  Consequently, all force areas have some form of direct
  consultation through forums, panels or committees.

        The problem has been that in the organisation and
  administration of community consultation the police have
  retained absolute discretion on agenda items, information
  giving and decision to act on matters raised.  In so doing,
  Chief Constables have invoked the principle of operational
  matters, and thus consultative groups have no effective
  powers to influece policies or practices, nor do they have
  the right to procedures of accountability concerning agreed
  changes in policies or practices.  It is against this
  background of debate and controversy over the effectiveness
  of procedures for police accountability that any proposal
  which suggests an extension of community involvement in
  policing must be placed.


  6.3: In your Interim Report, you discussed at some length
  the relationship between club management and the police in

                                -8-

  XR1AAX
      Prior to the Hillsborough disaster, the FLA was a
minor detail in a controversial Enabling Bill.   That
disaster acted as a catalyst catapulting the role of the FLA
to centre stage.   From an original overseeing role, the FLA
after Hillsborough allowed the Secretary of State for Sport
to claim the moral high ground by highlighting
football's erratic, if not appalling, record on spectator
safety.

      Immediately post Hillsborough, the Bill's terms of
reference were extended to include "safety" and a fully
fledged quango was proposed to supervise the full operation
of the compulsory football membership scheme and the
additional responsibilities of ground/spectator safety.

      The powers of the FLA are draconian.   Clubs will
require a licence from the FLA to operate under the auspices
of the FLA's own inspectorate.   The powers of the FLA
include the capacity to suspend or revoke licences and heavy
fines can be imposed on 'offending' clubs.


5.2: What deeply concerns this Local Authority, with an
excellent record on ground safety, is that the FLA has the
power to override any certificating authority by imposing
national standards with the added power to cancel a local
authority Ground Safety Certificate for a stadium.
Moreover, in the words of the Bill, "The Licensing Authority
may, at any time, by notice to the licence holder, vary the
times and conditions of the licence." The implications of a
centralised body with a board of between four-eight members
(with only one representative from football) are patently
apparent.

5.3: We request your Inquiry to advise the Secretary of
State for the Environment to withdraw the proposals for the
FLA outlined in Part I of the Bill with a view to
introducing separate and distinct legislation on the subject
of spectator safety and spectator facilities at football
grounds, pending meaningful and genuine negotiations with
representatives of all relevant certificating local
authorities and their Advisory Groups, including fans'
representatives.  Furthermore, the existence of the FLA, as
proposed, would clearly undermine the role of the Ground
Safety Advisory Groups set up as per recommendation 17 and
usurp the provisions of recommendations 13-17 as in your
Interim Report.

      Far from facilitating the involvement of fans,
relevant local authorities, and the emergency services, the
proposed FLA will leave responsibility for ground safety in
the hands of a detached bureaucratic quango in Whitehall.

                             -7-

XR1AAX
  centralised move to all-seater stadia we consider the best
  course of action, under current circumstances, for improving
  spectator safety on terraces such as the West Terrace at
  Hillsborough, and the West Terrace at Loftus Road (Q.P.R.);
  the Witton End (Aston Villa); the Scoreboard End (Manchester
  United) and the Park End (Everton), amongst many others, to
  be a conversion of such sections to all seater areas.


  3.5: We recognise not one death has occurred as a result of
  a pitch invasion.   Pitch invasions, though undesirable and
  indefensible, are rare.   At Hillsborough, a combination of
  pitch perimeter and radial fencing clearly contributed to
  the scale of fatalities on the West Terrace.

        The horror story and carnage of a Hillsborough cannot
  be allowed to be replicated.   We contend that Hillsborough
  must change the face of British Football for evermore.   Yet
  it cannot progress in the right direction positively if the
  lessons of anti-hooligan fencing are not learned from this
  tragedy.



THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS' BILL

  4.    As a full and detailed report on this Working Party's
  interpretation of the technical and deterrent principles of
  this legislation is currently being prepared, we agree fully
  with the submission of the Football Supporters' Association
  (FSA) to your Inquiry on this legislation.     Without
  elaborating upon our opposition in the light of
  recommendation 19 of your own Interim Report, we believe a
  compulsory national football membership scheme is not only
  impractical, labelling all fans as potential hooligans, but
  compromises the aforementioned recommendation.

        Thus, on the basis of recommendation 19 of your
  Interim Report, we request you recognise the futility of a
  compulsory national membership scheme (as outlined in Part I
  of the Government's Bill) and recommend to the Secretary of
  State for the Environment its withdrawal.


FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY

  5.1: Under the Football Licensing Authority (FLA) (as
  detailed in the Football Spectators' Bill which becomes law
  in November) the Government has taken powers to close
  grounds, introduce all-seater stadia and impose upon
  football measures as it sees fit. Indeed, one senior
  football official describes the proposed FLA as "a
  government takeover of football."

                                -6-

  XR1AAX
they merely state that a 'barrier' must be in place to
restrict spectator access to the playing area.

      Some eight clubs claimed specific incidents caused
them to introduce pitch perimeter fencing, whilst five clubs
stated there were no specific incidents causing their
installion of pitch fencing.

      It is the contention of this Working Party that the
hysteria surrounding 'football hooliganism' in the past two
decades has led to a number of clubs installing pitch
perimeter fencing without recognising the inherent conflict
between containment and legitimate 'traffic paths' which
tragically at Hillsborough meant the pitch was inviolate to
all spectators.


3.3: The rise in popularity over the last two decades of
radial segregatory fencing, such as at Hillsborough's West
Terrace, has mirrored in many ways the move towards and
rationale behind pitch perimeter fencing. On terraces
the introduction of such radial fences has increased a
club's "flexibility" to contain and segregate opposing
sections of support and, in some cases, to ease 'traffic
flow'.


3.4: This Working Party is unequivocally opposed to all
pitch perimeter fencing.    All fencing may be beneficial to
those advocates of the deterrent principle in anti-hooligan
fixtures to prevent pitch incursions, but fences, as proven
at Valley Parade, and Hillsborough, severely compromise
safety. We urge a major rethink on the desirability of
fences given there are numerous means of preventing
uncontrolled pitch trespass without resorting to such
draconian structures.   Furthermore, fences restrict the
ability of emergency services access to casualities on such
terracing/seated areas.

      Equally, our Working Party opposes the continuation of
terrace sections such as the West Terrace at Hillsborough.
They create the potential danger of overcrowding in
'popular' areas (e.g. behind a goal).

      We therefore call for the removal of all radial
segregatory fences apart from those dividing distinct
sections of a ground, whilst recognising the need to
continue to provide separately accessed, egressed and
serviced enclosures for 'visiting' supporters forming a
'self-contained area' and certificated thus.

      The costs of the above proposals would for many clubs
be prohibitive.   However, whilst we totally oppose any

                             -5-

XR1AAX
   fencing exists (or continues to exist in the light of your
   Final Report) no pitch area should remain inviolate in a
   relevant emergency.


FENCING AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS

   3.1: Given the centrality of fencing to the Hillsborough
   disaster (and as part of this Working Party's research into
   safety and crowd control policy in English football), we
   conducted a survey of all First and Second Division English
   League clubs requesting responses to questions on individual
   approaches and attitudes to both pitch perimeter and
   radial/segregatory fences, similar to those in use on
   Hillsborough's West Terrace.   (Enclosed in Appendix 3
   is the raw questionnaire which invited an open-ended
   response from all clubs, along with a complete set of
   replies.)

         The questionnaire was sent to 40 clubs and we received
   33 replies.   The most notable exceptions amongst the big
   clubs were Manchester United and Tottenham Hotspur - the
   former we do know have maintained their fences complete in
   the light of the Hillsborough tragedy, whilst Spurs have
   removed their pitch perimeter fences since Hillsborough.

         Currently, officers of the Working Party are
   researching a comprehensive report on fencing to include a
   survey of Scottish Premier League Clubs and certificating
   authorities covering all First and Second Division
   League clubs.


   3.2: Pitch perimeter fencing first began to be erected
   during the early to mid 1970's following several well
   publicised pitch invasions at St. James' Park (Newcastle);
   Old Trafford (Manchester United); and White Hart Lane
   (Spurs). Respondents from our sample overwhelmingly
   indicated that the installation of pitch perimeter fencing
   in particular was rarely the result of any specific public
   order problems/pitch incursions.

        The majority of respondents claimed that pitch
  perimeter fences were installed upon requests from police
  and/or local authorities.   A small minority of clubs also
  cited EUFA guidelines as their reason for the erection of
  such fences.   EUFA guidelines do allow a dry space/moat
  construction as a legitimate barrier to uncontrolled access
  to the pitch, a concept developed and practiced by this
  Authority, post-Hillsborough, so allowing the complete
  removal of pitch perimeter fencing at both Anfield and
  Goodison Park football grounds.   It would be incorrect to
  claim that EUFA guidelines demand pitch perimeter fencing:

                                -4-

  XR1AAX
documented in this Working Party's own Interim Report
(Appendix 2, pp 7-11) we believe your interpretation of the
police operation at Hillsborough indentified a fundamentally
flawed police operation and constitutes a damning and
unequivocal indictment of the manner in which the South
Yorkshire Police operation at Hillsborough was planned, led
and administered, identified a fundamentally flawed police
operation. From the experiences of football fans generaly,
and from the grievances listed by the Football Supporters'
Association in relation to policing at football matches, we
recognise the contextual nature of soccer policing policy in
relation to the South Yorkshire Police operation at
Hillsborough.

      The official Hillsborough Interim Report identified
the inherent dangers of public order (control and
discipline) approaches to public safety in a
controlled football setting. Evidence based on the
contemporary history of Hillsborough as a "premier venue",
allied to the variability of police operational practices
and culture at League grounds, compromises spectator safety
at many clubs.

      In consequence of the lamentable performance of the
South Yorkshire Police and the inconsistency of police
operation culture and practices throughout the country at
football stadia, this Working Party strongly stresses that
Chapter 14 of the 'Green Guide' covering 'Crowd Control' be
redrafted on the basis that its guidelines concentrate too
much on the prevention of hooliganism (a concept possessing
no legal, formal or working definition) at the expense of a
definitive programme of spectator safety.   In essence,
crowd safety must dominate crowd control strategies without
compromise.


2.6: One of the unheeded lessons of the Bradford City fire
disaster, highlighted by Hillsborough, is the detrimental
effect caused to crowd safety by denying 'legitimate' access
to a pitch area in a potential/actual emergency situation.
The inconsistent approach by certificating local authorities
to pitch access as a 'means of escape' must be ended.   The
controlling and disciplining aspect of pitch perimeter
fencing must not be allowed to deny pitch access in the
light of a relevant emergency.

      This Working Party requests that the Inquiry recommend
to the Home Secretary that all relevant pitch/playing areas,
covered by the Safety At Sports Ground Act, 1975 and as
documented in the 'Green Guide', be identified as a primary
means/route for evacuation in a relevant emergency and
becomes recognised in the 'Green Guide' as a legitimate
'means of escape'. We contend that at every stadium where

                             -3-

XR1AAX
    divisions, the financial consequences to many clubs in
    Division Three and Four would, based on attendance figures,
    make this impractical and unnecessary.  For all Third and
    Fourth Division stadiums a specific 'Place of Safety
    Certificate' should be introduced to supplement the existing
    Ground Safety Certificates.


    2.3: A new and distinct chapter on 'Turnstile Facilities'
    should be introduced to the Green Guide. Given the essence
    of the Hillsborough tragedy was identifiable in the 'crisis
    at the turnstiles' we consider the introduction of a
    specific section covering turnstiles is essential to prevent
    a repetition of a crisis caused by the convergence of a
    large number of people on a small number of turnstiles. Had
    more turnstiles been in use at Hillsborough the tragedy may
    have been averted.

          At every League ground the general inadequate ratio of
    turnstiles to supporters is unacceptable and should now be
    regarded as intolerable.

          We wish to express our concern that the location and
    design of many English League grounds makes the provision of
    extra turnstiles impractical and the introduction of a
    compulsory membership scheme - even if the technology were
    available - will actively reinforce the existing dangers of
    turnstile congestion. As the Green Guide already states
    that 'there should be no "funnelling" effect causing people
    to converge on a narrower means of access or egress' (p.23).
    We consider the added congestion inherent in such 'access'
    areas as proposed in the Football Spectators' Bill to be a
    just reason, amongst others, for the withdrawal of Part I of
    the Football Spectators' Bill.


    2.4: The problem of overcrowding and localised over­
    crowding on terracing and at access and egress points is not
    capable of being remedied by a single solution. We suggest
    that clear and comprehensive instructions as to the
    prevention or crisis management of overcrowding and crowd
    (flow) congestion be introduced into the Green Guide and
    made mandatory in Division Three and Four through the Place
    of Safety Certificate (see 2.2).


    2.5: Although it is not this Working Party's intention to
    discuss the issue of soccer hooliganism, we refer to Mr.
    Justice Popplewell's attempt, in his Final Report, to
    account for its causes and continuing containment to
    highlight the complex nature of the problem. We believe the
    'hooligan problem' has been elevated to the status of a
i
    moral panic with its attendant sledgehammer solutions. As

                                 -2-

    XR1AAX
GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES
   1.1: Given your Interim Report's detailed account and
   interpretation of the disaster at what was a neutral venue
   F.A. Cup Tie, we formally request your Inquiry consider
   advising the Football Association and Football League to
   hold future neutral venue fixtures at grounds pre-designated
   as acceptable venues possessing Special Ground Safety
   Certificates.   (Such grounds should have a regular
   attendance rate of 75% and be subject to a necessary capital
   investment programme to elevant their safety facailities and
   spectator provision for fans who are 'visitors' to a
   'foreign' stadium). Where such stadiums are pre-designated
   as having 'neutral venue status' the relevant Local
   Authority Ground Safety Advisory Group(s) meet, in advance,
   to assist that authority in exercising its functions and
   Safety Certificate obligations.


   1.2: This Working Party recommends that the Home Secretary
   be advised to consider designating the drawing up,
   monitoring, supervision and accountability for each local
   authority's General Safety Certificate responsibilities and
   obligations be administered by certificating authorities'
   Technical Building Service Departments. The powers and
   duties of such bodies must present regular reports to
   certificating authorities' full Licensing Committees -
   including amendments to ground Safety Certificates and
   requests for Special Safety Certificates - to include
   informing and briefing, where relevant, Local Authority
   Ground Safety Advisory Groups.


 HOME OFFICE GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
 (THE GREEN GUIDE HMSO, 1986)

   2.1: It is of the utmost concern to this Authority that the
   provisions of the Green Code must become mandatory for all
   First and Second Division Clubs.   Whilst the wisdom of your
   Inquiry, on technical evidence, may consider elevating
   sections of the Green Code to the aforementioned status, we
   outline below our own submissions and reasoning on this
   subj ect.


  2.2: The 'poor performance' of Sheffield City Council to
  its certificating obligations at Hillsborough, coupled with
  its complete failure (pre Hillsborough) to licence the
  Braxnhall Lane Stadium, indicates the urgency of making the
  Green Guide's provisions mandatory to overcome inconsistent
  application of its guidance and to remove 'minimal'
  interpretations of the guide. Whilst we would welcome
  extending mandatory provisions to all four English League

                                -1-

  XR1AAX
INTRODUCTION

        Liverpool City Council set up its Hillsborough
  Disaster Working Party on 26th April 1989.   As the Local
  Authority in the City connected with the Hillsborough
  victims we recognised our duty was to play as full a role as
  possible in, firstly, uncovering the truth of what occurred
  at Hillsborough on 15th April 1989; and, secondly, to
  contribute to the learning process arising from the lessons
  of the disaster.

        The Working Party is constituted of councillors
  representing both the ruling Labour Group and opposition
  members and is supplemented by a research team employed to
  service the Working Party's terms of reference (see Appendix 1).

         As a major Ground Safety Certificating Local Authority,
   responsible to two of the most prestigious football stadiums
   in the country, this Working Party believes that Liverpool
   City Council's record to its Safety Certificate respon­
   sibilities and obligations is of the highest order and will
   continue to be so in the light of recommendations 13-17 of
   your Interim Report.

         Since Hillsborough, this Working Party has
   communicated with many official bodies, including the game's
   administrators, many local authorities, Football League
   clubs and many other organisations and individuals involved
   in football, including ordinary fans.

         It is the committed intention of this Working Party to
   play a positive role in helping the 'national game'
   generally face the future in safety.



THE SUBMISSION

        As Part I of the Hillsborough Inquiry dealt with the
  events culminating in the tragedy and its aftermath, this
  submission covers those recommendations (see Appendix 2) as
  presented in the Chair of this Hillsborough Working Party's
  Interim Report into the stadium disaster and thus forms our
  submission to Part II of the Hillsborough Inquiry.


                                -oOo-




  XR1AAX
                                  I N D E X




Contents:

                                                                          Page:

          (I)   INTRODUCTION AND SUBMISSION


         (II)   GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES       ..................       1


        (III)   THE GREEN GUIDE     ..    ..   ..............   ..   ..    1-4
•   •




         (IV)   FENCING AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS        ..........       4-6


          (V)   THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ' B I L L ...................6


         (VI)   THE PROPOSED FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY ..         ..    6-7


        (VII)   POLICING, ACCOUNTABILITY AND COMMUNITY
                 CONSULTATION ...................................          8-9


    (VIII)      ROYAL COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO FOOTBALL ..         ..    9-10




XR1AAT
             L I S T    OF    A P P E N D I C E S




 1.   TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY.




 2.   THE HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY'S INTERIM REPORT
                    AND RECOMMENDATIONS.




 3.   THE HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY'S GROUNDS FENCING SURVEY.




                              —oOo-




XR1AAS
