                               The City o f Liverpool
                               Personnel & Administration Directorate
                               Head o f Committee & Member Services
                               Ken Corns
                               PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                               Tel: 0151 -225 2430 Fax: 0151-225 2427



                                            Enquiries to: Mr. Colin Moneypenny
                                            Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                            Your R e f : PW/PMS
                                            Our Ref: POL/CM
Mr. Paul White
Secretary
Nottingham Forest F.C.
City Ground
Nottingham
NG2 5FJ                                     26th September 1995

Dear Mr. White

                    HILLSBOROUGH D ISA ST E R JO IN T STATEMENT

Thank you for your letter dated 13th September 1995 concerning the
above matter.

It appears from your letter that there is some misunderstanding
arising from my previous correspondence with you and I have now
been asked by the Members of the Hillsborough Disaster Working
Party to clarify the matter. The request made to Forest is simply
to detail the contents of the existing Statement in its Programme,
as co-signators Liverpool Football Club have done. There is no
question of a "further" Statement, as mentioned in your response,
being required.

The only purpose of the Statement, which you will recall was in
fact the idea of Nottingham M.P. Alan Simpson, was to correct a
number of malevolent and untrue comments about the Disaster, the
most highly publicised of which had emanated from a former Forest
employee. The comments had caused deep distress to the many people
who remain seriously affected by the Disaster and the Statement
was intended to alleviate some of that distress and repair some of
the damage caused to relationships between the two Cities and the
supporters of the two Clubs.

Clearly the above process cannot be fully achieved while many
Forest fans remain unaware of the nature of the Statement agreed
to by their Chairman and Members of the Disaster Working Party, on
behalf of Liverpool City Council, consequently do not feel it
unreasonable to request Forest to re-consider their decision and
to emulate Liverpool Football Club, not by entering into a further
Statement, but by publishing, for the record, the existing joint
affirmation of the findings of Lord Justice Taylor with regard to
the Hillsborough Disaster, of which it was a willing signatory.

Yours sincerely


Head of Committee and Member Services

                    Director o f Personnel & Administration: Derek Griffin
 Administration & Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resource Service;
                   Information Technology; Legal Services; Public Relations.
