                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                               of the
                   Policy and Resources Committee

                           10th July, 1995




     PRESENT:   Councillor J. Spriggs, Chair;
                Councillors A. Dean, S. Ellison, G. Knibb,
                P. Millea, Bill Roberts and Len Tyrer..




     Apologies for absence were received from Councillors
     E. Clein and W. Craig.




8.   Minutes of Previous Meeting

     Resolved that the proceedings of the previous meeting of
     the Working Party held on 16th June, 1995 be approved as a
     correct record subject to the Head of Committee and Member
     Services being requested to write again to Liverpool F.C.
     with regard to the matter of the wish to ensure that in
     future Liverpool F.C. fixtures are not arranged at the same
     time as the Hillsborough Memorial Service.


9•   Correspondence from Families

     The Working Party considered correspondence which the Chair
     has received from one of the Hillsborough families with
     regard to a matter, related to the Disaster, to be
     submitted to the Attorney General.




     The Working Party was informed that Peter Kilfoyle M.P. had
     been invited to be present at this meeting in order to
     discuss this item but had been unable to attend due to
     another engagement.




 al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/A100795
    Resolved that the Chair and the Liberal Democrat
    Spokesperson be authorised to meet with Mr. Kilfoyle and
    with appropriate family representatives at a time which is
    convenient to all parties in order to discuss the matters
    raised by the correspondence.


10. Hillsborough Trust Memorial Bursaries

    The Working Party considered revised 'selection criteria
    which it is proposed to apply in respect of applications
    made to obtain educational bursaries from the funds made
    available from the Disaster Trust Fund to the Merseyside
    District Councils for this purpose.

    Resolved that -

    (A)   the following recommendation be submitted to the
          Education Committee -

          That:-

            (i) the revised selection criteria and application
                form submitted to the Working Party at this
                meeting, be approved;

           (ii) a Selection Committee comprising of the Chair of
                the Working Party, the Opposition Spokespersons
                on the Working Party of the Liberal Democrat and
                Liverpool Labour Groups, a nominated Labour
                Member of the Working Party and the Principal
                Officer in the Awards Section of the Education
                Department be established; and

          (iii) the system be implemented with a view to the
                Selection Committee considering applications and
                determining awards in September.

    (B)   a future meeting of the Working Party be requested to
          consider the issues arising from the winding down of
          the Disaster Trust Fund and in particular the
          arrangements which may be made by the Council
          following consultation with the Trustees in respect of
          revenues which may still accrue to the Fund.


11 • Hillsborough Project
    The Working Party considered:-

    (1)   arrangements in respect of the launch of the second
          Report of the Hillsborough Project which has been
          prepared by Edgehill College on behalf of the Council;
          and

    (2)   the question of the copyright of the Report.


 al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/A100795
  The Working Party was informed:-

  (A)   by Ms. S. Coleman, the Disaster Research Consultant,
        that due to illness she had not been able to undertake
        the consultation with families involved in the
        Judicial Review process that had been intended to form
        the basis of an analysis of that process which it had
        been agreed at the previous meeting to include in the
        final version of the Report;

  (B)   by Dr. P. Scraton of Edgehiil College that in
        accordance with the wishes expressed at the last
        meeting of the Working Party, 200 copies of the Report
        without the above analysis but with other amendments
        which had been submitted, had been printed and bound
        ready for the proposed launch this week. He explained
        that if the launch did not take place this week then
        not only would there by a cost implication but due to
        academic and holiday commitments at the College it
        would not be able to take place until September. He
        also believed that it had been made clear that
        copyright in the document lies with the City Council;
        and

  (C)   by the Assistant Head of Legal Services that he had
        written again on behalf of the Council to the Chief
        Executive of the College with regard to the issue of
        copyright and that although he was re-assured by the
        Statement made by Dr. Scraton at this meeting that
        copyright is vested in the City Council he did
        consider that the Chief Executive should provide
        formal written clarification that this is the position
        of the College.




  Resolved that -

  (A)   in order for a full analysis of the Judicial Review
        process, to be submitted by the Disaster Research
        Consultant, to be included in the Report, the launch
        be postponed until September;

  (B)   the Research Consultant make arrangements for the
        submission of the above analysis to Dr. Scraton as a
        matter of urgency; and
  (C)   any cost implications of the decision not to proceed
        with the launch of the Report this week, and the
        method and cost of the reprinting and binding of the
        amended Report, be considered by the Policy and
        Resources Committee.



al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/A100795
