         THE LICENSING OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS
         (CBS/320/89)

         REPORT OF THE CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR
         (Contact Officer : L.N. Bush, Tel. 225 3395)

         1.   The Chairperson of the Licensing Sub-Committee requested a report on
              the existing procedures for the licensing of football grounds, which
              particular matter is controlled by the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
              1975.  However, before moving into the detail of that subject, it is
              worth remembering that the development and alteration of most modern
              covered stadia is, or has been, subject to the Building Regulations,
              which set standards of design and construction relevant to the safety
              of users.  It is relevant also that parts of the stadium buildings are
              almost invariably subject to overlapping mandatory controls with
              regard to their use as workplaces (administrative offices) and places
              of assembly, or shops (restaurants).  In Merseyside and some other
              metropolitan areas, uncovered stands are controllable also under local
              Acts.  These other uses and their ongoing control frequently involve
              licensing for drinking and/or public entertainment, and in some cases
              (e.g. Anfield) as tourist attractions, involving the conduct of
              parties and the exhibition of historical films using videos.  Thus
              Members will appreciate that a total stadium complex requires
              co-ordinated consideration and supervision, not confined only to match
              day use, and that it is important for the Local Authorities
              responsible to provide that.

         2.   In the case of Metropolitan District Councils such as Liverpool, such
              an approach is possible through its Building Regulation Control
              Department, and this control was provided from the onset of the
              legislation.  The Act of 1975 is specifically directed to ensuring a
              satisfactory standard of safety for the spectators attending football
              matches, but that in itself involves a certain amount of use, or
              passage through buildings which from time to time have the other uses
              mentioned above.  This report will concentrate on the provisions and
              procedures of the 1975 Act, but Members will now appreciate that this
              is not the total control medium.

         3.   The Act of 1975 permitted the Secretary of State to designate sports
              grounds, which have accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators
              (covered or uncovered), to require a safety certificate issued by the
              appropriate Local Authority.  Stadia have been designated in a series
              of orders, since 1st January 1977, starting with international and
              First Division grounds, and followed on with further orders bringing
              in Second Division grounds, and (following the Bradford disaster) all
              Football League grounds and some grounds used for other team sports
              have been included in that process.  The safety certificate which has
              to be held is known as a "General Safety Certificate", and should be
              designed to cover all normal matches taking place at the stadium.   If
              some other activity, or different kind of competitive sport is to be
              held at the ground, the Act provides for a "Special Safety
              Certificate" to be issued for those uses (an example of that was the
              use of Anfield by the Billy Graham Christian Mission some years ago).
              The Local Authority has the power to amend a safety certificate, or to
              replace it completely, with or without an application for that being




NWAAAS
received from the Holder.  This effectively allows the authority to
review the certificate as often as it needs, in the light of
experience, and to alter any of the arrangements which it had
previously demanded or permitted, including the capacity of the ground
and its various enclosures, subject of course to a right of appeal by
the Holder against all actions of the authority, or conditions fixed
in the certificate.  Other "interested parties" also have a right of
appeal against provisions made, or not made, in a safety certificate.
Those "interested parties" include the Chief Officer of Police and the
Fire Authority, so that it is important for the Local Authority
dealing with the certificate to keep a close liaison with those
parties, although final decisions in any matter rest with the
certificating Local Authority.  In this connection, it should be noted
that where the Local Authority responsible is the County, the Building
Control Authority is also an "interested party".

It is worth noting the difference between a "Safety Certificate"
issued to football grounds and a "Public Entertainment Licence" issued
to places of other forms of entertainment.   The latter is renewable
annually, which ensures two things.   Firstly that the premises are
reviewed and every party concerned has its attention refreshed
regularly, although it is still possible for a slipshod    or poorly
resourced authority to neglect detail. Secondly, the cost     of the work
of performing all functions, whether it be the grant or renewal, or
enforcement of licence conditions, in the case of public entertainment
licensing, can be recovered by the fees fixed for annual renewal.     The
Safety of Sports Grounds Act, and  the statutory instruments and
guidance notes published for that Act, provide only for a fee on the
issue of a Safety Certificate, (General    or Special) and to any
amendment made to it thereafter.  There    is no financial provision      for
the cost of review without amendment or enforcement.

The Act of 1975 permits the Local Authority to include in a Safety
Certificate any terms and conditions it considers necessary or
expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stadium.    In addition to
a general authority to fix terms and conditions, the Act of 1975 is
specific, at Section 2 in requiring a safety certificate to cover
certain matters.     Firstly itmust state the maximum number of
spectators to be   admitted tothe stadium, and the maximum number to be
admitted to different parts of it.    It also requires the certificate
to include terms and conditions about the number, size and situation
of entrances to and exits from the stadium, and the means of access to
any such entrances or exits.    It must also require those entrances and
exits and means of access to be properly maintained and kept free from
obstruction.  There is also a requirement to specify the number,
strength and situation of crush barriers (on standing terraces).    The
Safety Certificate must also include conditions that certain minimum
records must be kept by the Holder, including records of the number of
spectators attending the stadium and records relating to the
maintenance of safety.    Finally, Section 2 calls for a Safety
Certificate to contain a plan of the stadium, by means of which terms
and conditions in the Certificate which refer to locations, can be
properly identified.

Safety Certificates   issued for football grounds have to be issued to a
                                            - 3 -


              person (called the "Holder"), who is likely to be in a position to
              control the use of the ground, and to ensure compliance with its terms
              and conditions.  That "qualified person" is generally the Club's Chief
              Executive and/or Secretary, although some Clubs have delegated the
              holding of the Certificate to other special officers, often to those
              concerned with the care of the fabric of the ground.  There is a
              general provision that anyone having anything to do with the
              management of the ground (called a "responsible person") must
              contribute to and not obstruct compliance with the conditions of the
              Certificate.

         8.   Whilst those matters specified in Section 2 of the Act (identified
              earlier) have to be covered in the Safety Certificate, to what extent
              and in what detail they are covered, and what other matters are
              covered by means of terms and conditions, or taken into account before
              deciding whether to issue a Certificate or not, are left to the
              expertise and discretion of the Local Authority responsible for
              implementation of the Act.  The usual method of dealing with this
              predominantly technical and regular ongoing duty has been to delegate
              the function to one or more officers of the responsible authority,
              which is most effective, provided that officer understands that he is
              unequivocally responsible and that he is provided with adequate
              resources to carry out his task.

         9.   It was the original intention of Lord Justice Wheatley, who carried
              out the Inquiry into the disaster at Ibrox Park and reported in 1972,
              that Chief Building Control Officers should be the principal officers
              responsible for this work in consultation with the Police and Fire
              Authorities.  That report explained how the County Authorities
              responsible outside metropolitan districts sometimes failed to harness
              the Building Control expertise of district councils, with disastrous
              consequences.

         10. In contrast to that calamitous neglect, the Merseyside County
             Authority, which issued the original Safety Certificates for both the
             Liverpool grounds, deliberately performed only an administrative
             function, which was delegated to the County Solicitor, and he relied
             predominantly on the City Building Surveyor in Liverpool for the
             necessary input throughout the period of their control from 1976 to
             abolition in 1986.  That was partly because both the Liverpool clubs
             had previously consulted and taken advice from the City Building
             Surveyor in matters of safety at their grounds since 1971.  The
             Football League had, for many years, required clubs to provide it with
             a form of guarantee of safety at their grounds, but the matter was
             dealt wth very nominally and certified generally by Club Secretaries
             or Chief Executives up to 1970.  The League then requested a technical
             input with guarantees from appropriate consultants employed by clubs,
             and recommended clubs to consult Local Authority Building Control
             experts who were generally responsible for safety in places of public
             resort and frequently had local powers over the design and
             construction of uncovered stands (i.e.  not being buildings) also.   It
             is relevant to mention here that Liverpool City Council has always
             held the need for building design and construction safety, and the
             suitability of buildings for safe use for public and other special
             purposes to be very important.  The City Building Surveyor, to whom

NWAAAS
                                           - 4 -


            this work has been delegated, has been able to maintain the
            application of adequate resources to these public use safety functions
            to date.

         11. Guidance on what ought to be covered by football grounds' safety
             certificates, and good standards for these matters, is given to all
             concerned in the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" booklet, which is
             published by H.M. Stationery Office.   This started life as a technical
             appendix to the Wheatley Report in 1972, and the City Building
             Surveyor, Liverpool University and both the Liverpool football grounds
             assisted in consultations on its contents, particularly in respect of
             the layout, design and strength of crush barriers.   The Home Office
             carried out physical tests of loadings at full capacity matches on the
             then existing crush barriers on the Kop at Anfield, and the Gwladys
             Street Terrace at Goodison Park.   The current Guide was revised in
             1986 following the Popplewell Inquiry concerning Heysel,
             Birmingham and Bradford, which included recommendations for that
             update.  The Guide sets out good standards, but it is a voluntary
             Code, and has no legal force.   Having regard to the general age of
             football grounds, and their associated terraces and stands, throughout
             the country, compliance with those ideally good standards is
             impracticable in many respects.   Compromises or alternative measures
             of achieving suitable standards of safety have to be found.   The
             chapter headings for subjects covered by the Guide are listed below,
             in order to illustrate its comprehensive scope.

                  Chapter   2     Management Responsibilities
                  Chapter   3     General Fabric and Structural Matters
                  Chapter   4     Inspections and Tests
                  Chapter   5     Ingress
                  Chapter   6     Egress
                  Chapter   7     Stairways and Ramps
                  Chapter   8     Terraces and Viewing Slopes
                  Chapter   9     Crush Barriers and Handrails
                  Chapter   10    Roofed Stands with Seated Accommodation
                  Chapter   11    Fire Safety
                  Chapter   12    Communications
                  Chapter   13    Stewarding
                  Chapter   14    Crowd Control
                  Chapter   15    Pitch Perimeter Fence/Wall
                  Chapter   16    Estimation of Safe Ground Capacity
                  Chapter   17    Recommended Flow Rates (for evacuation purposes).

             In addition, there are annexes to the Guide covering in further detail
             the subjects of (B) - Stewarding, and (C) - Testing of Crush Barriers
             and Handrails.

         12. The advent of the new "Green Guide", coupled with the Popplewell
             Report recommendations and the transfer of responsibility, for the
             implementation of the 1975 Act, to Metropolitan District Councils,
             prompted a review of Safety Certificates and procedures for monitoring
             and enforcement in 1986, by responsible authorities.  In Liverpool,
             that duty was carried out by the City Building Surveyor, in respect of
             both this City's designated grounds.  The Certificates were totally
             rewritten and all the drawings forming part of the Certificate were

NWAAAS
                                               - 5 -


            completely updated and annotated, in order to relate the terms of the
            Certificate to locations at the grounds.  The total documents are
            extensive.  The office copy of both the current Certificates for
            Anfield and Goodison Park will be available, should any Members wish
            to examine their general format etc.

         13. There is a small degree of nationwide exchange of information between
             officers responsible for this work, through occasional meetings held
             by the County Engineers Association, and also through Council meetings
             of the Society of Chief Building Regulation Officers.  Without
             examining the many documents produced and the details of functions
             performed by those various officers responsible, it is not possible to
             say generally how good is the quality and standard of attention given
             to this matter.  How many of them match the thorough attention given
             to the duty in Liverpool, it is difficult to say, but the City
             Building Surveyor suggests that the Anfield and Goodison Park
             certificates are amongst the best in the country.  These two
             certificates include schedules of conditions with the following
             headings

                     Schedule 1     :   General conditions
                     Schedule 2     :   Capacity of Stadium (inc. recording and
                                             controlling numbers attending)
                     Schedule   3   :   General Safety Provisions
                     Schedule   4   :   Lighting and Emergency Electric Supply
                     Schedule   5   :   Fire Safety
                     Schedule   6   :   Stewarding
                     Schedule   7   :   Locations (of Stewards)
                     Schedule   8   :   Inspections and Tests

         14. Adequate and sufficient stewarding was highlighted by the Popplewell
             Report to be a matter for careful attention, and it was noted earlier
             that the "Green Guide" includes an annexe B on the subject.  Schedules
             6 and 7 of the Safety Certificates issued to the Liverpool and Everton
             Clubs devote some 9 pages to the subject, in which every steward (116
             at Anfield and 115 at Goodison Park) is identified with a title and
             number, given a job specification, and assigned specifically to a
             location or area of the stadium.

         15. The grounds are checked for maintenance of safety features.  In detail
             the frequency varies according to the subject matter, and for Members'
             further information, a copy of the Schedule covering this matter in
             the Certificate for the Anfield Ground is appended to this report as
             Appendix A.  From that it will be noted that the City Building
             Surveyor's officers join in those inspections (1), (2), (6) and (7)
             listed in the condition to Table 8.2, in addition to monitoring the
             other items in the Table to condition 8.5.  Monitoring of the full
             provision of stewards and their compliance with the conditions
             attached to the Certificate are carried out by spot checks,
             immediately prior to and during the use of both stadia.

         16. In all the above work, very good co-operation is enjoyed from both the
             Liverpool clubs.  It should be appreciated that these are two
             successful football clubs, enjoying many full or near capacity
             attendances during the season, which places them financially in a

NWAAAS
    strong position to comply with safety requirements as well as putting
    them in need of such compliance at all times.  It is intended to amend
    the General Safety Certificate for the two Liverpool grounds during
    this year's annual closed season review, accordingly.   A Special
    Safety Certificate would be required in future in the event of either
    of these two grounds being used for a football match between two
    visiting teams, such as an F.A. Cup Semi-final.

17. The position of the Police as an "interested party" in the issue or
    amendment of any Safety Certificate was mentioned earlier.    Such
    Certificates generally include a requirement that the Holder shall
    arrange for the attendance of an adequate number of Police Officers
    within the stadium to secure orderly and decent behaviour.    The number
    of such officers for each certified use generally will need to be
    agreed with the Police at least 14 days beforehand.   That condition is
    contained in both the Liverpool Clubs' Certificates.    The cost ofsuch
    in-ground policing has to be met by the football clubs.    Policing
    outside the ground and traffic routing is a matter wholly for the
    Police Authority, which ought to be co-ordinated with the needs of
    ground safety.  The Police therefore maintain a very close liaison
    with football clubs, especially those whose matches are heavily
    attended and are in built-up areas, in order to organise the necessary
    traffic and crowd controls approaching and around the grounds.     These
    Police duties are a full-time job for a Police Inspector in respect of
    the two Liverpool grounds.  Information is generally collected from
    clubs and relevant Police Forces about estimated attendances of both
    home and away supporters and also about their likely behaviour.     The
    numbers of Police officers allocated to outside ground duties, and for
    escorting and checking upon visiting supporters, is adjusted
    accordingly for each match.  The City Building Surveyor and his
    responsible officers maintain a close contact with the Police at all
    times.  That is a matter of necessity owing to the regular high
    attendances at the Liverpool grounds.

18. The above covers the current position of certification of safety at
    football grounds and its extensive overlap with other legislation
    operated by district councils.




HILLSBOROUGH ADVISORY GROUP
25TH AUGUST, 1989
