                                                   HILLSBOROUGH



                   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                              19th May, 1989




      PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
                 Councillors A. Jennings, S. Ledwich.,
                 P. Millea and I. Templeman.



      Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors
      ¥. Edwards, Mary Johnston and F 0 Roderick.




9.    Detailed Arrangements for
      Visit to Sheffield

      The Chair informed members that, whilst it had not proved
      possible to arrange a meeting with representatives of
      Sheffield City Council, it had been possible to arrange a
      visit to the Football Ground.


10.   Production of Leaflet

      The Chair informed members that a leaflet relating to the
      work of the Working Party and giving details of the
      proposed Public Meeting had been prepared for circulation
      at the Cup Final and at Anfield.


11.   Proposed Public Meeting

      The Chair informed members of the arrangements made for a
      Public Meeting to be held at St. Georges Hall on 25th May
      1989.

12.   Visit to Hillsborough

      The Working Party then visited Hillsborough Football
      Stadium.
                                          City of Liverpool
                                                        ...         I. Templeman/S. Ledwich
                          From City Councillor ......................................... ....................................



                          Please reply to: ..........................................................................................


                                                                                                                           Date:        6th June, 1989.

REPORT ON FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL CONFERENCE

The Conference was organised by Hammersmith and Fulham Council's with a view to
ascertaining the views of local authorities and people who are involved in the
game.

The agenda was changed to incorporate a discussion on the Hillsborough Disaster.
The Chair explained that the Council had given serious consideration as to whether
the conference should go ahead in light of the disaster.  However, it was
decided to carry on given the Governments attitude to the Football Spectators
Bill.

David Blunkett, whose constituency covers Hillsborough opened the conference along
with Lord Graham who informed the conference that the Government intended to go
ahead with the Bill in the week beginning 12th June, 1989.

Rogan Taylor and Craig Brewin represented the FSA, ar.d spoke against I.D. cards
at football grounds.  Most of the speakers throughout the day put forward the
same views.

The day was not without its contraversial moments.  Viv Dunning con, Leader of
Luton Council and Ken Bates, Chairman of Chelsea provided food for some heated
debate.

Viv Dunnington praised Luton Town's I.D. card scheme.  He a r g u e t h a t crime around
the football ground had actually decreased in the last 3 years ’rid business in the
town was generally happy with the restrictions placed on supporrer:.        The
conference finally rose to life after he sat down, delegates poiiit-ng out that
gates during Lutons most successful period had actually .alien by ,V7%.

Clearly the emphasis seems to be at Luton to keep business in the town happy and
as many fans as pssible away from watching football.  This is obviously true
when you watch them play football on that pitch!

Most of the delegates to the conference expressed their surprise and concern that
Ken "electrify the fences at Chelsea" Bates was invited to speak.  There seems
to have been an amazing turnaround in his attitude, he now recognises that
football supporters are an integral part of the game.  He is actually against the
introduction of the I.D. card scheme, although he is looking at it as a financial
entity.  He was more concerned about how much would it cost to implement.
Predictably his answer to the games problems are tougher policing and stronger
sentences.
One of the most eloquent speakers all day was the Chairman of the PFA, Garth
Crooks, who was strongly opposed to the I.D. scheme and expressed the view
that supporters have to play a much more positive role in the game.

In summary the conference was unanimously against the I.D. card scheme and
agreed that it would do little for the game.  Far from solving problems it
would deepen them.  Problems such as no representation for supporters,
Victorian facilities and an appalling attitude from most clubs will not go
way with a membership scheme.




Ian Templeman,
Steve Ledwich.
