                                           Sdfe ‘rty&Ct
                                            UNIVERSITY
               St Helens Road Ormskirk                                            Telephone: 01695 575171
                    Lancashire L39 4QP      COLLEGE                               Fax: 01695 579997


                         Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice


Direct Line:    01695 584305

Our Ref:        PS/BH

Date:           21 June 1996

Colin Moneypenny
Committee and Member Services
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool
L69 2DH

Dear Colin

As promised I enclose my transcription of Ingham’s performance on Question Time. I have
written to ask him his sources, although I doubt if he will be forthcoming

Best wishes


?va
Phil

Enc




                                         Edge Hill Higher Education Corporation
                                             Chief Executive: Dr John Cater
Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice

Transcript of Question Time; Broadcast BBC 1 from London 6 June 1996

Panel: Jo Brand, Bernard Ingham, Glenda Jackson and Ian Lang.


Rita Groom (audience)

Will the pay-out to police officers involved in the Hillsborough Disaster create a precedent
for similar claims and is this a good thing?

David Dimbleby

£1.2 million damages to 14 police officers for the mental scars left by the Hillsborough
Disaster announced this week ... Jo Brand.

Jo Brand

Well, I think the situation has become confused, to some extent, because once the public
discovered that this money would be paid there was a complete ... sort o f ... process amongst
the families of people that lost relatives at Hillsborough and, I have to say, I think that the
two things are totally separate issues, really, which have become confused with one another
and which are making it difficult for people to accept...

 David Dimbleby

 ... But do you think people in the emergency services, like police officers, should be able to
 claim damages for the stress they suffer in the course of their duties?

 Jo Brand

 To some extent, yes ... I mean, having been a psychiatric nurse and had a lot of dealings with
 the police and other ‘caring’ ... sort o f ... professions (audience laughter)... Ho, ho, yes ...
 Catch the irony there, Bernard (audience laughter) ... No, I mean, as far as I see it in this
 situation, the policemen who were involved first of all cannot work because they are suffering
 emotional problems so they haven’t been able to return to work ... and, secondly, I do feel
 that they were let down very badly by their superiors in a situation where they should have
 been given more guidance and supported. So, I think on that separate issue I would support
 money being paid, yes.

 David Dimbleby

 Bernard Ingham?




                                                 1
Bernard Ingham

The question is, will it create a precedent and should it? Course it’ll create a precedent ...
Everybody queuing up to sue everybody in Britain today so they can get some money out of
it. All of it funded by me as a taxpayer which I object violently to. But of course, yes, it will
create a precedent. Should it? No it should not! And I am dismayed that this is taking place.
And as for Jo Brand’s culprits in all th is... in my view the culprits of Hillsborough were
those yobs in mass numbers who (audience voice: “Here, here”, gasps and some
clapping)... wait until I’ve spoken ... Yobs in mass numbers who turned up just before
the match and tried to force their way in and did force their way in. They are
responsible for the deaths of innocent people. They are responsible. The police have
suffered as a consequence but I don’t believe that we should have the caring services
spending their rime in the courts suing in this way. I think it really is ... its a very, very sad
day indeed.

David Dimbleby

So you think the police should not have sued or, it they had, should not have been awarded
damages.

Bernard Ingham

No, I think that, if indeed ... if indeed ... policemen suffer as a consequence of their duties and
are disabled or rendered incapable then there is a proper compensation system within the
force, or there ought to be, which would deal with the matter and we should take ... keep this
out o f the courts.

David Dimbleby

Rita Groom, who asked the question, what do you think of the two answers?

Rita Groom (audience)

Yeh. I agree with Bernard Ingham, I really don’t think that this thing should go to the courts.
As far as the police are concerned they have wages, they have pensions, there’s industrial
injuries, they are catered for it something happens to them. I really think we shouldn’t start
all this going through the courts.

David Dimbleby

Glenda Jackson, do you agree with her or with Jo Brand?

Glenda Jackson

W ell... could I just first of all say that I think what Bernard said when he referred to
yobs causing the Hillsborough Disaster was absolutely scandalous and disgraceful
(audience applause).



                                                 2
Bernard Ingham

(over the applause) I went there ...

Glenda Jackson

... He said he went the day after. I don’t think the inquiry had even begun but, of
course, a cursory glance and Bernard knows precisely what happened at the time. I
don’t accept his assessment. I think it was clearly a badly managed match. I think ... I
won’t go into the whole background of i t ... If I could go back to the original question I
would pray that there would never ever be an incident such as Hillsborough ever again.
I would hope that the lessons that were so bitterly learned from that appalling disaster
will ensure that no 12 year old child who goes to watch his favourite team is actually
killed in the terrible way that so many children were behind that goal. On this issue of
the police, I think in this particular incident, as Jo said, this is somehow outside what I think
we as the people who employ the police and, indeed, those who volunteer to be the arm of the
 law, in a sense, should expect. It was an extraordinary and appalling and dreadful incident.
 And certainly, reading the reports in the newspapers of the one policeman who, for the first
 time I believe, had spoken about his life which has been so shattered after that incident...
 then, one obviously has sympathy with him and, I agree absolutely with Jo, I think that we
 are tending to blur two separate issues here and the issue of the families o f victims who were
 denied any kind of compensation because they were not actually present, although they
 witnessed the death of their loved ones via the television, means that we really should
 reassess the whole basis of what constitutes post traumatic stress syndrome (sic) and whether,
 indeed, there can be claims in that area because I think we too little attempt to support victims
 both of natural... both of crime and ... in this instance ... I was going to say natural... but, of
  course, it was one of the most appalling unnatural disasters.

 David Dimbleby

 The man at the back in the red shirt ...

 Audience

 Yeh, I feel that the police mismanaged the whole situation and it’s about time ... the police
 are there for crowd safety and to look after the public. Clearly they didn’t do their job. Well,
 they did do their job but they didn’t do it to the full extent ... there was a lot of
 mismanagement there. I think that it’s about time the victims got paid what they’re due
 because they’re there and the police are there to look after them and they didn’t do that to the
 best of their ability.

 David Dimbleby

 But the police who got the damages were the police who, allegedly, according to the report
 at any rate, were badly led by their own officers, that the tactics were wrong and that’s
 why they came into the situation they did. The man in the white shirt there ...




                                                  3
Audience

Given the large amount of money that has been awarded against the police in recent months,
because the Commissioner (of the Metropolitan Police) seems to be failing to listen to public
concerns, it does make a change to find a lump sum being awarded to the police ...

David Dimbleby

... And you approve?

Audience

I approve, but I disapprove of the Commissioner not listening to public concerns about other
matters.

David Dimbleby

The woman on the far left ... Yes, in the front row.

Audience

Sir Bernard was saying that he resents paying out to victims, he’s lucky to have enough
money to pay in tax to the victims.

David Dimbleby

Ian Lang, what do you think of this?

Ian Lang

Well, I think it’s dangerous to generalise because the circumstances of each individual
policeman in that situation will have been different and the courts really are the only people
who can assess the extent of suffering and liability that could arise. So I don’t think one
could challenge the individual circumstances of individual policemen. But I think it is
regrettable that there is a tendency to rush to litigation now in the circumstances where, in the
past, people never did. This is a habit which, we’re told, happens to a great extent in America
and is now beginning to come in over here. I think it is a pity. I think there is a case for
reassessing and reappraising the way in which negligence and compensation and the
assessment of liability takes place and I think there is a point, to which Glenda touches on,
relating to the circumstances of the victims and the police which is worth examining further.
And I understand it is happening.

       [further audience discussion of the ‘right’ to compensation of emergency
       workers...]

David Dimbleby

Jo Brand. Do you want to come back on this?


                                               4
Jo Brand

Yes. I do. Because I mean I think people are just thinking of post traumatic stress as, “Can’t
do much ... just sit in front of the telly.” Do you know what I mean? But I actually think we
should be taking it a bit more seriously than that because these people can’t actually work,
you know, that is why they’re getting the money ... And if you want to know what post
traumatic stress is about, come and see me afterwards after I’ve been sat next to Bernard for
an hour! (much audience laughter and applause).




Transcript taken from tape, with permission.


Phil Scraton
June 1996




                                               5
