             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                      28th June, 1989



PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
           Councillors W. Edwards, S. Ledwich,
           Peter Millea, Jacqueline Smith and
           I. Templeman.



           Mr. A. Doswell attended as an observer
           representing Liverpool Trades Council.




Minutes of Last Meeting

Resolved that the Minutes of the last meeting of the
Working Party held on 7th June, 1989, be approved.


Application for Research Funding
Project: "Hillsborough and After -
the Liverpool Experience"

The Working Party considered the Report of the City
Solicitor concerning an application received from Edge
Hill College, Ormskirk for funding for a research
project called "Hillsborough and After - the Liverpool
Experience".



With the permission of the Working Party, Dr. Phil Scraton,
Principal Lecturer in Criminology and Head of the Centre
for Studies in Crime and Social Justice at Edge Hill
College, addressed the meeting on this matter.



Resolved that this Working Party recommend that the
City Council make a payment of £34,900 as a contribution
towards the funding of the Research Project.
23.   Alternative Routes to Hillsborough

      The Working Party considered the matter of alternative
      routes to Hillsborough.

      Resolved that the Officers of the Working Party be asked
      to give consideration to this matter.


24.   Safety Standards at Hillsborough Ground
      (CBS/193/89)

      Resolved that Report CBS/193/89 of the City Building
      Surveyor concerning Safety Standards at the Hillsborough
      Ground, be noted.


      The Licensing of Football Grounds
      (CBS/192/89)

      Resolved that Report CBS/192/89 of the City Building
      Surveyor concerning the licensing of Football Grounds,
      be noted.


26.   Football Supporters Legislation - Correspondence
      with Merseyside Football League Clubs

      The Research Officer to the Working Party reported that
      letters had been sent to Merseyside's three Football
      League Clubs requesting information regarding their current
      position in respect of the impending football supporters
      legislation.  A response has so far only been received
      from Tranmere Rovers F.C.

      Resolved that -

^     (a)   the response be noted; and

      (b)   the Officers of the Working Party be requested to
            assess the views of all Merseyside M.P.'s, with
            particular reference to Malcolm Thornton, M.P., and
            Barry Porter, M.P., in respect of the proposed
            legislation on Club Membership Schemes.
