                                                  W. I. Murray, LL.B,
                                                  City Solicitor, Secretary to the Cc ncil
                                                  P.O. Box No. 88
                                                  Municipal Buildings

  LIVERPOOL                                       Dale Street
                                                  LIVERPOOL L69 2DH

  CifyQcUt*cVl                                    Telephone: 051 -22X)SeXK}GXK
                                                             0 5 1 -2 2 5 2 4 3 0 {Direct. Line)
                                                  Fax: 051-236 2047
                                                  DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                  Your ref
                                                  Our ref    F&S/AKC/KH
                                                  Date       10th May, 1989




Dear Sir/Madam,

      You are requested to attend a meeting of the WORKING PARTY

RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER to be held at 4.00 P.M. on FRIDAY ,

next, the 12TH MAY, 1989 in a Committee Room in the Municipal

Annexe, Dale Street.

      The agenda for the meeting is enclosed together with the

minutes of the last meeting and a copy of reports which were

called for at that meeting relating to safety at football

grounds.

                           Yours faithfully



                            City Solicitor,
                       Secretary to the Council




TO:   All Members of the Hillsborough
      Disaster Working Party.
         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                   12TH MAY. 1989

                       AGENDA



Report(s) from the City Solicitor on the City Gouncil*s
request to submit evidence to the Taylor Inquiry.


Progress Report upon the development of links with the
Football Supporters* Association and Supporters generally.


Proposed visit to Sheffield and Hillsborough.


Leaflets publicising work of the Working Party to be
distributed at Wembley.


Proposed Schedule of Public Meetings.
              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                        26th April, 1989



PRESENT:    Councillors H. Chase, W. Edwards, A. Jennings,
            Mary Johnston, S. Ledwich, Peter Millea,
            K. Noon, F. Roderick and Jacqueline Smith.



            Councillor F. Ruse also attended.




Appointnent of Chair

Resolved that Councillor H. Chase be appointed the Chair
of this Working Party.


Terms of Reference of Working Party

The Working Party considered its terms of reference in
the light of the decision of tha City Counc.l of the 19th
April, 1989.

Resolved that -

   (i) the revised terms of reference be apDroved, viz:-

       1.   To ensure the submission of proper evidence      >
             to the Taylor Inquiry on be half <jf the people
             of Liverpool.

       2.   To assist in finding out the tru h of what
            occurred at Hillsborough includii g the
            preparations made in advanc e and to enable
            the Council to comment thereon.

       3.   To enable the Council to respond to any issues
            arising from the tragedy and to make
            observations generally.

       4.   To cause a report on the tragedy to be made
            to the City Council via the Finance and Strategy
            Committee as soon as practicable.

  (ii) the Working Party would urge all football supporters
       to give their evidence to the Official Inquiry
       but, in the case of those supporters who do not
       wish to be interviewed by the Police Officers
       appointed to assist the Inquiry, the Working Party
       wishes :to provide facilities for such evidence
         to be taken by the City Council. All unsolicited
         submissions so far received by the City Solicitor
         or Council members will be held to establish
         whether those who have made them wish them to be
         forwarded to the Inquiry team. The Working Party
         has asked the City Solicitor to obtain from Lord
         Justice Taylor his views on whether he would be
         prepared to -

         (a) accept evidence from this Working Party on
             behalf of persons who do, not wish to give
             their evidence tc the Police;

         (b) provide copies of submissions made to his
             Inquiry to this Working Party.

 (iii) the City Estates Surveyor and the City Solicitor
       be requested to find premises for a working office
       for this Working Party as a matter of urgency;

  (iv)    :he Leader and Deputy Leader of the Council, in
         conjunction with appropriate Chairs, be requested
         to make available appropriate staffing and
         administrative support forthwith to ensure the
         proper workings of this Working Party;

   (v) the City Solicitor arrange for all existing
       Council reports which have been prepared covering
       the arrangements for safety at football grounds
       to be-made available forthwith to all Members
       of the Working Party;

  (vi) the attached letter from the Football Association
       relating to ground safety be noted and the
       City Building Surveyor be requested to report to
       an early meeting of this Working Party upon the
       terms of the letter;

 (vii) an early meeting be arranged between this Working
       Party and the Football Supporters Association so
       that consideration can be given to making
       available facilities by the Council to assist
       football supporters generally in the submission of
       evidence to the Taylor Inquiry ; and

(viii) facilities be made available for discussions to
       take place with Sheffield City Council as soon as
       practicable.
Conference on Football
Supporters Bill

The Working Party considered an invitation to appoint
representatives to attend a Conference on the Football
Supporters Bill to be held on the 16th May at
Hammersmith Town Hall, London.

Resolved that the Chair (Councillor H. Chase) or his
nominee be appointed to attend this Conference.
                        THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                 LIMITED
                                                  I ' o u i it l c tl 1K63

                                 Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T i ie Q u e e n
                               President. H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                      Chairman: F. A. M illic h ii*

    C hief Executive:                                                                P/ione;01-4027151/2624542
R. H. G. K e l l y fcis                                                                     Te/ex; 261110
                                                                                        Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                          16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
  Our Ref:     RHGK/MD/PFS/80                 Y our Ref:                       17 th April 198 9.



 To:         All Member Clubs




 Dear Sirs,

                                           Re: Ground Safety

       Following the tragic events at Sheffield Wednesday F.C. last
 Saturday,- you are instructed to undertake, in conjunction with
 your Local Licensing Authority, an immediate review of ground
 safety.    This should include the perimeter fencing installed, the
 agreed capacity levels of all standing areas and the routes to and
 from the ground.

      A report should then be forwarded to The Football
 Association, stating any immediate action take a to implement
 changes and any longer term measures that you 'iave initiated.
 You should also advise us if no cranges have t-.^.en found necessary.
                                                        V
                         Yours faitnfully,




               County Football Associations
               All Senior Leagues




                              Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Cate, London W 23LW
                              Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987
PART III - Safety o f Stands at Sports Grounds


(CBS/1/89)




RECOMMENDATION




That the duties and responsibilities of the City Council imposed by Part III
of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987, be delegated
to the City Building Surveyor, through the Development Control Sub-Committee.




                            (See attached Report)




DEVELOPMENT CONTROL SUB-COMMITTEE

3RD JANUARY,   1989
FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987
PART III — Safety of Statius aL Sports Grounds


(CBS/1/89)

REPORT OF THE CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR

(Officer Contact   : L. N. Bush, Tel. 236 9231, Ext. 110)



1.   Parts of the above Act were the response of Parliament to some of the
     recommendations of the Popplewell Report, which followed the tragic loss
     of life at Bradford City football ground on the 11th May 1985.  This
     report is concerned with Part III, which is designed to ensure the safety
     of stands which provide covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators,
     at a sports ground which is not large enough to have been designated to
     require a safety certificate for the whole ground, under the provisions
     of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.  It requires local authorities
     to identify and control such stands in accordance with any orders and
     guidance which may be given by the Secretary of State.


2.   The statutory commencement order (S.I. 1988 No. 1808 ( C . M ) ) which brings
     Part III into operation on 1st January 1989, is accompanied by a further
     order (S.I. 1988 No. 1807) which sets out the obligation to apply for,
     and manner of application for a stand safety certificate, and the response
     to be made by a local authority, including the form such certificates
     must take.


3.   Immediately after the Bradford disaster, undssignated sports grounds in
     Liverpool were researched and those having stands with a capacity of more
     than 20 were surveyed by the City Building Surveyor, to ensure that they
     were safe.  Some improvements were called for in a small number of stands
     and these were carried out by the owners and the stands were re-examined.
     No covered stands with a capacity of 500 spectators were found in that
     process and none have been erected, to the authority's knowledge, since.
     Consequently the newly applicable legislation has no immediate impact
     for the City.


4.   It is relevant to emphasise that the new legislation only extends, in
     some respects, legislation which already exists and is delegated to the
     City Building Surveyor to enforce through this Sub-Committee.  Any new
     stand which will require a safety certificate will be a buidling, controlled
     under the Building Regulations, unless it is a temporary structure (to
     be removed after 28 days).  All relevant aspects of safety in permanent
     stands will be controlled during its design and construction under Building
     Regulations and kindred legislation activated by them.  The new legislation
     will merely require a certificate to be issued on the satisfactory completion
     of such a stand and ensure that it is properly maintained.  If such a
     stand was erected for a temporary period prior to this new legislation,
     then the City Building Surveyor was authorised to control its design and
     construction and to prohibit its use, if it was not satisfactory, under
     the provisions of the County of Merseyside Act 1980, Section 20 - Safety
     of Stands.  This local legislation controls temporary or permanent stands,
     as small as those accommodating only 20 persons and also those without
     a roof (not buildings).  It does not require a safety certificate to be
     issued, but empowers equivalent or better ongoing control of all safety
     features by permitting the City Building Surveyor to carry out remedial
     works to make the stand safe, if the owner fails to do so immediately
     he is notified, and to charge the cost to him, or to close the stand and
     prevent its use, if it cannot be made safe in time.


5.   None of this existing legislation is repealed or amended by the Act of
     1987, or the latest statutory order.   In some respects the new controls
     are. not as stringent as those provided by the local Act of 1980.  However,
     offences may be more heavily penalised under the new Act, which is
     concerned with at least 500 spectators, although there is no power of
     closure of the stand, such as exists in the local Act.


5.   It is mandatory for the local authority to implement and enforce the new
     provisions, including the issue of a safety certificate, which is a new
     formality for the City.  This last requirement is in all respects similar
     to the functions delegated to the City Building Surveyor in respect of
     the safety certification of designated sports grounds (Anfield and Goodison
     Park) but on a much lower scale.  If need to implement this new item of
     control of stands arises, it will need to be carried out as an ancillary
     to the existing principal controlling functions of the Building Regulations
     and those of the 1980 local Act, so as to produce the most effective
     combined' result. Consequently it is recommended that the duties and
     responsibilities of the City Council imposed by Part III of the 1987 Act,
     be delegated to the City Building Surveyor through this Sub-Committee,
     to be exercised in combination with the other relevant duties presently
     delegated to him.




DEVELOPMENT CONTROL SUB-COMMITTEE

3RD JANUARY,   1939
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS                          (For Information Only)
STATUTORY CONTROL FROM 1ST APRIL, 1986

(CBS/119/85)


REPORT OF THE CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR



1.   The attached report   is to be submitted to the meeting of the
     Policy Committee to   be held on the 18th December, 1985 and
     will be accompanied   by the following recommendation, viz

     That :

     (a)   as the Merseyside County Council will cease to exist
           on the 1st April, 1986 and the functions of that authority
           in relation to the Safety at Sports Grounds Act, 1975
           will, on that date, transfer to the City Council (insofar
           as sports grounds within uhe City are conc er ns J ), such
           functions be incorporated within the powers and duties
           of the Licensing Sub-Committee of the Trading and Licensing
           Committee;



     (b)   the implementation and enforcement of the provisions
           of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act, 1975 be delegated
           to the City Building Surveyor; and



     (c)   the C.'ty Building Surveyor and the City Solicitor be
           instt -cted to make all necessary arrangements with the
           County Solicitor for the tra sfer, at the appropriate
           time, of all documents and r< sords relating to this
           matter.



2.   The report is submitted to this Sub-Committee at this stage
     for the information of the Members.




Licensing Sub-Committee of the
Trading & Licensing Committee

15th November,   1985
SAFF.TY OF SPORTS GROUNDS                                    Appendix to Item No.
STATUTORY CONTROL FROM 1ST A P R I L , 1985

(CBS/120/85)



REPORT OF;THE CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR



1." The Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 was introduced following
  1 1 'ah''inquiry ’of M a y ;1972,: conducted^ by the Rt 1 Hon'. Lord W h ea tl ey ,
       which was ordered*partly' because of "general' concern on"the ’
       subject, but more’'particularly' as'an immediate result of the
       Ibrox'Park F o o t b a l l ;Stadium Disaster in 1 9 7 1 ; ‘ The Act deals .
       with the standards; of safety' for spectator’      s 'within sports' '
       stadia and sports grounds, as far as that can be controlled
       by p h y s i c a l ,provision in the structures (buldings, tecraces.,
 ■ ' seating, crush barriers;' stairsV’baiustrades, fetei etc'.).
       stewarding/ a n d 'the’.;Services' (lighting;' public1 address'; 'alarm
       and communication systems, 'first aid faeilitiesY'fire ,fighting
       equipment etc. etc; )' which' are provided for the premises'."

2.     Presently the'’cbntrol o v e r ’these/matters i s 'made available
       in' two wayS.: First l y-, and niost' emphatically, by requiring
       designated stadia to hold a general safety certificate. ’ Secondly,
       by obtaining' a ‘Court Order prohibiting any substantially dangerous
       usb" of any' sports ground.’' ' :        '



3.        The controls of the 1975.Act are presently the responsibility
          bf'County Councils, but this will;transfer on the ,1st A p r i l ,
      ’’ 1986, by the provisions'of the Lbcal'Govferrwient; Act; i9Q’5, '.
          froih' the abolished''Metropolitan C o un ty .Councils'to "tRe~’District
        "CbUncils iri those. CoUntifes         thus" the 'City Council will, on"
          that date, become^responsibie for implementation'oif these ;;
          controls in Liverpool." The selection' Of C o u n t y 'Councils to'
     ■; provide that sfervice' in 1975,'' was" biased .on assumptions made,',
       ' ‘following'th6‘Maude' Rfep6rt :of 1969 and, the Government White''
        .Paper' (dmnij. 4S94) bf 197li :8ri the reorganisation of local’w
       ■*government. " I n “both those documents' the Building Control ~V ,
          function,’which’was; to^/provide’the main technical/'inpi^t. fbr\
          t h e ’work w a s 'intended to niove.tb the Counties.'    In'the! event,
          this did riot happen as the' Bill’passed through Parliament.'
          The Act therefore took special stfeps tb ensure that t h e .expert
          knowledge of Building Control Authorities was enlistied to"
          perform the necessary duties and responsibility, by naming
          it as an "interested party" and giving it rights, of appoal A
          e t c . ,: to'guide 'the :Work of' the County. . '



4.       Prior to the 1975 Act, t h e ‘City Council had'operated control
         over covered spectator accommodation at sports stadia through
      ' the City Building'Surveyor'ahd the i’9 3 6 ’’Public Health'Act'
         provisions relating to safety i n :buildirigs.of public resort.
         Thus'the move to b e ’made next’April, not'Only places. th6 bji£ic
         control with the^ City' Council as‘ ESuildirtg Control' Authority',
      '■’as'"'intended' by Lo r d’Wheatley, ,:butiiis"'aiso a 'reversion' tb the
         situation which existed for nearly 40 years from 1936.
Other technical input into this function is provided by the
Police and the Fire Service and there is a well-established
and efficient liaison between officers of those bodies and
the City Building Surveyor.         In anticipation of the transfer
of these.duties and responsibilities, the City Building Surveyov-
has been closely-involved by the County Solicitor, in all
the C o u n t y 1s .activities following the football-ground disasters
at. the Bradford and.Heysel (Brussels) stadia of May l a s t , •,
insofar.as the City is concerned.         Consequently it is expected
that the transfer of this.function to this Council will not
present any.problems and.details only need to be arranged.



The bulk of the work involved, for the City lies in the designated
football-grounds,of L iv erpool.and Everton.   There are other
sports-grounds, including South Liverpool. F.C. and Liverpool
C.C. where.the interim report of M r ..Justice, Popplewell caused
a survey and requirements to be made, which will require some
ongoing supervision from time to time, but this is minor.
At present both the first division football-grounds hold a
general safety-certificate and are in .very good order throughout.
The City Building Surveyor also, has control of parts of their
accommodation, through conditions attached to entertainment
licences and also drinking licences which they both hold.



General safe ;y-certificates do npt lapse naturally under the
1975 Act, but are subject to reasonable cancellation .or alteration
by the certifying .authority, where circumstances or risks,..-,
c ha n g e ,appreciably. ,This continuous method of control involves
regular inspections and spot-checks, in addition to a system
of compulsory checks and record-keeping by the c l u b s . Whilst
this control is not identical to-that operated by the Licensing
Sub-Committee for other premises.,providing public entertainment,
it .is very similar, and varies o n l y :in,the scale and nature,
of the audience/spectator accommodation involved. .Accordingly,
the City Building. Surveyor anticipates and recommends that
the duties.."Bo be undertaken next. April by the City Council
should be through the same administrative .machinery and using
the same methods as those which apply to the licensing o f .
premises,for public entertainment.

                                               •-- 1    '   ’ ' ’*   *I
As mentioned earlier there is no administrjative process of
periodic renewal of the general safety-certificates under
the 1975 Act.     There is therefore no fee payable to the authority
for the performance of its duties.        The review of the 1975
Act, which is being undertaken by Mr. Justice Popplewell,
may bring some changes to the perpetuity of safety certificates
and the payment of reasonable fees for the local authorities'
service., Suggestions^about these matters have been made in
the evidence, being collected by him. . The large increase ;        in
the numbeir. of .sports’,stadia .desigtiated._earl.ier. this, year .when
       . i'f      r/u    Or-   :   C   K '        • '• •   '
     3rd and 4th Division Football Clubs and Rugby League Clubs
     (with capacities exceeding 10,000) were added to 1st and 2nd
     division and international football-grounds, make these changes
     more desirable.   Meanwhile, however, members may feel it would
     be useful to make formal and direct representations to the
     Government now, having regard to the delay being experienced
     in its implementation of the promise to provide fees for the
     work involved in "certificates of suitability" for members'
     clubs' entertainment facilities.



9.   All the duties and responsibilities involved in the statutory
     control of safety at sports-grounds are very similar to those
     delegated to the Licensing Sub-Committee for the licensing
     of premises for public entertainment.  Accordingly, it is
     recommended that they be carried out in parallel with, and
     in the same manner as, that licensing function.  A confirmation
     of that is sought now, in order that the City Building Surveyor
     and the City Solicitor can make arrangements with the County
     Council, Police and Fire Authorities for the smooth transfer
     and future conduct of the function.




Licensing Sub-Committee of
Trading & Licensing Committee - 15th November,   1985 (Information Only)


Policy Committee - 18th December,   1985
EUROPEAN CUP FINAL, WEDNESDAY, 29TH MAY, 1985
GENERAL APPRAISAL OF GROUND CONDITIONS

(CBS/6S/85)


REPORT OF THE CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR


Introduction

1.   The Chairman of the Licensing Sub-Committee in consultation with the
     Deputy Leader of the City Council on Monday, 10th June, 1985, instructed
     the City Building Surveyor to contact the Authorities in Brussels
     with a view to visiting them to establish a liaison at Technical
     Officer level, and to seek their permission to visit the Heysel
     Stadium and make a technical inspection of the structure and general
     conditions pertaining at the Stadium.



2.   The purpose of the visit was to seek to learn any immediate lessons
     for crowd safety following the tragedy which took place at the European
     Cup Final on 29th May, 1985, as the City Council, having the function
     of Building Control Authority, are involved in the enforcement of
     the Safety at Sports Grounds Act, 1975 and other associated legislation
     dealing specifically with the safety of persons who are attending
     entertainments, including those of a sporting nature.



3.   The City Building Surveyor in reporting has not in any way   attempted
     to explain or find reason for the tragedy that occurred at   the Stadium.
     The report deals with the subject of structural safety and   suitability
     using as a basis the standards set down in the appropriate   legislation.



4.   In carrying out the instructions of the City Council, the City Building
     Surveyor is very mindful that the standards and procedures laid
     down and practised in the United Kingdom are most likely to vary
     greatly from those in Belgium both in detail and extent of jurisdiction,
     and therefore the report does not contain any comment on the Belgian
     procedures for dealing with such events or emergencies.

                                                                                 f

5.   The initial contact with the Belgian Authorities was with the Brussels
     Fire Brigade, and through their good officers, the visit was arranged
     at short notice.  The visit took place on Wednesday, 12th June,
     1985.  There is presently a Parliamentary enquiry in progress in
     Belgium into this tragedy, and therefore, the visit was necessarily
     low-profile and to establish contact with officers of the Belgian
     Authorities, who share similar responsibilities with officers of
     this Authority.  The City Building Surveyor's representative was
     accompanied on the inspection of the Stadium by the Brussels Fire
     Brigade Public Relations Officer, Mr. F. Boileaff, and by the Commander
     in charge of the Emergency services at the time of the tragedy.
6.   The main structure of the Stadium was built approximately fifty
     years ago.  This includes the terracing at each end of the Stadium
     and the main stand.  A new stand was built in about 1980 and this
     is marked "Tribune 2" on the attached plan.  The Stadium is the
     largest of its kind in Belgium providing not only facilities for
     football matches, but also athletics.  The Stadium is open for general
     use by the public, and the impression given is that it is administrated
     by a public authority with the responsibility for safety resting with
     the Mayor's office.

Terracing


7.   The Standing spectators areas are situated at each end of the Stadium
     (marked 0,N,M;  X,Y,Z on the attached plan) and whilst the inspection
     of the ground concentrated more on the X,Y,Z areas, the observations
     apply equally to both ends.



8.   The terrace is formed at a slope of approximately 1   in10 at its
     shallowest and 1 in 6 at its steepest.   The surface of the terrace
     is compact earth of a shale-type appearance, with only the nosing
     of the step being formed in concrete (see attached sketch).    These
     concrete nosings had deteriorated and crumbed over the years, exposing
     rusted reinforcing bars.  The edges were uneven and jagged where
     pieces of concrete had broken off.   The compacted earth terraces
     were generally reasonably level, although there were outbreaks of
     vegetation growing through the terracing in a number of places.
     The general condition of the terracing would be best described as "poor



Crush Barriers



9.   The barriers consisted of two reinforced concrete posts 1.1m high,
     approximately 3m apart, set into the terrace.  Each post had two
     holes in their length, one in the middle and the other near the
     top.  Originally there were two tubular steel members passing through
     these holes forming the crush barriers.  Without exemption the lower
     rail had been removed in each barrier throughout the terracing,
     leaving just the top rail in the conventional pattern of crush barriers
     The holes in the middle of the concrete posts undoubtedly weakened
     the section.  The concrete uprights showed very serious# signs of
     deterioration to both the concrete and the reinforcement.   The concrete
     had broken off many of the uprights in parts, exposing badly rusted
     reinforcing rods.  The top rails were rusting and showing signs
     of deterioration where they entered the posts.  The pattern of the
     layout of the crush barriers was approximately 5m down the slope
     of the terrace, each line being offset to the next and in the pattern
     as shown on the attached sketch.
Perimeter Fence


10.   This comprised basically two lines of fencing.  The high security
      fence being constructed of approximately 3m high small section steel
      posts at 3m centres, with plastic coat wire mesh fencing infill
      to form a continuous barrier.  The outer fence from the terrace
      was a low level reinforced concrete wall approximately 900mm high
      rn an open honeycomb pattern.  The composite construction of these
      walls as a security fence and a crush barrier at the perimeter of
      the track did not form a substantial barrier against crowd pressures.
      At the X,Y,Z terrace the outer concrete wall appeared to have been
      renewed fairly recently, while at the 0,N,M terrace the concrete
      wall was very dilapidated, exposing rusting reinforcing bars.



Perimeter Fence to Stadium


11.   This wall was approximately 2.5m high and constructed of concrete
       posts, with concrete panels slotted into the posts.   The concrete
       panels were about 40mm thick, and only lightly reinforced.   Here,
       the concrete panels had deteriorated exposing the reinforcements;
       thus weakening the security of the wall.   There were holes in the
       wall, some measuring 800mm high x 2m long at a number of locations,
       particularly at the back of the X,Y terrace enclosure.



Flanking Wall to Terrace


12.   This wall was constructed of 225mm brickwork, with brick piers or
      buttresses at approximately 2m centres constructed on the terrace
      side of the wall.  This wall was approximately 3m high at its maximum,
      reducing to just under 2m adjacent to the terrace in order not to
      interrupt the sight-line of spectators.  This brick wall was rendered
      on both sides, although this had fallen off in part, but this in
      itself did not reduce the strength of the wall.  The wall, at the
      lower end, was built directly off the concrete retaining structure
      which formed the end of the earth terracing.  The brickwork did
      not appear to have been bedded in mortar or fixed in any other way
      to the concrete wall.  With the piers/buttresses of the wall being
      on the spectator side of the wall they would not assist in restraining
      the wall from movement when subjected to crowd pressure.  The wall
      was not constructed as a crush barrier, and was not adequate to
      act as such.



.Crowd Segregation Barrier


13.   This was sited in the Y section of the terrace and basically subdivided
      the whole of one end of the ground into two equal parts.  The barrier
      comprised of twolines of tubular steel handrails, fixed by metal
      straps to the top of the existing concrete crush barrier uprights,
      thus forming a passageway from top to bottom of the terrace.
      To one of the continuous handrails were fixed fairly lightweight
      steel posts approximately 2.5m to 3m high and tied to the steel
      posts was plastic coated wire mesh fencing.  This composite
      construction, whilst forming a physical barrier, would not withstand
      the normal loadings or force exerted by the sideways movements of
      a packed crowd on a terrace.  This was eventually removed by physical
      force during the course of the tragedy.



Means of Ingress and Egress to Terracing


14.    Access into the Stadium terracing was gained through openable timber
      .gates about 5m wide, at four separate locations at the back of the
       terracing at its highest point.   There were no turnstile controlled
       access points, the only control being exercised by stewards being
       positioned to collect tickets.   This situation has serious implications
       as to the manner in which the Stadium Authorities were able to ascertain
       with any accuracy the exact number of persons in any part of the
       ground, and thus prevent possible overcrowding.   The normal requirement
       for any means of egress, where crowds gather, and emergency evacuation
       in an orderly manner is thereby essential for crowd safety, is to
       ensure that at least a suitable alternative route is available to
       that normally used as the main ingress route.   The terracing, wallings
       and layout of the Stadium prohibited this by virtue of all terracing
       having to fill from the back and empty in that direction.   Thus
       all spectators on the terraces were in an enclosure space with only
       one means of egress.   Therefore, there was no reasonable alternative
       means of escape available to cope with any emergency evacuation
       for whatever reason.   Furthermore, the toilets and refreshments
       were sited adjacent to the entrance gates at the top of the terrace
       and persons requiring to use these facilities would cause more crowd
       movement than would normally be expected in a capacity crowd.



Summary


15.   The Stadium is generally 50 years old, and there appears to have       f
      been no major improvements to the level of safety standards at the
      Stadium, more particularly to the terraced area over that time.
      The fabric of the safety features originally built into the ground
      have, over the years, deteriorated to the extent where major refurbishments
      of those features is now necessary to accommodate a capacity and
      partisan crowd likely to attend a major competitive sporting event.
      If the criterion of the "Guide to the Safety of Sports Grounds (Football)"
      Code were to be applied to this particular Stadium, it is doubtful
      that the City Building Surveyor would be able to recommend a grant
      of a "Safety Certificate" issued pursuant to the Safety of Sports
      Grounds Act, 1975 to the appropriate Licensing Authority in this case.


16.   The Chief Fire Officer of Brussels has expressed a desire to visit
      Liverpool in the very near future to discuss procedures with officers
      of this Authority and the Licensing Authority (Merseyside County Council)
      on the certification of sports grounds in this area.  The City Building
      Surveyor is of the opinion that such a meeting would be beneficial
      to the City of Liverpool.
Report of the City Building Surveyor

1.       Council members and the public are asking if the tragic loss of life
          which occurred at Bradford City football ground, or anything like it,
          could arise in this City.  This report has been prepared as a matter
          of urgency to answer that question broadly and to explain what has,
        '"or is being done, to ensure that an accident of that nature cannot
          occur here.

2.       There are only two sports grounds in the City with large covered
          stands for spectators and they are the Liverpool and Everton football
        - club grounds.   All other sports grounds which have any terracing or
          stands provided are much smaller in size than these, o v even the
          Bradford ground.

3.   ‘ .. . The two first division football stadiums of Liverpool and Everton
            have been actively controlled in detail in all aspects of spectator
            safety affected by the structures since 1970, and before that, from
            time to time as the need arose.   That has been possible under
            national and local legislation available to the City Council, which
            still exists, here and elsewhere in the country.   On the 1st
            January, 1977, both these grounds were designated to require
            'Safety Certificates' under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.
            This is presently the responsibility of the County Council, in
            close consultation with the City as 'building authority' and both
            the police and fire brigade are jointly involved in the certification
            and ongoing control.   Constant contact with the clubs is maintained
            and reigular inspections of the grounds take place at intervals to
            ensure that there is proper maintenance of the structures and
            safety provisions.

4.       The Government intends that this function, and all the other
          functions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, will become
          the responsibility of the City (district council) if and when the
          County Council is abolished (possibly within 12 months).   The City
          Building Surveyor assumes that this duty will be allocated to the
          Trading and Licensing Committee, which looks after all other
          similar matters in place of public entertainment and i.s, therefore,
        . duplicating this report to that Committee for its information.

5.       The earlier work and more work done specifically in anticipation
         of the 1975 Act coming into operation, enabled Liverpool to be
         the first ground in the country to be issued with the necessary
         'Safety Certificate' and the one for Everton followed shortly
         after.  One of the problems at Goodison Park was the existance
         of timber construction in the stand on Bullens Road side and at
         the Park End.   There is also timber terracing at the Gwladys
         Street end, but this is simply a standing surface laid on a
         structural concrete floor, wholly sealed and without any risk of
         fire attacking the timber from its underside.   The timber terracing
         at the Park End stand was, and remains, closed off and walled-in.
         The timber flooi's of the Bullens Hoad stand were underdrawn with
         incombustible sheeting to make them fire resisting.
There are no timber roof constructions and no risk of a rapid
spread of fire above the spectators at either ground.   Arrangements
exist at both grounds for the continuous patrolling of the stands
when they are in use, to ensure that any fire incident is spotted
and dealt with immediately.   These are accompanied by a proper
system for instantly alarming all stadium stewards and the public.
All exit doors which are closed against non-paying, or unruly
entry, up to three quarter time, are manned constantly during
matches.   They can be opened before any spectators from the stands
actually arrive at them, in any emergency evacuation.   Members
rnay have been present at matches where this procedure has been
practised and they will have heard the announcements being made
over the public address system and the gate bells being rung.

All these structural and stewarding precautions are integrated with
the 'law and order' precautions taken by the clubs and the police
for each and every match day.  Whilst crowd behaviour and the danger
of throwing smoke cannisters or flare-3 (or anything else, for that
matter) remains a cause for concern and attention, it is not
considered that these factors could cause any structural failure
or spread fire at these two grounds, to endanger spectators beyond
their immediate vicinity.         ‘

The official enquiry into the tragic accident at Bradford is to be
coupled with one into the death resulting from a wall being pushed
over by a crowd at Birmingham City football ground on the same
day.  It is also to be extended to consider the hazards which
might exist at rugby and cricket grounds and grounds used for
other sports.   Whilst this enquiry is not immediately concerned
with laying or apportioning blame for the deaths which have occurred,
it is clear that its findings will be the basis for that exercp.se
by others concerned.   Therefore, it will be thorough and detailed
and will take many months to complete.   Its findings will not assist
in preventing any possible reoccurance of a similar accident in
the next, say, 6 to 9 months.   Nor will the imminent designation
of third and fourth division football league clubs (none in Liverpool)
to require safety certificates, make any impact in the same time
period, on the grounds of those clubs,   or at all on grounds which
are used for playing football in other leagues or for rugby,
cricket or- other activities.
                                                                       e
However, there are control facilities immediately available
to deal with this problem and to avoid, what presently appear to
have been, the principle factors which combined to produce the
tragedy at Bradford.  These lie in:-

      (a)   Section 71, Building Act 1984 (formerly Section 59,
             Public Health Act, 1936) - Ingress, egress and
             circulation in buildings used by the public.

      (b)   Section 20, County of Merseyside   Act,   1980 -
             Safety of stands.

      (c)   Section 48, County of Merseyside   Act,   1980 -
             Means of escape from fire.

      (d)   Section 10, Safety of Sports Grounds Act,    1975 -
             Emergency proceedure.
        The first throe of these are power?; of tbit/ authority and the
        last one is presently one for the County Council; which may well
        ‘tr'dnsf'ci"' to this      v/i’tiiin      jnonlrhs,, s.53 montiion^d.
        sbovo o

10.    Some of the groun 3 < ^ncerned in the City, such as South Liverpool
        Football Club,      Liverpool Cricket Club, are known to the City
        Building Surveyor and have been examined from time to time for
        other purposes or occasions and were then found to be satisfactory,
        despite the presence )f some timber construction.     Other sports
        grounds in the City p .~ e thought to have only small, if any,
      - spectator accommodating structures.     If any member, or ward
        Councillors generally, know of any sports grounds, with stand
        accommodation of any Lind or size the City Building Surveyor would
        be pleased to ;e advire],     A list has been prepared, but it is
        not necessaril'/ exhaucrive at present,

11.    A meeting has been he x with the County, the Police, the Fire
        Brignde and the City Pr/.lding Surveyor, which also included Chief
       0:'fi;:ers for building control of the other four Merseyside districts.
        Thi purpose was to dio^uss and co-ordinate the activities of these
        agencies, in using the powers of the legislation listed above, .to
        en^.v^e the safety of spectators at all sports grounds having stands
        throughout the Merseyr.ide area, regardless of any intended
        designations or other instructions that may be about to be issued
        by the Government.     A procedure for joint inspections and require­
        ments to be drawa up, informally in the first instance, has been
        agreed to mutual advantage.     From knowledge of the grounds presently
        listed for Liverpool i.t is hoped that it will not be necessary to
        servo formal notices for any improvements necessary, but if it
        i;:, and that involves any powers of the City Council, the City
        Bu .lding Surveyor will report back for the necessary authority.,
        S h m i d any more urgent action be necessary, which again seems
        me3t unlikely in the Liverpool district, court orders may be
        obtained by the County under the Act of 1975, for the closing
        (c • partial closing) of the stand concerned, until the necessary
        irrorovements are carried out.

12.     Tie first joint inspection of a sports ground in Liverpool will
        take place in two days and further inspections will follow in an
        estimated priority order.  These are expected to be completed
        within the next few weeks.  If this work proceeds as anticipated
        for Liverpool, and any necessary improvements are madt by the
        clubs concerned, a concluding report will be made in due coarse.
        If problems arise, or formal action becomes necessary that will
        be reported to the Development and Building Control Sub-Committee
        at that time.




Development and Building Control Sub-Committee
20th May 1985
Licensing Sub-Committee
18th June 1985




                     <
