              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                            of the

                Policy and Resources Committee

                      27th September, 1995




   PRESENT: Councillor J. Spriggs, Chair;
            Councillors Vera Best, W. Craig, S. Ellison,
            Bill Roberts, J. Thompson, Len Tyrer and P.
            Tyrrell.



            Apologies for absence were received from
            Councillors E. Clein, A. Dean, P. Millea and
            F. Roderick.




12. Minutes of Previous Meeting

   Resolved that the proceedings of the previous meeting of
   the Working Party held on 10th July, 1995 be approved as a
   correct record.


13. Hillsborough Project - Publication of Second Report

   The Working Party considered information provided by
   Professor P. Scraton of Edgehill University College,
   Project Director of the Hillsborough Project, concerning
   arrangements to be made in respect of the proposed
   publication of the Second Report of the Project which has
   now been completed and specifically the estimate received
   from Bocardo Press for the professional publication of the
   Report at a cost of £4,510 for 1,000 copies.

   Resolved that -

    (A) the Policy and Resources Committee be recommended to
        approve the appropriate expenditure to finance the
        printing of the Report by Bocardo Press; and




 al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/A270995
    (B) in the event that approval for the above expenditure is
        received from the Policy and Resources Committee, the
        Project Director be requested to liaise with the
        Committee Clerk and the Chair of the Working Party to
        determine the nature of, and arrangements for, the
        launch of the publication.


14. Hillsborough Trust Memorial Bursaries

   The Working Party considered issues relating to the
   selection criteria to apply in respect of applications made
   to obtain educational bursaries from the funds made
   available from the Disaster Trust Fund to the Merseyside
   District Councils and in particular the refusal of the
   Trust Fund Manager to accept the revised criteria
   previously agreed by the Working Party and his suggestion
   that monies would not be forthcoming in the event that the
   City Council insisted on the use of anything other than the
   original criteria which had been set down.

   Resolved that -

    (A) given the short time scale remaining in the present
        year and in the light of the viewpoint expressed by the
        Trust Fund Manager the original selection criteria be
        accepted as the basis for considering applications for
        Hillsborough educational bursaries;

    (B) the selection panel be requested to give special
        consideration to requests for assistance received from
        members of bereaved families;

    (C) clarification be sought of the period for which a
        particular individual may be awarded a bursary;

    (D) investigation be made of the feasibility of the City
        Council:-

         (i) calling for an independent review of the nature,
             constitution and operation of Trust Funds such as
             that established following Hillsborough; and

        (ii) establishing a separate Fund for Hillsborough
             families with specific terms of reference for
             specific outstanding needs not met by the existing
             Trust Fund;

    (E) the Trust Fund Manager be invited to the next meeting
        of the Working Party to discuss the issues which have
        been raised at this meeting; and




 al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/A270995
    (F) in the event that the Trust Fund Manager does not
        choose to accept the invitation to discuss these
        matters, consideration be given to the issuing of a
        press release stating the Councils viewpoint upon the
        operation of the Fund.


15. Hillsborough Statement - Correspondence with
    Nottingham Forest

   The Working Party considered recent correspondence received
   from the Secretary of Nottingham Forest Football Club
   refusing the request made for the Club to place the Joint
   Hillsborough Statement in its Match Programme.

   Resolved that -

    (A) the Head of Committee and Member Services be instructed
        to write to the Forest secretary in the appropriate
        terms clarifying the nature of the request which has
        been made and requesting the Club to review its
        decision; and

    (B) copies of the correspondence be sent to the Nottingham
        M.P. Alan Simpson and to the Leader of Nottingham City
        Council in order to ascertain if they are able to
        assist in seeking the publication of the Statement.


16. BBC Television Drama - "Backup"

   The Working Party considered information concerning a BBC
   Television Fictional drama programme "Backup" to be
   screened on September 28th which contains scenes of
   Liverpool Football Club Supporters acting in a "hooligan"
   manner.

   Resolved that -

    (A) in the light of the repeated and unfounded allegations
        which have been made against Liverpool fans following
        the Disaster the strongest possible protest be made to
        the B .B .C . about the programme and the further
        unnecessary suffering which its use of this discredited
        and unimaginative stereotype will cause to families and
        survivors of the Disaster as well as to ordinary, law-
        abiding football supporters; and




 al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/A270995
  (B)   in the light of ongoing and unresolved legal cases with
        regard to the Disaster, the Head of Legal Services be
        requested as a matter of urgency, to investigate the
        possibility of the Council being able to serve an
        injunction to stop the screening of the programme; and

  (C)   Liverpool Football Club and its sponsors Carlsberg also
        be urged to give consideration to issuing an injunction
        which would prevent the screening of the programme.




al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/A270995
