           Merseyside
           Fire & Civil Defence
           Authority
                                                               W. I. MURRAY,
                                                               LL.B., Solicitor,
            TO:     All Members of the                         Clerk to the Authority
                    Hillsborough Working Party.
                                                               P.O. Box 88,
                                                               Municipal Buildings,
                                                               Dale Street,
                                                               Liverpool L69 2DH.

                                                               Telephone: 051 -2 0 T S S m
                                                                           225 2431
                                                               Ext:

Yourref.                      Our ref. MFCDA/CM                Date 26th June, 1989


 Dear Sir/Madam,

      Further to my letter dated 23rd June, 1989 requesting
 you to attend a meeting of the HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING
 PARTY of the Finance and Strategy Committee to be held at
 9.00 A.M. on WEDNESDAY, 28TH JUNE, 1989 in Committee Room 'C'
 in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street, Liverpool,  I now
 enclose for your attention the Report of the City Building
 Surveyor to be considered in conjunction with item 5 on the
 Agenda.

                                         Yours faithfully,




                                   Clerk to the Authority.




When calling or telephoning please ask for:   Mr. Moneypenny
                                                                                      v 1*



                                                                   -V « >
                                       -    22


SCHEDULE 8                                                         Kut=U5;d_^=.
                                                                    S» aav.^-^-V'y d^_V*CT>
INSPECTIONS AND TESTS



8.1             Those parts of the stadium, including those fittings, services
                or equipment, which are specified in the tables to Conditions
                8.2 and 8.5 shall be inspected by the Holder, or his competent
                representative, to ensure that they are in good order, maintained
                free of danger, and /or that they function properly to protect
                the safety of spectators.        Such checks shall include whatever
                testing is required to verify these conditions and any check or
                testing which is specifically required by the Local Authority at
                any reasonable time.       Tests of the strength or stability of any
                part of the stadium specified, shall be supervised and reported
                upon by a Chartered Structural Engineer on behalf of the Holder.
                Inspections shall be carried out at least at those times or
                maximum intervals indicated in the relevant tables, and after
                the repair of any defect found, that part of the stadium shall
                be similarly re-inspected.


8.2             The inspections set out in the table to this condition are those
                for which a record is required to be kept by Condition 1.5(2) of
                this Certificate.


                Table to Condition-8.2

                Inspection Required                                Maximum Interval

(1)             The whole of the electrical installation.          12 months.

(2)             The detail condition of the general
                fabric of all buildings or other
                structures of the stadium not
                mentioned in items 6 or 7- below.                  12 months.

(3)             The manned or Police-controlled exit
                gate/door bells and the turnstile
                warning systems.                                   12 months.

(4)             The condition and operational efficiency
                of all portable fire extinguishers and
                hose reels.                                        12 months


      - \_*s-
                                  23


         Inspection Required                            Maximum Interval

         The closed circuit television installation,
         including the six cameras and screens and
         the two (video) monitor screens (one of the
         later being located adjacent to the
         attendance counter).                           12 months.


(6 )     The detail condition and strength of
         crush barriers, balustrading and
         handrails to all raised levels, and stairs,
         and the fences and barriers provided
         between the separate enclosures of the
         stadium listed in Schedule 2, and. the
         blocks of seating in the Anfield Road
         Stand and the separated ingress and
         egress routes thereto, and the pitch
         perimeter fencing.                             6 months.


(7)      The detail condition of all standing
         surfaces,.seats, steps, stairs, ramps
         and all those doors, gates, gate posts,
         boundary or other walls accessible to
         the public within or outside the stadium.      3 months.

(8 )     The public address system.                     3 months.


(9)      The apparatus for recording the number
         of spectators present (referred to
         in Condition 2.2).                             3 months.

(1 0 )   The fire alarm installation.                   3 months,


( U )    The emergency lighting and emergency
         electric supply generator.                     1 month.



8.3      The records required by Condition 1.5(2) shall include any
         reports or recornmend?,tions made by persons carrying out an
         inspection and a record of any defect found and of the

         re-inspection of that part after its repair.
8.4   Arrangements shall be made to carry out the inspections
      numbered (l), (2), (6) and (7) in the table to Condition 8.2,
      at a time convenient to the Local Authority, to enable it
      to be    represented at those, or parts of those inspections.


8.5   The inspections set out in the table to this Condition are
      those for which a record need not be kept.        Nevertheless, any
      defects found which cause a contravention of Condition 1.11 shall
      be remedied and the facts reported to the Holder.


      Table to Condition 8.5


      A.     Inspections required following     each certified use of the Stadium


      (l)      A general visual inspection o f the stadium as defined in
                Condition 1.11,     including all those items mentioned in
                items (2), (6) and (7) of the Table to Condition 8.2, for
                any damage which might impair its safe condition.


      B.     Inspections required before each certified use of the Stadium


      ( 1)      The operation     of the manned or Police-controlled exits
                bells referred to in Condition 3.5.


      (2 )      The manual operation of the fire alarms, using successively
               a different call point each time, so as to check all call
                points periodically.


      (3)      The operation of the emergency electric supply, including
                the batteries and generator, to

                (a)   the emergency lighting
                (b)   the public address system
                (c)   the manned or Police-controlled exits bells
                (d)   the turnstile warning bells
                (e)   the fire alarms.


               The clear and easy opening of all 'manned exit' doors/gates.
                       -   25   -




(5)    The operation oi' the public address system, including
       the cut-in and volume control located in the Police
       control room.


(6)    The operation of the         six Police-operated closed
       circuit television cameras and screens, including the
       two (video) monitor screens.


(7)    The operation of internal telephone lines,        including
       those to and between the Police control room, the
       Police detention rooms, and the first aid room.


(8)    The operation of the     hand radio transmitter/receiver
       sets provided to comply with Condition 6.7.


(9)    The operation of the         six loud bailers kept in the
       Police control room.


(10)   The operation of both the healthy/defective indicators
       for the fire alarm system, one located in the Police
       control room, and the other above the attendance counter
       on the first floor of the main stand.


(11)   The operation of the spectator attendance counter repeater
       located in the Police control room.


(12)   The operation of the turnstile closing signals from the
       Police control room.
         SAFETY STANDARDS AT HILLSBOROUGH GROUND

         (CBS/193/89)

         REPORT OF THE CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR

         1.   At its meeting on the 7th June 1989, the Working Party asked for a
               report on the standards of safety at the Hillsborough Ground.   The
               City Building Surveyor has examined only the Leppings Lane end of
               that ground in sufficient detail to report on these aspects of it.
              He assumes that this is the area with which the Working Party is
               concerned.  Owing to the legal advice given to the Sheffield City
               Council concerning its certification of the safety of the ground
               under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, no information has been
               obtainable, by way of copies of the Safety Certificate issued to the
               Sheffield Wednesday Club, or the drawings attached thereto. Two
               drawings have been prepared by the City Building Surveyor using a
              block plan and from a visual examination of the Leppings Lane end of
               the ground, and a copy of each of these.is attached, which will
               assist Members in following the remainder of this report.

         2.   The Leppings Lane or West End enclosures consist of uncovered
               terraces for standing spectators which are divided by railings into
               four separate enclosures which are generally at about pitch level,
               except for about I/3 of the Northernmost enclosure, which is raised
               above the remainder of that terrace and accessed by a flight of
               steps. Extending around the corner of the ground between the North
               Stand and the West Stand is an upper level terrace which is
               separately accessed by three stairways and is known as the North West
               terrace. There is also a covered stand, with raised level seated
               accommodation for spectators, behind the lower terracing, with
               accommodation underneath, not accessible to spectators.  The five
               terrace enclosures have a total capacity of 10,100.  Of that, 2,900
               are accommodated in the raised North West terrace and the remaining
               7,200 distributed in the four lower terrace enclosures.  The only
               sub-division of that capacity made known to the City Building
               Surveyor is that each of the two central enclosures, which were the
               fateful enclosures at the Hillsborough disaster, has a certified
               capacity of 1,100. The seated West Stand has a capacity of 4,500.
               It is also relevant to note that the North Stand, which is a seated
               stand, has a capacity of 10,000, so that on the 15th April last, the
              Leppings Lane entrance (shown in detail on the larger scale drawing)
              was required to pass 24,600 .spectators into the ground.  That is
              because 10 turnstiles, normally used by spectators accommodated in
               the North Stand, situated at the Pennistone Road North end of the
               ground, were not in use, in order to ensure that Liverpool and
              Nottingham Forest supporters did not come together in that vicinity.

         3.   It must be emphasised that the standards of design and construction
              and of stewarding and management accepted by a Local Authority
              responsible for certifying and enforcing the conditions attached to
              any Safety Certificate are at the discretion of, and subject to the
              resources applied by, that Authority. Members will be aware from the
              separate report on the Licensing of Football Grounds (CBS/192/89),
              that a very good set of standards is published for the guidance of




NBDAAB
                                           -   2 -



              certificating authorities. As and when the various designated
              grounds were first required to hold a Safety Certificate, the Local
              Authorities concerned were faced with mostly old designs and
              established structures which did not necessarily comply with the best
              standards set out in that "Green Guide". Therefore, many matters of
              existing detail required compromise in their acceptance, although the
              basic and predominant features affecting safety needed to be
              re-assessed much more thoroughly.  In the case of the Sheffield
              Wednesday Club ground at Hillsborough, this function was initially
              the responsibility of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan County.   That
              responsibility later passed to the Sheffield City Council on the
              abolition of the Metropolitan County in April 1986. Any
              independent expert examining the West End of the Hillsborough Ground
              to criticise its provisions, both structurally and from a management
              point of view, must relate his criticism to the standards he would
              expect to set, given responsibility for the issue of the required
              Safety Certificate.  For the purpose of this report and in the
              interests of brevity, only those features or aspects of safety which
              are considered unacceptable in that context are mentioned, with a
              reason for that, in the following paragraphs.  Those unacceptable
              features are identified, starting at the pitch perimeter and working
              backwards to the public highway.

         4.   The pitch perimeter fences provided in front of the West End terrace
              have been heavily criticised as contributory causes of the deaths at
              Hillsborough.  That is true, in the circumstances of that disaster,
              but in principle their provision followed a very widespread practice
              adopted to prevent the very real nuisance and danger of incursions
              onto the pitch by spectators.  Such fences went up at most grounds in
              the 1970's, due to bad behaviour at football matches. There was
              understandable fear for the safety of players and match officials and
              some cases of rival fans clashing.  It is not practicable for
              Stewards and Police to prevent a serious pitch invasion once more
              than a few spectators leave an enclosure. The F.A. and U.E.F.A.
              reacted by pressing Clubs for pitch perimeter fencing, and
              disciplining clubs where pitch invasions occurred.  Some Clubs did
              not erect fences, but those few massively increased their in-ground
              uniformed Police presence.  The matter of pitch perimeter fences was
              dealt with in both Lord Wheatley's and Mr. Popplewell's reports of
              1972 and 1985. Their need was accepted as the lesser of the two
              evils, and it was made clear that gates or access points for use in
              an emergency should be provided. The Popplewell report urged that a
              standard design and specification should be prepared for them by the
              F.A., but that Association declined the responsibility.  It should be
              emphasised that the gates or access points are required to allow
              Police or medical assistance onto terraces quickly, and to remove
              sick or injured persons out of the terraces.  Both those intentions
              envisage use by small numbers only. Any situation which creates the
              need for movement on or off the terraces, through pitch perimeter
              fence openings, on a large scale, due to extensive overpacking such
              as occurred at Hillsborough, indicates a totally unacceptable
              breakdown of a fundamental safety requirement, which ought not to
              arise in any circumstances.

         5.   Looking at the pitch perimeter fence itself at Hillsborough, the

NBDAAB
                                           -   3 -



              gates provided were relatively small and difficult for the removal of
              injured persons from the terrace.  Openings of good width are to be
              preferred to such small closeable gates. That is especially so on a
              large terrace which is accessed from several sides, when there is
              always some risk, at high interest matches, of some local
              overpacking, due to spectators not being distributed evenly between
              turnstiles, especially in the last few minutes before kick-off.
              Openings are particularly helpful in those circumstances, and
              facilitate the removal of overpacked spectators from one part of the
              terrace, and their redistribution into another part. However, the
              basic objective must remain at all times, to avoid overpacking
              totally or locally, using adequate resources and physical provision
              to do so.

         6.   Crush barriers in the two fateful central enclosures at Hillsborough
              also have been pointed to as possibly causing deaths. There was a
              failure of parts of the crush barriers installed in the Southernmost
              of the two central sections, and that may have caused fatal injuries
              to some spectators in its vicinity.   However, those barriers may have
              been subjected to loads in excess of those prescribed in the "Green
              Guide", which are intended to take care of very heavy surges of
              spectators, but in a terrace which is packed only to a reasonable
              density. Therefore, it is impossible to say whether the barrier
              which failed was structurally inadequate. Many of the barriers
              at Hillsborough show evidence of corrosion at the foot of standards
              and bracing, and also earlier repairs of this defect. However,
              experience has shown that such visual evidence is not a reliable
              indicator of lack of strength.   Old barriers which existed at Anfield
              and Goodison for some years, continued to give very satisfactory
              results when load tested. „ The Structural Engineer retained by the
              Sheffield Wednesday F.C. has given assurances that the strength of
              the collapsed barriers at the West End were tested recently, and
              found to be adequate.

         7.   It is possible to criticise in detail the crush barriers provided at
              Hillsborough, as regards their layout and the variation of their
              height.  They do not comply with the recommendations of the "Green
              Guide" for safety at football grounds in either of these respects,
              but what contribution this made to deaths, as opposed to the serious
              fundamental defect of overpacking the enclosures cannot be
              determined.

         8.   The radial fences which restrict the size of the two central
              enclosures and prevent spectators in them from spreading sideways,
              have also been pointed to as contributory causes of the deaths at
              Hillsborough. Again, there is nothing wrong in principle with
              dividing spectators into pens, provided adequate ingress and egress
              facilities are provided for each individual enclosure.  Indeed at
              most grounds, where there is a wide variation in the numbers of
              visiting spectators attending matches, such a sub-division can
              provide better management of those spectators, and also
              spectator-free buffer zones between them and home supporters.   There
              were facilities, by small gates towards the rear of these radial
              fences, to enable spectators to transfer to adjacent enclosures.
              However, these are never easy to see at any ground once the enclosure

NBDAAB
                                            - 4 -



               begins to get packed and there is a need to provide stewards at those
               points if they are to be used for that purpose. Those gates,
               together with the gates provided in the pitch perimeter fence, were
               just about sufficient (if properly stewarded) to evacuate the
               correct permitted number of spectators, from the central terraces, in
               accordance with the recommendations for that need laid down in the
               "Green Guide".  In all the right circumstances their sufficiency
               might still be considered marginal, and similar gates (manned by
               stewards) for emergency use might reasonably have been required at
               the front end of those same radial fences

         9.    It is absolutely clear that the prime cause of the deaths and
               injuries at Hillsborough was the gross overpacking of the two centre
               sections of the terraces at the West End. The recommended safe
               density for standing on terraces, with adequate crush barriers and
               reasonable step width, is 54 persons per lOm^ of terrace area. This
               can be exceeded quite safely, and often is, because it reduces
               movement within those areas and thereby assists in preventing
               misbehaviour in or by the crowd. A density of up to 60 persons per
               lOm^ has been found reasonable and acceptable.  A greater density of
               up to 70, tends to lock the crowd together, approaching a solid
               state, but does not in itself cause injuries, even during the
               excitement and tendency towards swaying caused by the events of a
               football match.  Any further increase in crowd density, especially
               where the crowd is subject to further pressure due to lineable gaps
               in crush barriers, or the sudden arrival of more spectators on the
               terrace, could cause injury.  If that density is considerably
               exceeded, as Hillsborough has proved, pressures on spectators can
               become so high, for the relatively short period required to cause
               death.  In those circumstances the control of numbers of spectators
               entering any particular standing enclosure at football grounds is
               vitally important. The lack of such provision at Hillsborough was
               quite simply the fundamental cause of the tragedy.  The contributory
               factors responsible for this gross overpacking have been well
               publicised since the disaster. They are summarised as defects in the
               following paragraphs of this report.

         10.   Fundamentally there are two methods of controlling the number of
               spectators entering an enclosure at a sports ground.  The first and
               most foolproof is that which segregates spectators outside the ground
               by requiring them to go through one or more turnstiles allocated
               exclusively to only one possible enclosure.  That requires that the
               route between the turnstile(s) and the enclosure is also exclusive
               and that spectators cannot wander into another enclosure or from
               their allocated enclosure into any other. The second method is the
               one which segregates the spectators into appropriate enclosures after
               they have passed through common turnstiles into the ground. This
               method relies on spectators being fully informed and guided by
               stewards and signposting, where they may or should go in the ground.
               Experienced stewarding and policing is necessary to monitor the
               packing of standing enclosures using this system. A reliable system
               of communication between those Stewards monitoring the packing and
               those Stewards and Police controlling the entry of spectators to the
               various enclosures is also essential.  The importance of that
               stewarding and policing is proportional to the expected attendance

NBDAAB
                                            -   5 -



               numbers, and requires to be increased where spectators are visitors
               to the ground, rather than (knowledgeable) home supporters.
               Unfortunately, neither of these two systems of controlling the
               density of packing on the West End terrace was operated at
               Hillsborough, and did not appear to be specifically provided for in
               the Safety Certificate.

         11.   It will be seen from the larger of the two attached drawings that the
               seven turnstiles allocated, in common, to pass West End standing
               terraces spectators into the ground, are not linked exclusively to
               any of the five separate enclosures available to them. Noticeably,
               when spectators pass through those turnstiles into the yard at the
               rear of the West Stand, they see conspicuously only Gangway 2, which
               is the central tunnel leading to the two central enclosures. On
               their left is a high wall and although that is provided with a pair
               of gates, which are open on match days, it tends to obscure the fact
               that there are further entrances to terraces to the North. There is
               no signposting to those northerly terraces. There are no Stewards or
               Police allocated to direct spectators to them, and even if youpass
               through the gates in the afore-mentioned wall, the existence of those
               further terraces is not known until you reach the refreshment bar at
               the other end of that second yard, near the North-west corner of the
               West Stand. To the right there is no view of the southernmost West
               End terrace enclosure, no Stewards are provided to guide you in that
               direction, and there is only one relatively small notice near the
               South End of the West Stand, which reads simply and inadequately
               "STANDING".  That astonishing neglect amounts to a total absence of
               control over the overpacking which caused the deaths.

         12.   Finally, one must criticise the inadequacy of the turnstile
               facilities at the West End of the ground, and the layout of that
               entrance area. The matter of access to football grounds is very
               relevant to safety, and Paragraph 5 of the "Green Guide" is devoted
               to the subject, albeit fairly shortly. The rate of entry through
               turnstiles does differ widely, and depends on what has to be done by,
               and the speed of individual turnstile operators.  That rate varies
               from as low as 4 or 5 persons per minute for cash entries requiring
               change, up to 10 persons per minute for pre-sold ticket matches.   It
               may be possible to pass up to 12 per minute at ticket matches where
               tickets are clear and need little scrutiny, provided there is orderly
               queueing outside the ground.  Spectators will not arrive two hours
               before a match unless pre-match entertainment is provided.  For an
               all-ticket match, there is an apparent guarantee of a space, and it
               is to be expected that they will arrive in the last hour to half an
               hour before the kick-off.  For an all-ticket match, a reasonable
               compromise expectation for the number of turnstiles needed would be
               one for about every 600 to 750 spectators. Thus, the provision of
               only seven turnstiles for 10,100 standing spectators at the West End
               of the Hillsborough Ground, which requires passage of over 1,440
               spectators through each, is totally unacceptable.

         13.   Similarly, the provision of eight turnstiles only,(which was caused
               by the deliberate closing of ten turnstiles in Pennistone Road North
               for this match), to pass 10,000 spectators into the seated North
               Stand, required each of those turnstiles to pass 1,250 persons. That

NBDAAB
                                            -   6 -



               is again a gross under-provision which should not have been allowed
               by the Safety Certificate.  Only in the group of eight turnstiles,
               allocated to the West Stand seating, was the turnstile provision at
               Leppings Lane on the 15th April last adequate.  Those last turnstiles
               were each required to pass only 563, which is reasonable, not
               forgetting that those persons would be further delayed within the
               ground, by having to have their tickets checked a second time by
               stewards at the foot of the two enclosed stairways leading up to the
               seating in the West Stand.

         14.   The inadequacy of the turnstiles giving access to the West End
               terraces and the North Stand is, in itself, sufficient reason to
               reduce the numbers permitted into the Hillsborough Ground by
               approximately 10,000, given good stewarding and signposting within
               the ground, and orderly queueing outside.  In the absence of those
               last essential provisions, and having regard to the funnel-shape of
               the Leppings Lane entrance, the ground must be considered unsuitable
               for any F.A. Cup semi-final match.




NBDAAB
                                                                                                                    \
                                                                                                                     \
                                                                                                                     ■\
                                                                                                                         \




                                                                          g y m n a s iu m


                                          — — iPildway__ under
                                                                                                                                                    W * V\
                                                                                                                                                        ^           \ \
                                                                                                                                                    ■                 \   \


                                                   north             STAND                                                                                  \   \         xx
                                                            s e a t ing


                                                                                                                                                                    \ -yJSX
                                               ------------ ---------------------- —       ______             -------— -------
                                                                                                    _
                                                                                                                                 —   ___


                  t                                                                1
                                                                                 1
                                                                                  1
                       <r a)                                                                                                ■


                                  --
                                                                      Q


                                                                                                                        f
                                                                                  1


                                               ________ _             _     j i "            .          •




                                                                                     - - t w n n e i ------------------ _
                               Jicej control
                               box


                                                   SOUTH                   STt^

                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                CLJB


                                                                            OFFICES
                                                                                                            car     parking-               i M i m r
                                                                                       B
                                                                                                                                            L-N.BUSH. FR.I.CS. C.Eng. Mi.Struct FIAS
                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                            b ,h f,,, ^ L,PINGf J         SURyEYOR,
                                                                                                                                                                            unvtiy u k ,    ' '
                                                                                                                                            h ^ tftn        K’n 9 | w a y ;_______
                                                                                                                                                                               House,.
HILLSBuKUUbH GROUND \                                                                                                                      ^n aa tto
                                                                                                                                                  to n
                                                                                                                                                     n G p irH /7 r> ,v. i ;,
                                                                                                                                                       Garden,-          Liverpool L3    2 AJ
       ATIC SKETCH PLANT                                                                                                                   Not- to scale
                                                                                                                                           21st April 1989
                                                                                                                                           ■                                          V-z.X-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i;-^vt:            iVVyS^\.'




                                                                                                ;-:v




                                                                                         c e r t ifie d                         capa                                 lower terrace

                                                                                                                                                                                                              /i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A           /

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T“      T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 poli.ce control
                                                                             <f-
                                                                                                                                        ed 1 capacity

      NORTH V/EST
     p P E R TERRACE                                                                                                                                 rracing
7 ; .2900 capacity)
                                                                 /           :\                                                                                                                     v
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -V




                                               tunnel

                                  / ^
                                  /-

                       4
                           m :-
                                                                                                                                                                              tunnel



                \
               res^Kpent


                                                                                                                                                                                                        vid 20 camera

                                                                                                                                               Vv-■.v..;.
                                                                                                                                                   r■•/•••■•;-
                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                :■




                                                                                                                                                                                               sign reading STANDING in
                                                                              i: '.‘vivV. >•:     • • • r. ■ .   • ••.. ••

                                                                     7>7nv
                                                                                                                                                                                               6"high letters i ^ r a c e of
                W o                    \                 at
                 \ vi*.                    V                 r                                                                                                                                                      ) ve - f Ipo r Iv


                              8 turnstiles                                                                                                                7 turns tiles
                                                                                                                     '■ >




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   drawing to be used
                                                                                                                                                                                                            fo r identification
                                                                                                                                                                                                            purposes only




                                                                                                                                  i-;




                                                                                                                                        :'.'- . i.1-'■•    .•'-■•••■ :■


                                                                                                                                                      ’ '■ .7        .        ■ •'

                                                                                                                                                                     ■ '■■■-. ■'. .
                                                                                                                                          'r                                 ■■ ■:




                                       HILLSBOROUGH - SHEFFIELD                                                             :
                                                                                                                            v
                                                                                                                                                                                                          LIVERPOOL CITY                 COUNCIL
:r'\:>'
                                                                                                                                                                                                          C ity    Building      Surveyor
                                                                                                                                               ^            -’
                                                                                                                                                             r'l1"                                        2 0 -4 -8 9        not to .scale .
                                                            ; >'-:u .....
                                                                                                                                                                                                             V v
                                                v'
                                                 ;v     .'■• ,:v                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7.:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  v-:.   ^   r-;.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;.••-.'j.•.“_...ii
