STATEMENT TO THE PUBLIC MEETING ON THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

FROM CLLR. HARRY CHASE, CHAIR - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY


1.   This meeting welcomes both the City Councils Hillsborough initiatives and
     the work of the F.S.A in their submissions to Lord Chief Justice Taylors
     Inquiry.

2.   We recognise the need to take-up those issues already identified with
     Hillsborough recognising that the events of April 15th were neither a
     tragedy parochial to Liverpool nor a set of events which happened in
     isolation.  Therefore we need to look beyond the immediate tragedy to the
     issues of spectator safety and facilities; the threat to civil liberties
     inherent in the I.D. schemes; and the involvement of supporters in effecting
     change within the football industry.

3.   We condemn the media coverage of Hillsborough and its aftermath which
     portrayed the city of Liverpool and its football supporters as the
     perpetrators of the tragedy which took place. We call on the Hillsborough
     Disaster Working Party to investigate and contest such smears and vindicate
     the heroic role of fans in the life-saving evacuation of Hillsborough.

4.   We are determined to effectively involve football supporters in resolving
     the problems they have long-highlighted. For too long we have, as
     supporters tolerated the entrenched dictates of clubs and administrators,
     and the blind prejudices of Governments.

5.   The inertia of the F.A in the wake of both Hillsborough and the Government's
     proposed I.D. scheme bears testament to a body which neither recognises
     nor understands the concern and protestations of fans.

6.   We call for a full independent investigation into the administration and
     financing of football to expose the greed and mismanagement that permeates
     the professional game.

7.   We urge all football fans to co-operate with the work of the City Council
     and the F.S.A in their efforts to ensure that those responsible for
     Hillsborough are exposed and brought to justice and that football'o future
     is secured through meaningful representation of supporters within the
     football industry.
