WORKING PARTY - VISIT TO HILLSBOROUGH
MAY 19TH 1989
(CS/124/89)
                    Report of the City Solicitor

1.    Although unfortunately the Working Party's proposed
meeting with representatives of Sheffield City Council was
cancelled at short notice, it nevertheless, having been granted
access by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, proceeded with its
visit to Hillsborough Football Ground on 19th May, 1989.

2.   The Working Party was accompanied by the City Building
Surveyor and representatives of the City Engineer and City
Solicitor, and by a video and photographic team from Liverpool
University. The primary purpose of the visit was to assemble
film evidence, of the layout and structure of the stadium, for
future use.

3.   The route taken to Hillsborough was that recommended in
the Liverpool Match Programme on 8th April, 1989 and advocated
on local radio by the Police and motoring organisations i.e.
M62 Eastbound, Ml Southbound to Junction 3 6 and thereon on the
A61 becoming the Penistone Road into North Sheffield. Members
of the Working Party recalled that it had been as early as the
Penistone Road - Grenoside at its junction with Wheel Lane and
Salt Box Lane that large signs had first appeared at the side of
the road on match day indicating "Car Parking - 5 minutes from
Ground". The signs occurred at several more junctions all
pointing to the right of the main road - further away again from
Hillsborough - and it could be estimated that as the driving
distance from the original sign was some five minutes, the
walking time from that point would be considerable.   Such signs
could therefore be considered as misleading to supporters arriving
from the motorway and the north.

4.   The Working Party arrived at Hillsborough at approximately
2.30 p.m. and departed at 6 p.m. Photographic and video evidence
was assembled from all parts of the stadium and in particular
from the approaches to and turnstile and terrace areas of
Leppings Lane. The City Building Surveyor provided a commentary
to accompany the video sequences.

5.   There were a number of observations made by the Working Party
during its visit which it considered to be of note in confirming
or improving its knowledge of the factors involved and associated
with the Disaster and its precipitation. Among these obser­
vations were the following

     (a)   the raised location of the Police Control Room
           at the southern corner of the Leppings Lane
           Terrace directly overlooking the central pens
           of the terrace. The Room is equipped with video
           monitors to receive pictures from surveillance
           cameras around the ground including that located
           on the outside of the West Stand, monitoring the
           turnstile and entry area used by Liverpool
           supporters;
                          -   2   -




(b)   the division of the entry area effectively
      into two by a brick wall. The gate in the wall
      was open during the visit but Members were of
      the view that portacabins, no longer on site,
      impaired fans access on match day;

(c)   the inadequate signposting of access to the
      outer terracing in the following respects:-

       (i)   from the north-west turnstile area
             Gangways 3 and 4 are hidden and only one
             arrowed sign marked "Refreshments" points
             in that direction. The access to the
             upper west Terrace which is isolated
             from the lower terracing is particularly
             difficult to locate unless familiar with
             the ground layout; and

      (ii)   from the south-west turnstile area and
             from the southernmost "concertina" gate
             (the one opened by Police on April 15th)
             the only access to the terracing clearly
             visible is Gangway 2, with a large sign
             declaring "STANDING" directly above the
             tunnel. From the area of the gate part
             of the pitch can be seen through the
             bottom of the tunnel.  Some distance to
             the right of this entry area out of the
             immediate viewing range a much smaller
             sign marked "Standing" indicates the
             outer southern terracing.

(d)   the tunnel, forming "Gangway 2", through which
      access is gained to both central pens (marked as
      A and B above the tunnel) in which the disaster
      occurred, is long, dark and of low height.
      However its most notable feature as observed is
      the steepness of its gradient as it descends
      towards the terracing. An involuntary increase
      in speed is unavoidable by a person attempting
      to walk down the tunnel at normal pace.  The
      gradient only levels out at the opening onto
      the terrace and the effect of the multiplied
      impact of hundreds of people arriving at this
      point at such a sharply increased velocity can
      be imagined.

(e)   yellow lines mark the entrance to the central
      pens at the bottom of the tunnel. The lines are
      intended to indicate to Stewards that the pens
      have reached capacity.

(f)   the varying sizes and types of crush barriers in
      the terracewere noted. The older variety of
      barrier as well as being lower also incorporate
      in their design protruding base supports which
      can be seen to provide an added obstacle to free
                         -   3   -




      movement on the terrace. The Working Party-
      noted that the barrier in pen 3 which collapsed
      during the disaster has now been fully removed
      from the Terrace.

(g)   the size of the pen fences and the varying
      heights from the terrace floor of the perimeter
      fencing were noted. The mesh in the fencing is
      of two district gauges and varies at random
      from one section of fence to the next. The
      large gauge mesh would certainly provide a far
      better foothold than that afforded by the
      narrow gauge sections. The gates in the peri­
      meter fencing are also of a non-uniform nature
      while access to the gates also varies insofar
      as some are approached by steps and others access
      directly to the terrace floor.

(h)   the access to and from, and the distribution of
      the turnstiles allocated to Liverpool ticket
      holders were observed. The width of the access
      from the outer gates to the turnstile areas was
      noted, along with other measurements, by the
      representative of the City Engineer.
