10 January 1994                Enquiries to:
                               Direct line: 225 2524
                               Your ref:
                               Our ref:      LS/JM/JB


Alan Simpson M.P
1 Talbot Street
NOTTINGHAM
NG1 5GQ



Dear

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER -   COMMENTS OF BRIAN CLOUGH
Thank you for agreeing to meet with me and my colleagues on Friday
27th January.      I will be attending together with two of the
Council's officers who have worked closely with the   Hillsborough
families.    Both officers have extensive knowledge of the legal
proceedings arising out of the disaster.   They are Ann Adlington
and Colin Moneypenny.       Donna Carlile, whose brother died at
Hillsborough will also attend the meeting at your offices at 11.00
^ m . on Friday 27 th February 1995.

As I said to you on the telephone, I will expand upon the reasons
for the meeting and how you may be able to help the Hillsborough
families and the people of the City of Liverpool.   I know that as
one who attended Hillsborough on the day of that semi-final, you
are outraged by Brian Clough's comments about Liverpool supporters
being responsible for the disaster.

Representatives of the Council and of bereaved families and
survivors have travelled to Manchester, London and Nottingham to
attend Mr. Clough's book-signing sessions. Mr. Clough has also
been   asked    in writing to substantiate his allegations or
alternatively apologise. Mr. Clough has consistently refused to
meet   or    speak to those representatives and has not even
acknowledged correspondence. He has, however, commented further
on the disaster and his views about Liverpool people in general on
various T.V. programmes.


                                                     -/I
2
LS/JM/JB
A. Simpson MP
10 January 1995




Brian Clough has the Freedom of the City of Nottingham and is very
much a "local hero".      As such, his comments carry significant
weight in the City. Mr. Clough's comments have caused immense
distress to the Hillsborough families and to survivors of the
disaster. All that representatives want from Mr. Clough is some
justification and explanation of his views, bearing in mind Lord
Justice Taylor's report or a public retraction and apology.    One
cannot help but wonder whether Mr. Clough is expressing such
explosive opinions purely as a marketing ploy.

The City Council is anxious that Mr. Clough does not further
damage the spirit of friendship that has developed between
Liverpool and Nottingham. As an exiled Liverpudlian living in
Nottingham, you may be able to help either politically or via the
media. We would be grateful for any assistance you can give and
look forward to meeting with you to discuss the matter further.

On a personal note, Happy      New Year to you and I hope that the
Lebanon trip is successful.

Best Wishes



      sincerely,
