                                                       W. 1. Murray, LL.B.
                                                       City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council




                                                 v£
                                                       P.O. Box No. 88
                                                       Municipal Buildings

  LIVERPOOL                                            Dale Street
                                                       LIVE R P O O L L69 2DH

                                                       Telephone:   051-225 3911      Ext:
                                                                     0 5 1 -2 2 5 2431 (Direct Line)
                                                       Fax: 0 5 1 -2 3 6 2047
                                                       DX 14206 LIVERPOO L


                                                       Your ref
  TO:     All the Members of the
                                                       Our ref       F&S/CM/VJ
          Hillsborough Working Party
                                                       Date          11th September 1989




  Dear Sir/Madam,

  You are requested to attend a meeting of the HILLSBOROUGH

  DISASTER WORKING PARTY to be held at 10.00 A.M. on FRIDAY,

  15TH SEPTEMBER, 1989 in Committee Room 'A' in the Municipal

  Annexe, Dale Street, Liverpool.



  The Agenda for the meeting is attached.

  Yours f a i t h f u l l y , '




  City Solicitor,
  Secretary to the Council.




When   calling   of   telephoning   please   ask for
              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                      15TH SEPTEMBER , 1989

                          A G E N D A


consider

  Minutes of the Last Meeting.

  Matters Arising.

  A report of a meeting held between Members of the Working
  Party and representatives of West Midlands Police.
  Coventry City Council and Coventry City Football Club on
  6th September, 1989.

                       (Report to follow)

    (i)    A letter received by the City Solicitor from
           Mr. M. Webster, the Acting Head of the Administration
           and Legal Department of Sheffield City Council;

   (ii)    An article by the City Building Surveyor which
           appeared in the Municipal Journal on 18th August, 1989
           and

  (iii)    An article by Mr. Webster responding to the above
           article which also appeared in the Municipal Journal
           on 1st September, 1989.

                        (See enclosures)
               HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                               of the

                 Finance and Strategy Committee

                        15th September, 1989




 PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
            Councillors S. Ledwich, Peter Millea and
            Jacqueline Smith.



            Apologies for absence were received from
            Councillors W. Edwards and A. Jennings.




41.   Minutes of the Working Party held
      on 6th September, 1989

      The Working Party considered the proceedings of the
      previous meeting held on 6th September 1989.

      Resolved that -

      (a)   in respect of Minute 38, the City Building Surveyor
            be requested to investigate with Liverpool Football
            Club the current signposting and access arrangements
            at the Anfield Road End at Anfield or in the event
            that no satisfactory progress is made in the
            meantime, the matter be taken up at the next meeting
            of the Ground Safety Advisory Group;

      (b)   the remainder of the proceedings be approved.




42.   Liverpool Weekly Star -
      Hillsborough Supplement

      Resolved that, subject to the approval of the Finance
      and Strategy Committee, the City Solicitor together with
      the Chief Public Relations Officer prepare a 4 page
      supplement for inclusion in the Liverpool Weekly Star
      on 5th October, 1989, detailing the response of the
      Hillsborough Working Party to the Hillsborough Disaster
      and in particular highlighting the Working Party's Interim
      Report, at a cost of £2,300 plus V.A.T.
Meeting with West Midlands Police,
Coventry City Council and Coventry
City Footbal Club

The Working Party considered -

 (i)    a Report into the Working Party's Investigation
        of allegations arising from the Coventry City v
        Everton match on 19th August, 1989; and

(ii)     the minutes of a meeting held between Members
        of the Working Party and representatives of
        West Midlands Police, Coventry City Council
        and Coventry City Football Club on 6th September,
        1989.

 Resolved that -

 (a)    Minute 7.2 be amended to read:-

        "Councillor Chase thought that apart from the
         vindication that there was no substantial
         terrace over-crowding, on the basis of the
         highly selective video evidence...;"

 (b)    copies of the Report and Minutes be submitted
        to the Chief Executive of Coventry City
        Council, Lord Justice Taylor, the Minister of
        Sport and the Home Secretary and the Chief
        Constable of West Midlands Police be requested
        to further investigate the outstanding allegations
        and

 (c)    the Research Officer be requested to investigate
        the question of responsibility for the
        determination of arrival times of British Rail
        Football Special Trains.



Letter from Sheffield City Council
- Article of City Building Surveyor

The Working Party considered -

  (i)    a letter received by the City Solicitor from
         Mr. M. Webster, the Acting Head of the
         Administration and Legal Department of Sheffield
         City Council;

 (ii)    an article by the City Building Surveyor which
         appeared in the Municipal Journal on 18th
         August, 1989;

(iii)    a letter by Mr. Webster responding to the above
         article which also appeared in the Municipal
         Journal on 1st September, 1989; and
    (iv)   a statement prepared by the Chair of the Working Party
           in response to the letters of Mr. Webster.

Resolved that the Statement of the Chair be approved and forwarded
to the Acting Head of Sheffield City Council's Administration and
Legal Department.
