                                                  COLIN MONEYPENNY




                                             Work 0151 225 2431


                                             12th November 1998

Dear

Thank you for your letter which I received a couple of weeks ago.
Sorry I haven't had the chance to respond earlier but there has
been so much happening on Hillsborough issues that with m y own
"real" job to do as well as other FSA work and a family I've
scarcely had time to sleep, never mind write letters, in recent
weeks!

Anyway sob story over, I was very pleased to get your letter as I
know there is a lot of support in South Yorkshire for the idea of
a Memorial at Hillsborough. Clearly the Disaster itself continues
to cause controversy but our argument is that the issue of a
Memorial is separate to that. Had there been a tragic but non-
controversial incident on the site e.g a bus or plane crash,
resulting in a loss of life can you really conceive there wouldn't
have been a Memorial there in a prominent position paid for by the
Club? It would have been up in a blaze of publicity within months.

Rather than try to explain everything in detail, I enclose sortie
correspondence I've had on the matter on behalf of Liverpool City
Council. The main letter to Rick Parry at Liverpool FC earlier
this year gives you the background. Please note the responses from
Bradford and Bolton about their Memorials. John Gr4«3 of Rangers
also rang me and spoke at length about his personal memories of
the second Ibrox Disaster in 1971 and how the Club there has gone
to great lengths with memorials to ensure that both Ibrox
Disasters are tastefully commemorated.

In short it really does look like Wednesday are isolated in their
failure to acknowledge the loss of life in Britain's biggest
sporting disaster and their most recent excuse that they can't do
anything because of the private prosecutions is almost laughable.
They have had ten years nearly to do something and have
effectively shown contempt for the memory of the bereaved by their
deliberate inaction.
As that tenth anniversary approaches, this contempt and the way in
which Liverpool fans have been treated on visits to Hillsborough
since - e.g. the decision to have "The Sun" as sponsors of the
game last season - means that serious efforts are being made to
organise a boycott by Liverpool fans of this season's fixture. If
you wish to be kept informed on that please let me know, otherwise
I hope this information is of some assistance. Please also let me
know the outcome of your proposal to write to the local paper in
Sheffield. I doubt it will make much difference but it would be
nonetheless a useful thing to place the issue into the public
arena in Sheffield.


Yours sincerely



Colin Moneypenny    ’'
Merseyside Branch Secretary.^
Football Supporters Association
                                                                                                       1




                                  The City of Liverpool
                                   Personnel & Administration Directorate
                                  Peter Rhodes, Head o f Law & Committee Services
                                  Solicitor to the Council
                                 PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                 Tel: 0151-225 2404 Fax: 0151-225 2427




                                                                  Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                                                  Direct Line: 0151 225 2431 (Work)
                                                                                              Home)
                                                                  Your R e f :
                                                                  Our R e f : P&R/CM


28th January,      199S


Mr. Rick Parry
Liverpool Football Club
Anfield Road,
LIVERPOOL
L4 OTH


Dear Mr. Parry

HILLSBOROUGH MEMORIAL -                          SH E FFIE L D WEDNESDAY

I understand from            that you are interested in the
present situation m respect of the calls being made on Sheffield
Wednesday to erect a Memorial to the 96 victims of the
Hillsborough Disaster.

Perhaps as background I should explain my own involvement in
Hillsborough issues. After the Disaster, as a survivor myself, I
soon, l i k e |   became involved in the work of the local Branch
of the Football Supporters Association and for the last few years
I have been Secretary of the Branch. The FSA has throughout firmly
backed the families and the surviving fans with, for example, the
remarkable "Justice for the 96" red card display at the Spurs game
last season, being an FSA initiative to raise the profile of the
ongoing campaign for justice.

However for the purposes of this letter I am writing in my other
Hillsborough capacity. Since April 1989, I have acted - within the
context of my full time employment as a Committee Clerk with
Liverpool City Council - as part time officer of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party of the Council. The two roles often merge
into each other as for example when responding to the many
appalling comments, notably by Bernard Ingham and Brian Clough,
made in the media about the Disaster and about the behaviour of
Liverpool fans.

The Working Party was created by the Council in the immediate
aftermath of the Disaster with a view to support the families of
the bereaved through the judicial processes to follow. Nearly nine
years later the Working Party, which has always been unanimously
supported by all the political parties on the Council, is still in
existence and after many years of bitter disappointment at the

                    Director o f Personnel & Administration: lan Jones
                  Administration & Commercial Services: Human Resource Service:
        Information Technology Services; Lxtw & Committee Services: Legal Services Agency:
                              P i / h h ' f ' R f > h / t i n i i K A’   Infh rn w /tinn   SVrW <-v'
absolute failure of the legal system to deal justly with the
consequences of the Disaster it has recently been aiding the
submissions of families to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, whose
investigation is seen by many as a "last chance" for justice.

The move to highlight the absence of a Memorial at Hillsborough,
came from the South Yorkshire Branch of the FSA last season. The
Branch, obviously with the support of the Merseyside Branch and of
a number of fanzines and individual fans, lobbied Sheffield
Wednesday Board Members and South Yorkshire M.P.'s. A peaceful
"demonstration" at the ground on the morning of the game against
Liverpool last season attracted considerable and favourable media
a t te nt i on .

The essence of the case for the Memorial is that while there are
two informal tributes to the victims in the vicinity of the
Stadium, neither is in a prominent position and neither is an
initiative of the Club. Sheffield Wednesday have not officially
recognised the Disaster at all although they did offer potential
sites to the families in locations (in the tunnel and outside a
toilet) which were unacceptable. At other times they have rejected
calls for a Memorial on various spurious grounds, such as their
concern that it would upset Club Stewards.

There is a growing feeling amongst supporters that it is high time
that they did find an appropriate method and location to
"officially" mark the tragedy, in the way that Bradford City,
Glasgow Rangers and even Bolton Wanderers have done in respect of
the Disasters which occurred at their Grounds. (I enclose copies
of letters which I have received from Bradford and Bolton while I
have also spoken at length on the phone to John Greig at Rangers
about their existing and planned tributes to the victims of both
Ibrox Di s asters).

The present position is that directly as a result of the
representations which have been made and in particular of a
request made by the Working Party via the Chief Executive of
Sheffield City Council, the Sheffield Wednesday Board agreed at a
meeting held in December, 1997 that the Club will meet with John
Derricott, the Licensing Officer from Sheffield Council to discuss
the situation. John has promised to advise me of the outcome of
this meeting although I have no knowledge of when it will take
place or what precisely will be discussed.

If you are able to help in any way, what remains to be resolved is
first of all to ascertain the outcome of the above meeting and to
find out if that outcome is acceptable to the Family Support
Group. What is required really is not anything on the scale of the
Anfield Memorial but a fairly simple tribute - with wording to be
agreed by the families - in a suitable and accessible location at
the Leppings Lane end of the Stadium.
Clearly there are wider and very important issues at present being
considered about the Disaster but the continuing controversies
about its cause and its aftermath should no longer be allowed to
obscure the need at long last for a permanent Memorial to the
victims at Hillsborough Stadium itself. A Memorial does not need
to refer at all to the circumstances of the Disaster but should
serve only to record the fact of the tragic loss of life. Surely
had a bus accidentally crashed into the back of the Leppings Lane
area on that day with 96 deaths resulting, there would be no
question that a Memorial would have been erected - or that this
would have been done almost immediately? Surely the site of 9 6
deaths should be respectfully marked, regardless of continuing
arguments about events precipitating those deaths.?

There is some urgency in this matter in view of the impending
fixture at Hillsborough on February 14th. There is a growing mood
of resentment amongst many Liverpool fans about the way Sheffield
Wednesday have handled everything to do with the Disaster and the
continuing absence of a Memorial seems to embody what many feel is
at best a "cold-shouldering" of the families and survivors and at
worst a deliberate, almost Orwellian attempt, to obliterate the
whole shameful episode from their history.

I would welcome any help you can give us in achieving a
satisfactory outcome.


Yours sincerely




Colin Moneypenny
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party.
                GROUND SPONSOR
                                                                                                                        MAIN SPONSOR
                [liM e s I
                i        » H ~ IP i

                EOHBEami^™                                                                                    JCTGOO
                                                                                                              ^TRUSTED SYTHEWORLD'SBESTMANUFACTURERS
                    STAND SPONSOR
                                                                                                                       STAND SPONSOR

          Allied Colloids                                                                                    diamond se^
                                                                  ~^tg BANTAMS-


             SH/ALS                   BRADFORD CITY A.F.C.
             Mr. C. Moneypenny,
             Committee Clerk to Hillsborough Disaster,
             The City o f Liverpool,
             P.O. Box 88, Municipal Buildings,
             Dale Street,
             Liverpool,
             L69 2DH.
                                                                                                              8th October, 1997.


            Dear Mr. Moneypenny,


                                                             R e: Disaster M e m o r ia l

                        Lrcferto your letter o f 7th October, 1997. addressed to our Stadium Manager, Mr.



            whether w f f i l l ” , le“e' " ith   and WOuld "ol like ,0 offcr “ V                as to
            whether we feel it is appropriate Sheffield Wednesday Football Club erect a formal
            memorial a, the Hillsborough Stadium, as o f course, that is their decision a n d ours

               _        Here at Bradford City Football Club, at the ground itself we have a sculpture

           tostfteTraiive0
            ost          s "1The ^sculpture
                     lives.          1 S,,PPOr‘er    "’eon the° external
                                            is situated         f 'he         “ the
                                                                         face of 3 mem0rial  ,0 those
                                                                                    stand, which  replaced
           the one which was burnt down.                                                          icpiacea


                       Adjacent to the sculpture, at eye level, is a plaque acknowledging the donation o f

           Uie ground                    St3tin8 ^ PUrP° Se              “ mem° ry ° f th° SC Wh° ,0St their Iives herc at


           Rrartf ? e ?■'tt S tWm t0Wn’ Hamm in Germany> aIso sent a memorial to the City o f
           Bradford, which is currently located in the City’s Centenary Square, and is the place
           where, on each anniversary, a short memorial service is held to remember those that died.




                                                           fr©E88&.               —-
                                                                                                                  Continued.

      STAND SPONSOR                                       B radford C ity A.F.C. (1983) Ltd.
_   _ _           , ' “ 7                      The Pulse Stadium at Valley Parade, West Yorkshire BD8 7DY.                    STANDSPONSOR
V I I r l lA /I I I                   Tel: ( ° 1274) 773355. Fax: (01274) 773356. Ticket Office: (01274) 770022
^        * * W ¥ 1 1 1                                   Bantams Leisure Shop: (01274) 770012.
—   The people w ho care! —                               R egistered No. 1732784 England.
                                                                                             1




    Cont’d.                                  —2—




       The memorial service is attended by Civic Dignatories, current members o f the
Club staff, supporters, and the relatives o f those who died, who have an open invitation.

       I hope this information is of some use, however, should you require any further
information please do not hesitate to contact me.

       Kind regards,

                                Yours sincerely,
                        BRADFORD CITY A -F£L (1^83) LTD.,




                                   Shaun Harvey,^ J
                                  Managing Director.
Colin Moneypenny Es q .,
Personnel & Administration
                Directorate
City of Liverpool
PO Box 88                                               B o lto n W a n d e r e r s

Municipal Buildings                                                 F o o tb a ll
                                                                          &
Dale Street
                                                        A th le tic C o m p a n y
Liverpool L69 2DH        17th November 1997                         L im ite d

Dear Mr Moneypenny,

Apologies for not replying earlier to your
letter of October 7th concerning a Disaster                          President.
Memorial. I have telephoned a couple of                 Nat Lofthouse,O.B.E.
times without success.
The Burnden Park Disaster of March 1946 was
initially marked purely by a relief fund                            C h a irm a n .
opened by the Mayor of Bolton.        I think            G o rd o n Hargreaves
there was so much to be done generally at
that time (the war had just ended) that no
thought was given to a permanent memorial.
                                                       C h ie f Executive/Secretary-
However in the early 1990's, following the                     D es McBain
construction of a Normid Superstore on the
spot where 33 people lost their lives, a
memorial plaque was unveiled by Club
                                                                    Manager-.
President Nat Lofthouse.        This plaque was
                                                               C o lin Todd
fixed to the Superstore wall as close to
the actual spot as possible.        The plaque is
now in safe keeping while we decide whether
to re-erect it after the Burnden site is              G r o u n d & Registend Office
                                                           R e e b o k S tadium
re-developed or find a place for it here at
                                                             B urn den Way
The Reebok Stadium.
                                                                    L o s to c k
I should add that in 1996, the 50th                                  B olton
anniversary, we organised a private service                         BL6 6|\V
of remembrance on the pitch at Burnden with
the relatives of those who died.        The                   T ele p h o n e :
following day a public service was held in                  (0 1 2 0 4 )6 7 3 6 7 3

the Parish Church attended by players,
                                                                    Fa x No:
staff, management and directors as well as
                                                            (0 12 04 ) 6 73 773
civic leaders, representatives of fire,
police and ambulance services and the                                e-m a il:
public of Bolton.                                     admin@ bw fc.u-net.corr;
The Disaster will never be allowed to be
forgotten in this part of Lancashire.                          W e b page:
Good^^«<rfc-_rir-j£our efforts,                     h ttp://w w w .bo ltonw fc.co .uk/

Youi^s sin,cer^ly,__________



Public Relations Officer                                Reebok
                                                        Stadium


                                                        V .A .T .                      N o.
                                                               I 45 0290 7r>
                                                      O m jw ity                        N (>
                                                             1'iiytfy (."•> I -lO, i
                                 Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                 Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                 Your R e f :
                                 Our R e f : PR/CM

7th October 1997

M r s . PJ Gordon
The Chief Executive
Sheffield City Council
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
SI 2HH

Dear M r s . Gordon

HILLSBOROUGH D IS A S T E R MEMORIAL

I write on behalf of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party of
Liverpool City Council.

In May of this year the South Yorkshire Branch of the Football
Supporters Association launched a campaign which called upon
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to erect a formal Memorial at
their Hillsborough Stadium for the 96 victims of the 1989 Disaster
which occurred there in the Leppings Lane terrace. I understand
that a number of M.P.'s in both South Yorkshire and Merseyside,
and many football fans generally have joined with this City
Council in supporting the request to Sheffield Wednesday to
recognise that a suitable formal tribute to the dead would be
welcomed by the families of those who lost their lives as well as
by the survivors of the Disaster and indeed the many fans who
visit the Stadium each season.

As Sheffield Wednesday have still not consented to the provision
of a Memorial, I have been requested by the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party to ascertain if Sheffield City Council are prepared
to use their links with the Club to assist in any way in
fulfilling the desire of many people to see the creation of a
formal Memorial at the Stadium itself. Perhaps the Council could
arrange a meeting between the Club, this Council, M.P.'s and the
appropriate supporters groups at which all the issues involved
could be discussed?

I am sure that many of the people of Sheffield having witnessed
the trauma of the Disaster will recognise the deeply held concern
of many here on Merseyside that those who died, simply because
they chose to go to a football match in your City are entitled at
the very least to be remembered. While it is acknowledged that
there is a thoughtful but somewhat obscure unofficial Memorial
near to the Stadium, I would hope you would agree that a simple,
dignified and officially sanctioned Memorial at the site of the
Disaster - as happens at other Stadiums where football disasters
have occurred - would serve to give the bereaved families a focus
for their grief while also providing survivors, other fans and
indeed all future generations - who may also wish to pause,
reflect and show their respect - with a permanent and formal
historical reminder of the tragedy and the simple fact of the
tragic loss of 96 lives.

I look forward to receiving your response to the request for
assistance from the elected Members of Liverpool City Council.


Yours sincerely



Colin Moneypenny
Committee Clerk to Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
    Telephone:       (0114)273 4000


              Fax:   (0114)273 6844


Your reference:

                     RK/SC/Hills
 Our reference:
                                                                                 C O U N C I L
             Date:
                     10th October 1997


                                                                                  Chief Executive
                                                                                  R. W. Kerslake,   bsc , ip f a



                                                                                  Town Hall
                     Mr C Moneypenny                                              Sheffield
                                                                                  S1 2HH
                     Committee Clerk to
                      Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
                     The City of Liverpool
                     P O Box 88
                     Municipal Buildings
                     Dale Street
                     LIVERPOOL L69 2DH




                      Dear Mr Moneypenny

                      H IL L S B O R O U G H   DISASTER MEMORIAL

                      Thank you for your letter dated 7th October 1 9 9 7 ,1 am looking into the above
                      and will get back to you as soon as I have discussed this with the Officers
                      concerned

                      Yours sincerely




                       Chief Executive




      R360
    Telephone:    (0114) 273 4000


           Fax:   (0114)273 6844                                                                       L~ f~   A

Your reference:


 Our reference:               /2 62 /WJD
                                                                      C O U N C I L
          Date:            2 8th October, 19 97



                                                                      Chief Executive
            Chief Executive,
            Liverpool city Council,               '• ' h   ?          R. W. Kerslake,   bsc . ip f a
                                                  54 * -

            Municipal Buildings,                                      Town Hall
            Dale street,                                              Sheffield
            Liverpool,                                                SI 2HH
            L69, 2DA

            Dear sir,

            Hillsborough stadium Disaster Pronnsprf Memorial

            I refer to previous correspondence concerning your request for the city
            Council to raise with Sheffield Wednesday Football club the possibility of
            opening discussions between the Hillsborough Families Support Group and the
            Club to provide a memorial at the Hillsborough stadium in respect of the
            Hillsborough stadium Disaster.

            I have raised your request formally with the club.

            I now write to inform you that your letter will be considered by the full
            Board of Sheffield Wednesday Football club Limited when they meet in
            December of this year.

           The club are to contact me again after their meeting and I will therefore
           write to you when I have some further information.

            Yours faithfully




            Chief Executive




           cc             Mr. G. H. MacKrell, Company Secretary
                          Sheffield Wednesday Football club Limited
                          Hillsborough
                          Sheffield
                          S6 1SW




           wjd/letter/lpool28.10/hr
                                 Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                 Direct Line:|              |
                                 Your Ref:
                                 Our R e f : MFCDA/CM
R.W. Kerslake
Chief Executive
Town Hall
Sheffield
SI 2HH                                                13th May,   19 98

Dear Mr.   Kerslake

HILLSBOROUGH D IS A S T E R MEMORIAL

I wrote to you about the above matter at the request of the
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party of this City Council on 7th
October, 1997.

As a result of our correspondence, Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club agreed to meet with your representative in the New Year to
discuss the possibility of a permanent Memorial at the Stadium. I
spoke to the officer delegated to meet with the Club in Januaxy
and he promised to inform me of the outcome of that meeting as
soon as it had taken place.

Unfortunately since that promise I have received no further
communication at all from your Authority and have no knowledge of
whether the intended meeting has in fact taken place nor if it
has, what emerged from the meeting? I have now therefore been
asked by the Working Party to write to you again to express their
dismay, given the considerable importance attached to this matter
on Merseyside, that it appears to have been forgotten about and to
ask if you would please inform us of the present position.

Thank you for your assistance.

Yours sincerely



Committee Clerk to Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party




                                Colin Moneypenny
    Telephone:    (0114)273 4000


           Fax:   (0114)273 6844


Your reference:


 Our reference:   R K /s c /C o r r J 8 0
                                                                           C  I   T  Y
                                                                           C O U N C I L

          DaK: 19th May 1998


                                                                           Chief Executive
                                                                           R. W. Kerslake,   bsc, ip f a



                                                                           Town Hall
                                                                           Sheffield
                                                                           S1 2HH
                  Mr C Moneypenny
                  Committee Clerk to Hillsborough
                  Disaster Working Party
                  The City of Liverpool
                  P O Box 88
                  Municipal Buildings
                  Dale Street
                  LIVERPOOL L69 2DH




                  Dear Mr Moneypenny

                  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER MEMORIAL

                  Thank you for your letter of 13th May 1998 and my apologies at the lack of a
                  response as agreed. I will investigate why progress has not been made and
                  ask Mark Webster, Head of legal and Administration Services to get back to
                  you.

                  Yours sincerely




                  Chief Executive
                                                                                 Sheffield
                                                                                  City Council
Legal & Administrative Services
      H ead o f Legal & Adm inistrative Services (C ity Solicitor):
      M ark W e b s te r l l b

      T ow n Hall ■ Sheffield • SI 2HH
                                                                                 Chief Executive's
      Tel: 0114 273 4254 ■ Fax: 0114 273 5qq3
      Email:
                                                                                   Directorate


      Your Ref:

      Our Ref:           GP/262/Policy/WJD

      Date:               19th May, 1998

      Mr. C. Moneypenny,
      Clerk to Hillsborough Disaster Working Party,
      The City of Liverpool
      Personnel and Administration Directorate,
      P.O. Box 88,
      Municipal Buildings,
      Dale Street,
      Liverpool
      L69 2DH

      Dear Sir,

      Hillsborough Disaster Memorial

      I refer to previous correspondence and to your letter of 13th May, 1998 to the Chief
      Executive of the Sheffield City Council, which has been passed to me for reply.

      As you are aware, the City Council, at your request, has endeavoured to facilitate a
      meeting between the 'Hillsborough Disaster Working Party' and Sheffield Wednesday
      Football Club to discuss the possibility of siting a memorial within the curtilage of the
      Stadium in addition to the two memorials that are sited close to the Stadium.

      My Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Derricott, has spoken with representatives of the Club
      on several occasions on this matter.

      As I understand it, the Directors o f the Club have met to discuss the approach made by
      the working party, but, on legal advice, took the view that it would be inappropriate to
      enter into discussion while there remained the possibility of further inquiry into the
      disaster or indeed prosecution. I believe the Government statement regarding the
      possibility of further inquiry, which has recently been discussed again in Parliament, is
      clear however I do understand that certain families have indicated publicly that they ’are
      considering taking private prosecutions which may involve police officers or officers of
      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. The Club have therefore confirmed to my Chief
      Licensing Officer that while this is the case, they still feel that it would be inappropriate
      to enter into discussion about the possibility o f establishing a memorial at the
      Hillsborough Stadium.

     I apologise for not writing to your since the telephone conversation between yourself and
     Mr. Derricott, when you were updated on the approach of the Club. I was, however
     under the impression that there had been some direct contact with the club and certainly
     following the Board meeting I am aware that representatives of the national and local
     press spoke to Mr. Derricott and the Club regarding this matter.




      T h e Officer d e a lin g w ith this e n q u iry is:   ^   Derricott
I hope this now clarifies the position. I will continue to liaise with the Club, on your
behalf and, of course, you may approach the Club directly. However, until the question
relating to private prosecutions is resolved, I believe the Sheffield Wednesday Board will
follow the legal advice they have been given.

Yours faithfully




City Solicitor




w jd/l/citliv1805/hr
                   F/BRLL UNIT           Fax:                                15 Jun ’98 .15;04.

                                       -O n s        or              ■+U ^c^vc_ . F * f 62S*>*&-£ O f

-"fio   <i"L^O/v   ^ 'A~£2,v/? '*■?'
  Letter to Parry re SWFC

  Dear Rick

  In view of the well piibliriMri problems encountered by Liverpool fans at
  couple of seasons, and the offensive and provocative arrangements made «t thnyw rtleague
  f l Z , , then, 1= a sirons, groundswell of opinion am ong* Lwerpool I ^       »fu o m » l ^ y c o t t of
  this year's fixture at Sheffield Wednesday, as you may have h e a r d . . W e ^ 1‘h«   ^       '
   annroDriate wav for Liverpool fat is lo respond to the stance adopted by oouth Yorkshire Po
   and Sheffield Wednesday FC when we visit Hillsborough, the only-way to                   ® ^ f® S 0Ur
   disgust at their behaviour, and the only tactic we can adopt that will make its point within uie
   boardroom of SWFC.

   To this end, as representatives of various strands of independent                                ^
   to request an urgent meeting with yourself to discuss the position of ILiverpool FC, and tc■ « *
   what can be arranged for this year's fixture in the way of an official boycott. The key factor many
   US,    fction is ™ , me dub and the fans present a un«ed front                                 2 ta
   anger and disgust of Liverpool fans following their lest two visits to Hillsborough ar0           ,fl
    responsible and civilised ways. The best way we can hope to achieve this is for Liverpool FC to
   offer a hard-edged stance on the issue of the sale of tickets for that fixture that L|V2[P00*
    supporters can unite behind. We have already discussed this idea with Mr Trevor H ic^o ftiie
    Hillsborough Family Support Group, and he is fully behind the proposal, as are the Committee.

    While we appreciate that the summer is a very busy time for you, we would welcome your urgent
    thoughts on this matter, and a date when a meeting can be arranged with you so that some sort
    of strategy can be quickly implemented once we know when we are timetabled to visit
    Hillsborough.

    With thanks

    Yours sincerely,
CENTRE FOR STUDIES IN CRIME AND SOCIAL JUSTICE

Graham Mackrell
Secretary
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
Hillsborough
Sheffield
S6 1SW

Date: 16.2.98

Direct Line:

Dear Mr Mackrell

We are writing to express our serious concerns about the organisation of the
Liverpool v Sheffield Wednesday match which took place on Saturday 14th
February.    Our first point concerns the match sponsorship by the Sun
newspaper.     Given the Sun’s disgraceful coverage of the Hillsborough
Disaster, in particular the notorious front-page, headlined, the Truth, we are
shocked at the lack of sensitivity shown to visiting Liverpool supporters, by this
sponsorship deal.

Second, we have discovered from first-hand accounts of Liverpool supporters,
that those who took floral tributes to the ground, in memory of those who lost
their lives at the Hillsborough Stadium, were prevented from laying their
tributes.    Surely some arrangement could have been made which
accommodated the needs of the bereaved and survivors at this difficult time?

More than eight years may have passed since the day of the disaster, but the
pain and suffering of the bereaved and survivors continues, exacerbated by the
continued struggle for justice.

We hope that you will respond to the above points.

Yours sincerely




Professor Phil Scraton                Ann Jemphrey
Centre Director                       Research Coordinator
                                      Sheffield W ednesday
                                         Football Club Limited



               Professor P. Scraton and                                 Our Ref: GHM/JC
               A. Jemphrey,
               Edge Hill University College,
               Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice,
               St. Helens Road,
               Ormskirk,
               Lancs.
               L39 4QP                                                  24th February 1998



               Dear Professor Scraton and Ms. Jemphrey,

               I am in receipt of your letter dated 16th February 1998, regarding the
               sponsorship of the recent Sheffield W ednesday v Liverpool match by the Sun
               newspaper.

               I have to advise you that the match was in fact sponsored by N ew s
               International Distribution who, in fact, sponsored all the senior matches in
               Yorkshire over that weekend, ie. Sheffield United v Reading in the F.A. Cup
               and Leeds v Birmingham City. It was their choice to "brand" the match
               utilising the Sun.

               I can assure you there was no slight intended by Sheffield Wednesday in this
               area and w e believe that the insinuations that have been made by certain
               supporters are totally unjustified.

               In addition I can assure you that supporters were not prevented from leaving
               floral tributes, there were tables in place and dedicated stewards there to
               receive these flowers and to transport them to the Hillsborough Memorial
               adjacent to the ground.

               Thank you for taking the trouble to write in order that I may clarify the
               situation.

               Yours faithfully,




Hillsborough • Sheffield • S6 1SW • Telephone: (0114) 221 2121 • Fax: (0114) 221 2122
Registered in England No. 2509978        E-mail: enquiries@swfc.co.uk                   www.swfc.co.uk
