Legal & Administrative Services
                                                                                   Sheffield
                                                                                    City Council
      H ead o f Legal & Adm inistrative Services (C ity Solicitor):
      M ark W ebster    llb


      Tow n Hall • Sheffield • SI 2H H
      Tel: 0 1 1 4 2 7 3 4 2 5 4 • Fax: 0 1 1 4 2 7 3 5 q q 3                      Chief Executive's
      Email:                                                                         D irectorate


      Your Ref:

      Our Ref:         GP/262/Policy/WJD
      Date:            19th May, 1998
      Mr. C. Moneypenny,
      Clerk to Hillsborough Disaster Working Party,
      The City of Liverpool
      Personnel and Administration Directorate,
      P.O. Box 88,
      Municipal Buildings,
      Dale Street,
      Liverpool
      L69 2DH
      Dear Sir,

      Hillsborough Disaster Memorial

      I refer to previous correspondence and to your letter of 13th May, 1998 to the Chief
      Executive of the Sheffield City Council, which has been passed to me for reply.

     As you are aware, the City Council, at your request, has endeavoured to facilitate a
     meeting between the 'Hillsborough Disaster Working Party' and Sheffield Wednesday
     Football Club to discuss the possibility of siting a memorial within the curtilage of the
     Stadium m addition to the two memorials that are sited close to the Stadium.

     My Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Derricott, has spoken with representatives of the Club
     on several occasions on this matter.

     As I understand it, the Directors of the Club have met to discuss the approach made by
     the working party, but, on legal advice, took the view that it would be inappropriate to
     enter into discussion while there remained the possibility of further inquiry into the
     disaster or indeed prosecution. I believe the Government statement regarding the
     possibility of further inquiry, which has recently been discussed again in Parliament is
     clear however I do understand that certain families have indicated publicly that they’are
                         ,Private prosecutions which may involve police officers or officers of
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. The Club have therefore confirmed to my Chief
     Licensing Officer that while this is the case, they still feel that it would be inappropriate
     to enter into discussion about the possibility of establishing a memorial at the
     Hillsborough Stadium.

     I apologise for not writing to your since the telephone conversation between yourself and
     Mr. Derncott, when you were updated on the approach of the Club. I was, however
     under the impression that there had been some direct contact with the club and certainly
     following the Board meeting I am aware that representatives of the national and local
     press spoke to Mr. Derricott and the Club regarding this matter.




     T h e O fficer dealing w ith this enquiry is:              Mr. W. Derricott
 I hope this now clarifies the position. I will continue to liaise with the Club, on your
 behalf ana, of course, you may approach the Club directly. However, until the question
 relating to private prosecutions is resolved, I believe the Sheffield Wednesday Board will
 follow the legal advice they have been given.
 Yqurs faithfully



City Solicitor




wjd/l/citlivl805/hr
