                                 The City of Liverpool
                                 P erso n n el & A d m in istra tio n D irec to ra te
                                         Committee & Member Services


                                PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                Tel: 0151 -225 2430 Fax: 0151 -225 2427



                                              Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                              Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                              Your Ref:
                                              Our Ref: MFCDA/CM

12th December 1996


To: Chief Executives of Knowsley, St. Helens, Sefton
and Wirral District Councils.



Dear Sir/Madam

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I have been requested to provide you with the attached proceedings
of the meeting of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party of the
City Council held on 6th December, 1996.

The meeting considered the reaction to the "Hillsborough"
television programme broadcast by ITV on 5th December and gave
preliminary consideration to ways of assisting the bereaved
families in their renewed campaign for the justice and
accountability which they feel has been denied them in the
aftermath of the Disaster. There is considerable feeling that such
a campaign will be successful given the new and unused evidence
which has emerged as a result of the programme and you are
therefore asked, given the implications of this matter for
families beyond the City boundary, if you would be prepared to
support the campaign which is now being organised by the families
and the_City-Council to bring this about? You should note that all
Merseyside M.P.'s are also being asked to support the campaign.

You should also note that you are invited to send a representative
to attend a Special Meeting of Liverpool City Council to be held
in the Town Hall, Dale Street, Liverpool at 10.00 a.m. on
Thursday, 19th December, 1996. All the issues arising from the
Programme will be debated at that meeting and the writer of the
drama/documentary, Jimmy McGovern, has been invited to address the
Council.


Yours faithfully



Committee Clerk
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

                      Director o f Personnel & Administration: Ian Jones
 Administration & Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resource Service;
                   Information Technology; Legal Services; Public Relations.
