                           Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                           Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                           Your R e f :
                           Our R e f : P&R/CM


7th April 1997


Chief Executive
Local Government Association
26 Chapter Street
LONDON
SW1P 4ND


Dear Mr. Briscoe

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CAMPAIGN

I write at the request of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
of Liverpool City Council to inform you of the most recent
developments with regard to the support of this City Council and
of other Councils in the Merseyside region for the campaign of the
Hillsborough families for justice and to ask as we approach the
eighth anniversary of the Disaster on 15th April if the LGA would
be prepared to consider adding its support to the campaign.

The Hillsborough Disaster Working Party was created by the City
Council within days of the Disaster in 1989 for the purpose of
ensuring that the truth was established of what had occurred at
Hillsborough that day. The fact that the Working Party has
continued in existence throughout the intervening eight years is
evidence that the unanimous view of Members of this Council is
that the true facts behind the Disaster have never fully emerged.
In effect there is a huge discrepancy between the conclusions
reached by Lord Justice Taylor and the verdict of accidental death
reached by the Inquest jury and it is the latter in particular
which the families and the Council consider to be a fundamental
miscarriage of justice.

As a result of the television programme "Hillsborough" which was
broadcast by Independent Television in December 1995 new evidence
has emerged which has resulted in a complaint made to the Director
of Public Prosecutions seeking a criminal investigation into
possible misconduct in the way evidence was or was not presented
to the Inquest jury. It is anticipated that in the next few days
the DPP will announce whether or not an investigation into th.e
Disaster will be re-opened. As well as this possible investigation
the Home Secretary is also presently considering whether there are
grounds for him to order a fresh Inquiry into the Disaster while
the families are also considering an application to the Attorney
General under Section 13 of the Coroners Act asking the High Court
to review the Inquest verdict.

I enclose for your attention the resolution of an extraordinary
meeting of Liverpool City Council held on 19th December, 1996 the
terms of which have subsequently been supported by all the other
Councils on Merseyside and indeed by every Member of Parliament
and various Councils such as Halton and Chester, in the wider
Mersey Basin region. However the Hillsborough Disaster, although
of course having a devastating effect within Merseyside, also
claimed victims and affected many other people from all parts of
the country and indeed following the transmission of the
television programme, many individuals from all over Britain made
contact to express their outrage at the treatment of the families
and the failure of the judicial system.

It is in the above context and particularly in the light of the
many repercussions which the Hillsborough Disaster continues to
have for Local Government, not just on Merseyside, that Liverpool
City Council considers it appropriate to ask now if the LGA is
prepared to register its support for the growing campaign    for the
true facts of the Disaster to be established once and for    all asa
matter of public and historical record. As well as the resolution
of the City Council in   this matter I also enclose for your
attention some further   documents which may assist you inreaching
a decision.



Yours sincerely



Colin Moneypenny
Committee Clerk to Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party of Liverpool City Council.
