                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - PUBLIC INQUIRY



Purpose and Nature of Inquiry

1.     The. Public Inquiry, headed by Lord Justice Taylor       and with two

        assessors to assist him, was formally opened in Sheffield Town Hall

        on Friday April 28th.     The main purpose of the day's business was

        to enable the terms of reference of the Inquiry to be stated and to

        enable the Inquiry team to explain how they proposed to conduct it.
        A secondary purpose was to consider applications for representation

        before the Inquiry.



2.     Lord Justice Taylor explained that it was not the purpose of the

        Inquiry to find fault with any individual or body       - that was a

        matter for the criminal or civil courts in an appropriate case.

        His role was to identify facts which would hopefully show:-

            (i) what happened at Hillsborough on 15th April;



           (ii) why it happened;



          (iii) what lessons could be learned to prevent a future disaster

                 of a similar kind.


3.     He made a specific appeal for co-operation in ensuring that the

        Inquiry could be conducted with all possible speed (consistent with
        thoroughness) to enable an early publication of the Inquiry report.

        He therefore ex pl a in ed .that:-

            (i) every statement of evidence or written document presented
                 to the Inquiry would be read and considered by the Inquiry team;



           (ii) having regard to the many thousands of statements expected

                 to be taken, only a limited number of the makers of those

                 statements would be asked to give evidence to the Inquiry.
                 Between them those witnesses would present all the relevant

                 facts necessary to enable the Inquiry team to answer

                 the    first : two questions - namely what happened and why.

                 Statements would therefore need to be carefully collated

                 and compared in advance of the Inquiry to prevent

                 unnecessary repetition of fact, whilst at the same time
                 ensuring that no evidence of a factual nature was excluded

                 from consideration.
4.    The task of collating and comparing the evidence would be undertaken

       by Counsel for the Inquiry:     in this connection three Counsel had

       been appointed whose brief would be to ensur- that the Inquiry

       recevied a full and fair presentation of the evidence and who would

       be distanced from (and uninfluenced by) Counsel for any other party
       to the Inquiry.



5.    He announced that the taking of evidence would commence at 10.30 a.m.

       on Monday 15th May 1989 at Sheffield Town Hall.     He explained that,
       unless an overwhelming argument were put to nim    which at this stage

       he   ould not anticipate,   the taking of evidence into what happened

       and why it happened would occur in public.



6.    He prohibited the taking of pictures or sound recordings in the
       Inquiry and advised the press of their duty to avoid seeking

       comments from witnesses before they had presented their evidence to

       the Inquiry.   He also appealed for a restrained and unemotive response

       by the press in the light of the evidence presented.



Repres entation


7.    Lord Justice Taylor then turned to the issue of     representation.     It

       became clear that he would limit representation to those parties who

       could show good cause why they should have it.     Good cause implied

       a reasonably direct interest in the events at Hillsborough.     It was
       stressed that representation,    carrying with it the right to cross-

       examine witnesses and to present evidence, should only be accorded
       to those of whom criticism could legitimately be expected and, even

       in those cases, he made it plain that he would look for a joint

       representation of interests wherever possible so as not to unduly
       delay the conduct of the Inquiry.    He made it plain that represent­

       ation would not be agreed in circumstances where a party truly

       required no more than a watching brief.
Representation was agreed in respect of the following interests where

criticism could be expected to arise and in the light of the Judge's

strong recommendation that one Counsel should be allowed for each
interest:-



   (i) the bereaved and injured;



  (ii) South Yorkshire Police;



 (iii) Sheffield Wednesday Football Club;


  (iv) Sheffield City Council;



   (v) South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority;



  (vi) the Football Association;


 (vii) the Football Supporters' Association.


Applications for representation were rejected from, amongst others,

the Severn Trent Water Authority,    two Health Authorities and the

Merseyside and wider group of Local Authorities.


In connection with the latter an application was made to the Inquiry

on behalf of the City Council, Sefton, Knowsley, St. Helens and Wirral
District Councils and Lancajhiro and Cheshire County Councils.        The

application mentioned the Authorities' community interests having
regard to the unusually local effect of a national disaster and asked
that the Inquiry team might understand that., by allowing representation,

they would be demonstrating the need to guarantee the intention of the

Inquiry to be open and thorough.     Before having his application for
representation declined,   the Council's representative was allowed to

develop the worries and suspicions    (and the need to assuage them) of

the Communities of Merseyside and beyond and in response Lord Justice

Taylor indicated that he and his colleagues understood the point that

was being made and gave an assurance that Liverpool and Merseyside's

interests would be properly borne in mind by the Inquiry.
Conclusion


11.     Lord Justice Taylor had previously indicated to Councillor Coombes

        that it would not be acceptable for statements of evidence to be

        taken by the City Council in the light of the machinery which the

        Inquiry had established for this purpose.   At the Inquiry, and in

        answer to a question by Counsel for the bereaved, Lord Justice Taylor

        also indicated that whilst he acknowledged that some persons may

        wish to make statements direct to the Inquiry rather than through

        the West Midlands police, such a manner of procedure would be
        inconsistent with, and unhelpful in the context of, the need to
        col]ate evidence in a systematic way, to compare the various statements

        and to present through witnesses a full but disciplined presentation

        of what is believed to have occurred at Hillsborough on April 15th.
