             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                              of the

                  Finance and Strategy Committee

                         8th August, 1989



PRESENT:   Councillor I. Templeman, in the Chair;
           Councillors W. Edwards, Mary Johnston,
           S. Ledwich, P. Millea and Jacqueline Smith.




Interim Report of the Inquiry
into Hillsborough Stadium Disaster -
Lord Chief Justice Taylor

The Working Party considered the Interim Report of the
inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster compiled
by Lord Justice Taylor, in the light of information
contained within the Report of Lord Justice
Taylor and the verbal reports given by both the City
Building Surveyor and the Hillsborough Working Party
Research Officer.

Resolved that -

(a) The Liverpool City Council Hillsborough Working Party
    welcomes the Interim Report of the Inquiry into the
    Hillsborough Stadium Disaster and its clear statement
    that no blame for the tragedy can be attached to the
    supporters of Liverpool F.C.;

(b) this Working Party recognises the importance of the
    recommendations contained in chapter 24 of the
    Interim Report which are described as the 'minimum
    necessary' to ensure that existing football grounds
    can be safely used.     In order to ensure that the
    supporters  of Everton     and Liverpool can feel confident
    that Goodison and Anfield remain and will continue to be
    safe for spectators, a Special Meeting of this Working
    Party will  be held on     Friday,11th August, 1989 at
    10.00 a.m.  to receive reports from appropriate Chief
    Officers concerning the implementation of Lord Chief
    Justice Taylor 's 43 specific recommendations;

(c) this Working Party believes that the Interim Report       •
    highlights a series of appalling errors by the South      i
    Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,      ;
    Sheffield City Council and the Football Association.
    This justifies the immediate dismissal of Chief           !
    Superintendent Duckenfield and the resignation of Chief
    Constable of South Yorkshire, the Chief Executive of the
    Football Association and those at Sheffield Wednesday
    F.C. and Sheffield City Council responsible for the
    safety certificate for the Hillsborough Stadium;


(d) this Working Party also calls upon the Chairman of the
    South Yorkshire Police Authority to resign his position.
    We believe his actions in seeking to defend a Chief
    Constable who was ultimately responsible for the
    inadequate policing that led to the deaths of the 95
    supporters and who was ultimately responsible for the
    presentation of the heavily criticised evidence from
    police officers to the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry,
    are shameful;

(e) this Working Party also believes that the Executive
    Committee of the Football Association bears a heavy
    responsibility for forcing through the use of an
    inadequate stadium.  Time and again Liverpool supporters
    protested, well in advance of the day of the tragedy,
    about the inadequacy of the ground and the unfairness
    of the match being played there.  The Executive
    Committee of the Football Association should therefore
    also face up to their responsibilities and resign as
    well;

(f) this Working Party also recognises the need to remove
    all fences at football grounds in the interests of
    spectator safety.  We also recognise that the introduction
    of Identity Cards for football supporters will not
    increase spectator safety - on the contrary, it will
    cause massive safety problems outside football stadiums.
    In addition to the report on ID cards, the Hillsborough
    Working Party research officer be requested, as a
    matter of urgency, to submit a report on the question
    of fences at football grounds;

(g) this Working Party also notes that the relevant
    recommendation contained in Lord Justice Popplewell's
    Report covering police procedures, perimeter fence
    gates and stewarding arrangements were absent at
    Hillsborough; and

(h) this Working Party believes the issues of spectator
    safety will never be resolved unless safety
    recommendations are backed with legal requirements
    and the football clubs and authorities have effective
    supporter representation.
