*H                      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                                      of the

                          Policy and Resources Committee

                                4th November, 1994



*P          PRESENT:   Councillor J. Spriggs, Chair;
                       Councillors E. Clein, P. Clein, C. Curry,
                       A. Dean, S. Ellison and Jackie McCarthy.



                       Councillor R. Quinn also attended.



*M   ®*     Minutes of Last Meeting

            The proceedings of the meeting of the Working Party held on
            28th September, 1994 were submitted for the information of
            Members.


     9.     Parliamentary Debate - Reopening of Inquest

            The Working Party considered a verbal Report of the
            Research Consultant regarding the matter of the potential
            re-opening of the Inquest into the death at Hillsborough of
            Kevin Williams which was raised by Sir Malcolm Thornton
            M.P. with the Attorney General in a debate in the House of
            Commons.



            The Research Consultant indicated that -

             (i) there had been a poor attendance from Merseyside
                 M.P.'s at the debate which did not help make the best
                 of the opportunity to raise the issues of Hillsborough
                 at Parliamentary level; and

            (ii) the Attorney General had said that he would consider
                 the arrangement of a new Inquest if new evidence was
                 produced which would support such an action.




          al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Y041194
   Resolved that Merseyside M.P.'s and M.E.P.'s be invited to
   a meeting with appropriate representatives of the Working
   Party to discuss ways in which their assistance to the
   activities of the Working Party can be better co-ordinated.


10. Brian Clough - Comments regarding Hillsborough
    Disaster

   The Committee considered -

    (1)    (i) the action taken by the meeting of the City
               Council held on 26th October, 1994 with regard to
               the comments made by Mr. Brian Clough in his
               autobiography regarding the Hillsborough
               Disaster; and

          (ii) the further comments made by Mr. Clough on
               television on 4th November re-iterating his view
               of the Disaster and adding further derogatory
               remarks about Liverpool and Merseyside;

          (iii) the comments made by a senior Nottingham Police
                Officer,              also supporting the
                allegations ot Mr. Clough; and

           (iv) the comments made by BBC Radio 5 "presenter"
                James H. Reeve on a programme broadcast on 23rd
                October supporting the claims made by Mr. Clough
                that 'latecomers' caused the tragedy.

    (2) the contents of a programme broadcast recently in the
        "Despatches" series on Channel Four Television which
        indicated that there were continuing breaches of safety
        regulations at various English Football Stadiums
        including Hillsborough.




   The Liaison Officer advised the Working Party that she had
   sought advice as to the feasibility of seeking legal
   redress against the various parties including Sir Bernard
   Ingham and Mr. Brian Clough who have recently made
   allegations that Liverpool F.C. Supporters were responsible
   for the Hillsborough Disaster and had been advised that
   there was some merit in giving the matter further
   consideration although the likelihood of success was
   probably limited and a substantial cost would be involved.



   Resolved that -



 al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Y041194
  (A) the condemnation of the Working Party of the further
      comments of Mr. Clough be placed on record;

  (B) the Officers of the Working Party in consultation with
      the Chair and the Opposition Spokespersons be
      authorised to determine a strategy for providing a
      suitable response to the comments which have been made;

  (C) the strategy include the appropriate adaptation of the
      statement made at the City Council meeting to take into
      account the further developments and the matters
      discussed at this meeting and the amended statement be
      delivered in the most appropriate and effective manner
      to Mr. Clough;

  (D) details of the letter be sent to -

        (i) Nottingham Forest Football Club and Nottingham
            City Council and they be requested to inform the
            Working Party of their comments; and

       (ii) appropriate media outlets particularly those in
            Nottingham and Sheffield; and

      (iii) other persons who have publicly supported the
            views of Mr. Clough; and

  (E) if necessary consideration be given to the placing of
      an advertisement containing the views of the Council in
      the Nottingham evening newspaper;

  (F) the possibility of making representations to the Press
      Complaints Commission regarding the comments supporting
      Mr. Clough in the media, be investigated by Officers;

  (G) with regard to the disturbing contents of the
      "Despatches" programme -

       (i) a joint meeting of the Working Party and the
           Ground Safety Advisory Group be held as soon as
           possible to view the television programme and
           thereupon to determine a suitable course of action
           in response to the poor standards which the
           programme suggested were in operation at certain
           Stadia with a view to possibly making visits to
           Grounds outside the City; and

  (H) in the longer term consideration be given to the
      development of a pro-active approach which may prevent
      the continuing allegations which have been made by
      certain commentators that Liverpool supporters were to
      blame for the Disaster.




al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Y041194
