JOINT STATEMENT FROM COUNCILLOR JACK SPRIGGS, COUNCILLOR PETER
MILLEA AND COUNCILLOR JACKIE MCCARTHY ON BEHALF OF THE
HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY

We unreservedly condemn the reported comments of Mr. Brian Clough
blaming Liverpool supporters for causing the Hillsborough tragedy
as revealing his total and pitiful factual ignorance of the real
causes of the Disaster which were the comprehensive failure of the
Police control operation on the day allied to wider organisational
failures by those responsible for staging the semi-final.
We deplore the cynical attempt by the publishers of the
autobiography of Mr. Clough to exploit the disaster to gain free
publicity in advance of publication;
In the light of the recent statement of the Secretary of State for
National Heritage recognising the extensive nature of the Judicial
Inquiry and concluding that "this vast store of evidence was
carefully sifted, we think it is fair to say that Lord Justice
Taylor's Interim Report gives a very clear picture of events on
the day."
We are concerned that
     (i) five years after the Disaster and the unequivocal
          judgement of Lord Justice Taylor detailing its causes
          there continues to be a movement among journalists such
          as Sir Bernard Ingham, now supported by Mr. Clough, to
          "re-write" the Taylor report by recycling discredited
          theories which blame the Liverpool fans for the
          Disaster; and
     (ii) this determination by some to avoid the true lessons of
          Hillsborough suggests that some of the contempt for
          supporters and the complacency, ignorance and neglect
          which led to the Disaster may still be in place and
          could yet lead to another tragedy;
We refute the specific content of the "opinion” of Mr. Clough as
being fundamentally flawed and inaccurate particularly given the
clearly established transportation problems faced by Liverpool
supporters on the day, and also given that only approximately one
third of the number of turnstiles allocated for Nottingham Forest
fans were made available for the access into the Stadium of a
similar number of Liverpool supporters;
We demand that in the light of the above, the fact that Mr. Clough
was not either a personal participant in or witness to events
outside or inside the Leppings Lane Terrace and in noting his
longstanding commercial allegiance to the "Sun" newspaper Mr.
Clough either state the factual evidence he has gathered to
support his "opinion" and reveal the source of this evidence or he
retract his comments forthwith and apologises to the bereaved
families and survivors of Hillsborough and to all football
supporters for the offence he has caused.

gmc/docs/hills pr
In the event that no retraction, amendment or apology is received
we urge
      (i) vmmmgm bookstores to decline to place the book on sale
          in recognition of the very grave offence which has been
          caused to the people of the region: and
     (ii) all football supporters nationally, but particularly
          followers of Nottingham Forest, not to purchase the book
          in recognition of the fact that given the circumstances
          of the tragedy any supporter could have been its victim
          and that therefore Mr. Clough's "slur" is against all
          football fans and not just those from Merseyside.




^R(to(UUla
