                              The City of Liverpool
                               Personnel    ifc   A d m in is tr a tio n D ir e c to r a te
                              Head o f Committee & Member Services
                              Ken Corns
                              PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                              Tel: 051 -225 2430 Fax: 051 -225 2427




13 October 1993                       Enquiries to:                    Mr. C. Moneypenny
                                      Direct Line:                    051 225 2431
                                      Your Ref:
                                      Our Ref:                         MFCDA/CM/LJ




TO:   All Members of the
      Hillsborough Disaster
      Working Party




Dear Sir/Madam

You   are requested to attend a meeting of the HILLSBOROOGH

DISASTER      WORKING         PARTY         of        the         Policy            and       Resources

Committee      to     be     held      at     12.00             NOON        on      TUESDAY,       19TH

OCTOBER,     1993      in   Room      'D'     in the             Municipal              Annexe,    Dale

Street, Liverpool.

An agenda for the meeting is attached.

Yours faithfully                                           "*




Head of Committee
and Member Services




                    Director of Personnel & Administration: Derek Griffin
            Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resources;
       Information Technology; Legal Services; Management Support; Public Relations.
           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                            OF THE

             POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                   19TH OCTOBER, 1993

                            AGENDA

  Minutes of Last Meeting

  The proceedings of the last meeting of the Working Party
  held on 26th April, 1993 are submitted for the information
  of Members.

               (See enclosed proceedings)

  Hillsborough Disaster Trust Fund

  To consider correspondence between the Liaison Officer and
  the Disaster Trust Fund Manager, following the meeting held
  between representatives of the Working Party and the Trust
  Fund Manager on 18th May, 1993, concerning the possibility
  of the Trust Fund being utilised to provide certain
  financial assistance with regard to expenses incurred by
  bereaved families involved in the Judicial Review process.



  Judicial Review - Hearing

  To consider a Report of the Liaison Officer concerning
  matters with regard to the Hearing of the Judicial Review
  of the Disaster Inquest Verdict^ which is to take place in
  London in November, 1993.


  Hillsborough Project - Edge Hill College

  To consider matters related to the progress of the
  Hillsborough Project in the light of a letter received from
  the Director of the Project following the last meeting of
  the Working Party and of futher verbal reports.

                  (See enclosed letter)




al/cttee/hillsborou/agenda/Yl91093
                                                                      1
*H                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                                  of the

                     Policy and Resources Committee

                             26th April, 1993



*P      PRESENT: Councillor J. Spriggs, Chair;
                 Councillors A. Dean, F. Hegarty, P. Millea,
                 K. Noon, Bill Roberts and I. Scott.



*N               Apologies for absence were received from
                 Councillor E. Clein.



*M      Application for Judicial Review
        The Working Party considered the verbal report of the
        Liaison Officer concerning the successful Application which
        had recently been made by six Hillsborough families for a
        Judicial Review of the Inquest verdicts.

        Resolved that the Report be noted.


     12. Hillsborough Project - Edgehill College

        The Working Party considered matters related to the
        Hillsborough Project being undertaken at Edgehill College,
        Ormskirk with City Council funding.


        Ms. S. Coleman, a former employee of Edgehill College,
        addressed the meeting with the permission of Members and
        explained how her present role as a voluntary assistant to
        the six families who had applied for a Judicial Review of
        the Inquest verdicts had arisen from her initial work on
        the Project as an employee of the College.



        Resolved that the Head of the Committee and Member Services
        Department be requested to write to the Director of the
        Hillsborough Project to ascertain as a matter of urgency
        the present progress of the second Report of the Project
        and to request the provision of details of how the funding


      al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Y2 60493
   made available by the Council has so for been allocated in
   the undertaking of the Project.


13. Court Case - South Yorkshire Police Officer

   The Working Party considered a newspaper report detailing a
   Crown Court Case involving a South Yorkshire Police Officer
   who used the fact of his being on duty during the
   Hillsborough Disaster as a mitigating factor in his defence
   during a criminal trial.

   Resolved that the details of the case be noted and the
   Liaison Officer and Head of Committee and Member Services
   Department be requested to determine a form of words,
   recording the displeasure of Members at the use of the
   Disaster by some South Yorkshire Police Officers as an
   excuse for poor or indeed criminal behaviour, for
   submission as appropriate to the relevant organisations.

14. Letter of Thanks

   A letter of thanks from members of the six families who
   have successfully applied for a Judicial Review of the
   Inquest verdicts to the Liaison Officer Ms. A. Adlington
   and Ms. S. Coleman formerly of Edgehill College for the
   hardwork and support provided by them in recent years, was
   submitted for the information of Members.




 al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Y260493
                                          UNIVERSITY
             St Helens Road Ormskirk                 t” t   “ T7 S~> T7         Telephone: 0695 575171
                  Lancashire L39 4QP           W     J L J L XL \J T XL Fax: 0695 579997



                 Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice


                                                                      Direct Lines:

Our Ref PS/BH                                                         Kathryn Chadwick                   0695 584405
Your Ref MFCDA/CM/LJ                                                  Barbara Houghton                   0695 584379
20 May 1993                                                           Phil Scraton                       0695 584305

Mr Colin Moneypenny
Personnel and Administration Directorate
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
LIVERPOOL   L69 2DH

Dear Colin

Further to the letters from Ken Corns and our conversation earlier this week
I am writing to inform you of our progress on the Hillsborough Project.

As I explained, we are at a significant stage in the production of the
Project's Second Report. You will be aware that the First Report received
national publicity and its impact has been considerable in the formulation of
current government policy initiatives and professional practice. The Project
has made major contributions to the following:

Emergency Planning Information Centre Seminars on Crowd Safety;
CORE ,Westminster [House of Lords] Conference on Crowd Management;
Nuffield Foundation/LSE Seminar on Law Reform [attended by the Home Office;
CPS; Law Society; etc];
Assembly of Welsh Counties on Aftercare for the Bereaved and Survivors of
Disasters [attended by all Welsh County Chief Executives and Directors of
Social Services];
National Disaster Centre [Easingwold] Conference on Inter-Agency Cooperation
in the Aftermath of Disasters.

What these contributions demonstrate is the importance of the Project's work
in providing a solid base upon which local authorities can prepare for and
respond to disasters within their areas. The Hillsborough Project is unique
in providing analytical, informed and independent research upon which future
policy and practices can be based. At a national level the Project also gave
both written and verbal evidence to the all-party Parliamentary Special
Hearings into the Freedom and Responsibility of the Press.

As you know, following the close contacts established with families bereaved
at Hillsborough, the Project has continued to give direct help and support on
a whole range of issues. This work has been most important.

Currently the Project is about to publish its Second Report.   The Second
Report will provide a full and thorough overview of the legal procedures
relating to Hillsborough. The main focus will be a close appraisal of the
Inquest procedures which will demonstrate its inadequacies, prejudices,




                                       Edge Hill Higher Education Corporation
partiality and the serious injustices suffered by the bereaved and survivors.
Apart from exposing the failures of the inquest it will make wide-ranging but
detailed recommendations concerning the procedures for referral, investigation
and examination of such cases. This will be the first analysis of its kind.
It will also break new ground in suggesting that medical conditions suffered
by the bereaved and survivors are not necessarily related to the disaster
itself [Post Traumatic Stress Disorder] but are a consequence of protracted,
unwieldy and inadequate legal procedures. This section of the Report is
almost at First Draft stage and it is expected to run to approx 25,000 words.

A second key focus of the Report, in line with our terms of reference, is an
update on the media.     This section, approx 30,000 words, has just been
completed at First Draft stage. It includes an overview arid up-date of the
coverage of Hillsborough since the publication of our First Report. It also
provides the first detailed analysis of the obsessive attacks on Liverpool and
Merseyside within the press. This includes the invidious reporting on the
James Bulger case and the way in which this was linked to Hillsborough by the
national press. Finally it examines in detail the proposals for statutory
press regulation put forward in the Calcutt Report, in Clive Soley's Bill and
by the National Heritage Committee. It argues that as self-regulation is not
working there must be means established through which ordinary citizens and
their elected representatives can seek redress for inaccurate and offensive
reporting.

Finally it is proposed that the Second Report will introduce a new agenda for
the analysis and understanding of disasters. We argue that there are eight
phases in the unfolding of a disaster, from the longer term build-up to the
long-term aftermath.    As with Hillsborough, the official inquiries and
investigations [police; public inquiry; coroner] focus only on the immediate
events and fail to inquire into the problems faced by families and survivors
from the moment of the disaster onwards. Our project again is unique in
taking the analysis on through to the long-term consequences. As you know the
First Report exposed, for the first time, the appalling events of the
immediate aftermath at the Hillsborough Gymnasium.         What the Project
emphasises is that in order to understand the complexities and implications
of disasters it is imperative to consider the historical background, the
immediate events, the short-term impact and the long-term consequences. In
putting together this Second Report we present the views and responses of the
bereaved and survivors in order that the real consequences on the lives of
those who have suffered can be understood. We also are committed to the
belief that those directly involved have a right to be heard.

As you will appreciate the project has turned into a task of considerable
proportions. At the outset no one could have envisaged that the inquests
would run for over a year, nor that the Coroner would opt for a structure of
unprecedented complexity.     Neither were the extraordinary, direct press
attacks on Liverpool envisaged. Undoubtedly, as the Second Report will show,
this has had severe consequences for the bereaved and survivors and for the
City.   The Second Report will be substantive and will carry multiple
recommendations. It is my intention that we complete the work and publish
within the next few months. As soon as we have the remaining section of the
Report in completed First Draft and the three co-authors [Sheila, Ann, myself]
have agreed the text we can publish within weeks. My proposal is that we
press on over the forthcoming weeks and then meet to discuss plans for
publication which will involve a press conference similar to that mounted at
the Council for the First Report. Clearly I am keen to work with Councillor

                                      2
# 4    t


      Spriggs and colleagues in preparation for such a launch as it will bring
      considerable media attention. As I have said in addressing previous Council
      meetings, the City Council has enabled a unique research project to develop
      which has clear implications for families and survivors seeking justice and
      also for future policies and practices.

      Further, the Project - in line with its terms of reference - has developed
      substantial material concerning the long-term, historical attacks on the
      reputation of the City and its people. I intend to provide the City Council
      with a further report which will demonstrate that the recent attacks in the
      press have a well-established history.     I am convinced that this further
      report, already substantially prepared, will help the City Council in
      developing the lead taken by Councillor Rimmer in the wake of the James Bulger
      publicity. Initially I propose that this 'third' report will be an internal
      document and clearly I would take advice on how the Council would want to
      proceed with its contents.

      Finally, in terms of the financing of the Project almost the entire budget has
      been used, as proposed, to fund researchers' salaries. Expenses were incurred
      by both researchers in monitoring the inquests in Sheffield. The publication
      expenses of the Second Report has been budgeted. The administration of the
      project, including all word-processing of the Reports, etc, has been b o m by
      the Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice.          My own time, in
      researching, administering and writing up, has not been taken from the
      Project's budget.

      I realise that this is a long response. However, as you know, I was concerned
      that the Project was discussed publicly in my absence and families have been
      in touch to express their concern and regret that such discussions took place.
      I hope that what is written above explains our progress to date and our
      intentions for the future. I am keen to move forward quickly in completing
      the Second Report and I have every confidence that it will be well-received
      by the City Council.

      Yours sincerely




      Professor Phil Scraton
      Centre Director




                                            3
