         THE LICENSING OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS
         (CBS/192/89)

         REPORT OF THE CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR
         (Contact Officer : L.N. Bush, Tel. 225 3395)

         1.     The Working Party, at its meeting of the 7th June 1989, asked for a
                report on the existing procedures for the licensing of football
                grounds, which particular matter is controlled by the Safety of Sports
                Grounds Act 1975.  However, before moving into the detail of that
                subject, it is worth remembering that the development and alteration
                of most modern covered stadia is, or has been, subject to the Building
                Regulations, which set standards of design and construction relevant
                to the safety of users.  It is relevant also that parts of the stadium
                buildings are almost invariably subject to overlapping mandatory
                controls with regard to their use as workplaces (administrative
                offices) and places of assembly, or shops (restaurants).  In
                Merseyside and some other metropolitan areas, uncovered stands are
                controllable also under local Acts.  These other uses and their
                ongoing control frequently involve licensing for drinking and/or
                public entertainment, and in some cases (e.g. Anfield) as tourist
                attractions, involving the conduct of parties and the exhibition of
                historical films using videos.  Thus Members will appreciate that a
                total stadium complex requires co-ordinated consideration and
                supervision, not confined only to match day use, and that it is
                important for the Local Authorities responsible to provide that.

         2.     In the case of Metropolitan District Councils such as Liverpool, such
                an approach is possible through its Building Regulation control
                department, and this was provided from the onset of the legislation.
                In the case of football grounds in non-Metropolitan Districts, the
                County Council remains the authority responsible for the functions
                required by the Act of 1975 and that immediately poses some degree of
                difficulty in liaison.  The Act of 1975 is specifically directed to
                ensuring a satisfactory standard of safety for the spectators
                attending football matches, but that itself involves a certain amount
                of use, or passage through buildings which have the other uses
                mentioned above at other times.  For the purposes of the Working
                Party, this report will concentrate on the provisions and procedures
                of the 1975 Act, but Members will appreciate that this is not the
                total control medium.

         3.     The Act of 1975 permitted the Secretary of State to designate sports
                grounds, which have accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators
                (covered or uncovered), to require a safety certificate issued by the
                appropriate Local Authority.   Stadia have been designated in a series
              • of orders, since 1st January 1977, starting with international and
                First Division grounds, and followed on with further orders bringing
                in Second Division grounds, and (following the Bradford disaster) all
                Football League grounds and some grounds used for other team sports
                have   been included in that process.   The safety certificate which has
                to be held is known as a "General Safety    Certificate", and should be
                designed to cover all normal matches taking place at the stadium.     If
                someother activity, or different kind of competitive sport     is to be
                held   at the ground, the Act provides for a "Special Safety




NBCAAD
                                            - 2 -


              Certificate" to be issued for those uses (an example of that was the
              use of Anfield by the Billy Graham Christian Mission some years ago).
              The Local Authority has the power to amend a safety certificate, or to
              replace it completely, with or without an application for that being
              received from the Holder.  This effectively allows the authority to
              review the certificate as often as it needs, in the light of
              experience, and to alter any of the arrangements which it had
              previously demanded or permitted, including the capacity of the ground
              and its various enclosures, subject of course to a right of appeal by
              the Holder against all actions of the authority, or conditions fixed
              in the certificate.  Other "interested parties" also have a right of
              appeal against provisions made, or not made, in a safety certificate.
              Those "interested parties" include the Chief Officer of Police and the
              Fire Authority, so that it is important for the Local Authority
              dealing with the certificate to keep a close liaison with those
              parties, although final decisions in any matter rest with the
              certificating Local Authority.  In this connection* it may be noted
              that where the Local Authority responsible is the County, the District
              Authority which is the Building Control Authority is also an
              "interested party".

         4.   It is worth noting the difference between a "Safety Certificate"
              issued to football grounds and a "Public Entertainment Licence" issued
              to places of other forms of entertainment.  The latter are renewable
              annually, which ensures two things.  Firstly that the premises are
              reviewed and every party concerned has its attention refreshed
              regularly, although even so, it is possible for a slipshod or poorly
              resourced authority to neglect detail.  Secondly, the cost of the work
              of performing all functions, whether it be the grant or renewal, or
              enforcement of licence conditions, in the case of public entertainment
              licensing, can be recovered by the fees fixed for annual renewal.   The
              Safety of Sports Grounds Act, and the statutory instruments and
              guidance notes published for that Act, provide only for a fee on the
              issue of a Safety Certificate, (General or Special) and to any
              amendment made to it thereafter.  Thus, there is no financial
              provision for the cost of review or enforcement.  In the current Local
              Authority financially constrained climate, some authorities might pay
              less attention to the need for ongoing control than is healthy for the
              spectators using the grounds concerned.  This is a particular
              possibility where the clubs concerned are not very successful ones,
              and are not therefore spending money frequently on alterations at
              their grounds, demanding a review of the Safety Certificate's
              provis ions.

         5.   The Act of 1975 permits the Local Authority to include in a Safety
              Certificate any terms and conditions it considers necessary or
              expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stadium.  Initially those
              terms and conditions may lay down requirements for alterations or
              additions to the stadium, and that was the practice when grounds were
              first designated.  The effective sanction being that the defective
              part of the ground either could not be used, or alternatively could be
              used only by a reduced number of spectators, until such times as the
              required improvements were completed.  That is unlikely to be the
              situation at many grounds now, although fixing the maximum number of
              spectators admitted to the stadium and admitted to different parts of

NBCAAC
                                             - 3 -


              it, is the basic sanction in the compromises which have to be made
              between an excellent level of safety and one which is barely
              acceptable.  In addition to a general authority to fix terms and
              conditions, the Act of 1975 is specific, at Section 2 in requiring a
              safety certificate to cover certain matters.    Firstly it must state
              the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to the stadium, and
              the maximum number to be admitted to different parts of it.     It also
              requires the certificate to include terms and conditions about the
              number, size and situation of entrances to and exits from the stadium,
              and the means of access    to any such entrances or exits.   Itmust also
              require those entrances and exits and means of access    to be properly
              maintained and kept free from obstruction.    There is also a
              requirement to specify the number, strength and situation of crush
              barriers (on standing terraces).    The Safety Certificate must also
              include conditions that certain minimum records must be kept by the
              Holder, including records of the number of spectators attending the
              stadium and records relating to the maintenance of safety.     Finally,
              Section 2 calls for a Safety Certificate to contain a plan of the
              stadium, by means of which terms and conditions in the Certificate
              which refer to locations, can be properly identified.

         6.   Safety Certificates issued for football grounds have to be issued to a
              person (called the "Holder"), who is likely to be in a position to
              control the use of the ground, and to ensure compliance with its terms
              and conditions.  That "qualified person" is generally the Club's Chief
              Executive and/or Secretary, although some Clubs have delegated the
              holding of the Certificate to other special officers, often to those
              concerned with the care   of the fabric of the ground. There is a
              general provision that anyone having anything to do with the
              management of the ground (called a "responsible    person") must
              contribute to and not obstruct compliance with the conditions of the
              Certificate.  That requirement is qualified by the usual plea of 'due
              diligence1 in the event of an alleged offence.   A person guilty of an
              offence is liable, on summary conviction, to a fine of not exceeding
              £400, or on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for not more than
              two years, or a fine, or to both.

         7.   Matters relative to the safety of Spectators at   football grounds are
              of course legion.  The fundamental essential is   that the design and
              layout of the ground and its general fabric and structural ability to
              fulfil its use, is reasonable and sufficient to ensure safety.    In
              that respect, it shares most of the features essential to any place of
              public resort, particularly those used for entertainment, although the
              needs are heightened at football grounds by the competitive nature of
              the event, by the provision for standing spectators, and for
              considerably greater numbers than are commonly experienced at any
              other entertainment event, except perhaps for pop concerts.
              Conseqently the next most important provision is to ensure that the
              numbers using the ground, or various parts of the ground, are strictly
              controlled.  Thirdly, one must provide for thorough ongoing
              maintenance of features essential to safety at the ground.   Fourthly,
              under these broad headings, each of which covers many matters of
              detail, the certificate should require a level of management and
              stewarding appropriate to the ground conditions and the numbers of
              spectators permitted.

NBCAAC
                                            - 4 -




         8.   Whilst those matters specified in Section 2 of the Act (identified
              earlier) have to be covered in the Safety Certificate, to what extent
              and in what detail they are covered, and what other matters are
              covered by means of terms and conditions, or taken into account before
              deciding whether to issue a Certificate or not, are left to the
              expertise and discretion of the Local Authority responsible for
              implementation of the Act.  Thus there will be a wide difference in
              the quality of both initial attention, attention to alterations and
              additions, and also in the monitoring of a club's   compliance with and
              enforcement of the conditions attached to the Certificate, as is usual
              in many matters entrusted to Local Authorities.   The usual method of
              dealing with this predominantly technical and regular ongoing duty has
              been to delegate the function to one or more officers of the
              responsible authority, which is most effective, provided that officer
              understands that he is unequivocally responsible and that he is
              provided with adequate resources to carry out his task.

         9.   It should be remembered that many football grounds are situated
              outside metropolitan district areas, and the work falls to the County
              Council in those cases.   It was the original intention of Lord Justice
              Wheatley, who carried out the Inquiry into the disaster at Ibrox Park
              and reported in 1972, that Chief Building Control Officers should be
              the principal officers responsible for this work in consultation with
              the Police, and Fire Authorities.  The history of what happened in fact
              was explained in paragraphs 4 to 7 of the City Building Surveyor's
              report on the F.A. letter to clubs, dated 17th April, 1989, which this
              Working Party received on the 19th May last (CBS/159/89). That report
              also explained how the County Authorities responsible outside
              metropolitan districts sometimes failed to harness the Building
              Control expertise of district councils, with disastrous consequences,
              in the case of Bradford.   At that time, West Yorkshire County was
              responsible (prior to its abolition) and the Bradford Chief Building
              Control Surveyor had not been consulted on the subject.

         10. In contrast to that calamitous neglect, the Merseyside County
             Authority, which issued the original Safety Certificates for both the
             Liverpool grounds, deliberately performed only an administrative
             function, which was delegated to the County Solicitor, and he relied
             solely on the City Building Surveyor in Liverpool for the necessary
             input throughout the period of their control from 1976 to abolition in
             1986.  That was partly because both the Liverpool clubs had previously
             consulted and taken advice from the City Building Surveyor in matters
             of safety at their grounds since 1971.  The Football League had, for
             many years, required clubs to provide it with a form of guarantee of
             safety at their grounds, but the matter was dealt wth very nominally
             and certified generally by Club Secretaries or Chief Executives up to
             1970.  The League then requested a technical input with guarantees
             from apptopriate consultants employed by clubs, and recommended clubs
             to consult Local Authority Building Control experts who were generally
             responsible for safety in places of public resort and frequently had
             local powers over the design and construction of uncovered stands
             (i.e.  not being buildings) also.  It is relevant to mention here that
             Liverpool City Council has always held the need for building design



NBCAAD
                                           - 5 -


             and construction safety, and the suitability of buildings for safe
             use for public and other special purposes to be very important.   The
             City Building Surveyor, to whom this work has been delegated, has
             been unable to maintain the application of adequate resources to these
             public use safety functions to date, despite delays and difficulties
             in filling an increased incidence of vacancies generally in the
             department.

         11. Guidance on what ought to be covered by football grounds' safety
             certificates, and good standards for these matters, is given to all
             concerned in the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" booklet, which is
             published by H.M. Stationery Office.   This started life as a technical
             appendix to the Wheatley Report in 1972, and the City Building
             Surveyor, Liverpool University and both the Liverpool football grounds
             assisted in consultations on its contents, particularly in respect of
             the layout, design and strength of crush barriers.   The Home Office
             carried out physical tests of loadings at full capacity matches on the
             then existing crush barriers on the Kop at Anfield, and the Gwladys
             Street Terrace at Goodison Park.   The current Guide was revised in
             1986 following the Popplewell Inquiry concerning Heysel,
             Birmingham and Bradford, which included recommendations for that
             update.  The Guide sets out good standards, but it is a voluntary
             Code, and has no legal force.   Having regard to the general age of
             football grounds, and their associated terraces and stands, throughout
             the country, compliance with those ideally good standards is
             impracticable in many respects.   Compromises or alternative measures
             of achieving suitable standards of safety have to be found.   The
             chapter headings for subjects covered by the Guide are listed below,
             in order to illustrate its comprehensive scope.

                 Chapter   2      Management Responsibilities
                 Chapter   3      General Fabric and Structural Matters
                 Chapter   4      Inspections and Tests
                 Chapter   5      Ingress
                 Chapter   6      Egress
                 Chapter   7      Stairways and Ramps
                 Chapter   8      Terraces and Viewing Slopes
                 Chapter   9      Crush Barriers and Handrails
                 Chapter   10     Roofed Stands with Seated Accommodation
                 Chapter   11     Fire Safety
                 Chapter   12     Communications
                 Chapter   13     Stewarding
                 Chapter   14     Crowd Control
                 Chapter   15     Pitch Perimeter Fence/Wall
                 Chapter   16     Estimation of Safe Ground Capacity
                 Chapter   17     Recommended Flow Rates (for evacuation purposes),

            In addition, there are annexes to the Guide covering in further detail
            the subjects of (B) - Stewarding, and (C) - Testing of Crush Barriers
            and Handrails.

         12. The advent of the new "Green Guide", coupled with the Popplewell
             Report recommendations and the transfer of responsibility, for the
             implementation of the 1975 Act, to Metropolitan District Councils,
             prompted a review of Safety Certificates and procedures for monitoring

NBCAAD
                                               - 6 -


             and enforcement in 1986, by responsible authorities.  In Liverpool,
             that duty was carried out by the City Building Surveyor, in respect of
             both this City's designated grounds.  The Certificates were totally
             rewritten and all the drawings forming part of the Certificate were
             completely updated and annotated, in order to relate the terms of the
             Certificate to locations at the grounds.  The total documents are
             extensive.  The office copy of both the current Certificates for
             Anfield and Goodison Park will be on the Table at the Working Party
             receiving this report, should any Members wish to examine their
             general format etc.

         13. There is a small degree of nationwide exchange of information between
             officers responsible for this work, through occasional meetings held
             by the County Engineers Association, and also through Council meetings
             of the Society of Chief Building Regulation Officers.   Without
             examining the many documents produced and the details of functions
             performed by those various officers responsible, it is not possible to
             say generally how good is the quality and standard of attention given
             to this matter.  How many of them match the thorough attention given
             to the duty in Liverpool, it is difficult to say, but the City
             Building Surveyor suggests that the Anfield and Goodison Park
             certificates are amongst the best in the country.  These, two
             certificates include schedules of conditions with the following
             headings

                     Schedule   1 :     General conditions
                     Schedule 2   :     Capacity of Stadium (inc. recording and
                                             controlling numbers attending)
                     Schedule   3   :   General Safety Provisions
                     Schedule   4   :   Lighting and Emergency Electric Supply
                     Schedule   5   :   Fire Safety
                     Schedule   6   :   Stewarding
                     Schedule   7   :   Locations (of Stewards)
                     Schedule   8   :   Inspections and Tests

         14. Adequate and sufficient stewarding was highlighted by the Popplewell
             Report to be a matter for careful attention, and it was noted earlier
             that the "Green Guide" includes an annexe B on the subject.  Schedules
             6 and 7 of the Safety Certificates issued to the Liverpool and Everton
             Clubs devote some 9 pages to the subject, in which every steward (116
             at Anfield and 115 at Goodison Park) is identified with a title and
             number, given a job specification, and assigned specifically to a
             location or area of the stadium.

         15. A Member of the Working Party asked, on 7th June last, with what
             frequency the grounds are checked for maintenance of safety features,
             or with regard to enforcement, in the case of the two Liverpool
             grounds.  In detail the frequency varies according to the subject
             matter, and for Members' further information, a copy of the Schedule
             covering this matter in the Certificate for the Anfield Ground is
             appended to this report as Appendix A.  From that it will be noted
             that the City Building Surveyor's officers join in those inspections
             (1), (2), (6) and (7) listed in the condition to Table 8.2, in
             addition to monitoring the other items in the Table to condition 8.5.
             Monitoring of the full provision of stewards aijd their compliance with

NBCAAD
                                                - 7 -


               the conditions attached to the Certificate are carried out by spot
               checks, immediately prior to and during the use of both stadia.

         16. In all the above work, very good co-operation is enjoyed from both the
             Liverpool clubs.   It should be appreciated that these are two
             successful football clubs, enjoying many full or near capacity
             attendances during the season, which places them financially in a
             strong position to comply with safety requirements as well as putting
             them in need of such compliance at all times.   Elsewhere in the
             country, the attention given to safety at sports grounds is not only
             dependent upon the resources allocated to the matter by the Local
             Authority responsible, but must be strongly influenced by the
             financial position of the football clubs concerned, and also by the
             relative demand for attention to safety as dictated by regular
             attendance figures.   These aspects of the matter are probably relevant
             to the apparent failures which caused the Hillsborough disaster.
             Clearly where a ground is regularly used to partial capacity only,
             practices and standards of safety can become attuned to that need, so
             that any full capacity match which uses only the regular habitual
             practices relevant to safety may present risks.   Hillsborough also
             highlights the difference between matches where one of the teams is a
             home team and therefore the majority of those attending are regular
             supporters, with a detailed knowledge of the ground and the crowd
             safety practices, and those matches where both teams and spectators
             are visitors, with a limited, or no knowledge of the ground.   It is
             intended to amend the General Safety Certificate for the two Liverpool
             grounds during this year's annual closed season review, accordingly.
             A Special Safety Certificate would be required in future in the event
             of either of these two grounds being used for a football match between
             two visiting teams, such as an F.A. Cup Semi-final.

         17.    The position of the Police as an "interested party" in the      issue or
               amendment of any Safety Certificate was mentioned earlier.       Such
               Certificates generally include a requirement that the Holder shall
               arrange for the attendance of an adequate number of Police Officers
               within the stadium to secure orderly and decent behaviour.       The number
               of such officers for each certified use generally will need to be
               agreed with the Police at least 14 days beforehand.       That condition is
               contained in both the Liverpool C l u b s 1 Certificates.  The cost of such
               in-ground policing has to be met by the football clubs.       Policing
               outside the ground and traffic routing is a matter wholly for the
               Police Authority, which ought to be co-ordinated with the needs of
               ground safety.   The Police' therefore maintain a very close liaison
               with football clubs, especially those whose matches are heavily
               attended and are in built-up areas, in order to organise the necessary
               traffic and crowd controls approaching and around the grounds.        These
               Police duties are a full-time job for a Police Inspector in respect of
               the two Liverpool grounds, and in many other towns.       Information is
               generally collected from clubs and corresponding Police officers,
               about estimated attendances of both home and away supporters and also
               about their likely behaviour.    The numbers of Police officers
               allocated to outside ground duties, and for escorting and checking
               upon visiting supporters, is adjusted accordingly for each match.         The
               City Building Surveyor and his responsible officers maintain a close
               contact with the Police at all times.       That is a matter of necessity

NBCAAD
                                           - 8 -


            owing to the regular high attendances at the Liverpool grounds, but is
            not necessarily universally the case for all football grounds
            throughout the country.  Where a local authority and/or a football
            club responsible for safety at the ground, neglects its ongoing duties
            in that respect, the Police may be faced with problems to be solved,
            possibly in the absence of adequate experience in their own service.
            This was brought to Members' attention in paragraph 8 of the City
            Building Surveyor's report on the F.A. letter to clubs, which was
            mentioned earlier (CBS/159/89).

         18. The above covers the current position of certification of safety at
             football grounds.    Its extensive overlap with other legislation
             operated by district councils, the difficulties of liaison with County
             authorities responsible in shire districts, the risks of poor
             attention to the duties by financially constrained local authorities,
             the risk of local loyalties producing overtolerance with poor clubs
             with poor grounds, undoubtedly will be considered by the Hillsborough
             Inquiry.    Its earliest possible recommendations are awaited with
             interes t .




NBCAAD
