                                  The City of Liverpool
                                  Personnel & Administration Directorate
                                  t eter Rhodes, Head o j Law & Committee Services
                                  Solicitor to the Council
                                 PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                 Tel: 0151-225 2404 Fax: 0151-225 2427



                                            Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                            Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                            Your R e f :
                                            Our Ref: MFCDA/CM


To-. All Merseyside Members of Parliament                                          9th February,   1998




Dear Sir/Madam


Hillsborough Scrutiny

I write further to my letter of 21st November, 1997, concerning
the above matter, to ask that you support in whatever way
possible, the terms of my attached second letter sent on behalf of
Liverpool City Council to the Home Secretary detailing continuing
concerns about the Scrutiny. I also enclose a copy of the response
of Mr. Straw to my original letter.

You should be aware, as the announcement of the decision of the
Home Secretary about the Scrutiny is apparently imminent, that
there continues to be speculation amongst families and other
interested parties that the decision which is to be made may not
satisfy their continuing demands for justice.

The Members of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party, while
sharing the anxiety of the families, particularly in the light of
past experience, continue to hope for a satisfactory outcome and
will of course await the decision of Mr. Straw before making any
comment. However at this stage they have felt it sufficiently
important to emphasise, on the record to the Home Secretary, that
notwithstanding his previous comments, there remain legitimate
concerns about the terms of reference of the investigation and
about the neutrality of the appointed judge given his public
remarks about Liverpool supporters.

Most importantly though the concern of the Working Party has been
submitted to Mr. Straw that while, as he indicates Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith may consider he has received sufficient information
from South Yorkshire Police, the Hillsborough families'continue tc
feel that documentation which may have assisted the presentation
of their submissions, has been withheld from them by the Police.




                    Director o f Personnel & Administration: lan Jones
                  Administration c£ Commercial Services; Human Resource Sen rvice;
        Information 7cchnoloxy Services; Im w   Committee Services; Le^al Sen
                                                                            ■rvices Agency;
                              1‘nhlic Relations  Information Service.
The view of the City Council remains that even before a Scrutiny
of "new" evidence, the case for a full new Inquiry and the severe
doubts about the adequacy of the previous judicial proceedings had
been more than adequately demonstrated. As all of the Merseyside
Councils are backing the City Council in its unanimous support for
the ca.Tnpa.igTi of the Hillsborough families, I am sure any
assistance you can give whatsoever at this stage will be sincerely
appreciated by all concerned.

Yours faithfully



Colin Moneypenny — |            |
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
This Liverpool City Council is acutely aware of the outrage from
its citizens following the Home Secretary's presentation of Lord
Justice Stewart-Smith's report as to his investigation of the
Hillsborough inquiry, in which the decision was to take the issues
m   f n - v ' f          w   w u \ _ i 3




This decision flies in the face of numerous evidence and has left
the families, the City Council and citizens stunned beyond belief.
Lord Justice Stewart-Smith quite clearly, on his arrival in
Liverpool left many people in no doubt that he would produce a
negative report.

This City Council therefore calls upon the Home Secretary to look
again at the evidence provided by the families and many others
and set aside Lord Justice Stewart-Smith's submission.
Furthermore, this City Council continues to support the
Hillsborough Family Support Group until justice for the 96 victims
is finally achieved.

The City Council further calls upon the Party Leaders at
Westminster and M.P.s' on Merseyside to mount a campaign for the
rejection of Lord Justice Stewart-Smith's findings and for the
Home Secretary to institute a new inquiry.

Failing to do so would be an affront to the families and the
victims.
                                  The City of Liverpool
                                  Personnel & Administration Directorate
                                  Peter Rhodes, Head o f Law & Committee Services
                                  Solicitor to the Council
                                  PO Bex 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                  Tel: 0151-225 2404 Fax:0151-225 2427



                                             Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                             Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                             Your R e f :
                                             Our Ref: MFCDA/CM


To: All Merseyside Members of Parliament                                           9th February,    199 8




Dear Sir/Madam


Hillsborough Scrutiny
I write further to my letter of 21st November, 1997, concerning
the above matter, to ask that you support in whatever way
possible, the terms of my attached second letter sent on behalf o
Liverpool City Council to the Home Secretary detailing continuing
concerns abou^ the Scrutiny. I also enclose a copy of the response
of Mr. Straw to my original letter.

You should be aware, as the announcement of the decision of the
Home Secretary about the Scrutiny is a p p a r e n t l y imminent tnat
there continues to be speculation amongst families and other
interested parties that the decision which is to be made may not
satisfy their continuing demands for justice.

The Members of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party ^ i l e
sharing the anxiety of the families, particularly m the light.
past experience, continue to hope for a satisfactory outcome a.,
will of course await the decision of Mr. Straw before making any
comment. However at this stage they have felt it sufficiently
important to emphasise, on the record to the H o m e Secretary,
notwithstanding his previous comments, there remain legitimate
concerns about the terms of reference of the investigation and
about the neutrality of the appointed judge given his public
remarks about Liverpool supporters.

 Most importantly though the concern of the Working Party h a s _been
 submitted to Mr. Straw that while, a s he indicates Lord^Ju.,
 Stuart-Smith may consider he has received sufficient inf      ....
 from South Yorkshire Police, the Hillsborough families continue to
 feel that documentation which may have assisted the presentation
 of their submissions, has been withheld from them by the Police.




                      Director o f Personnel & Administration: Ian Jones
                   Administration & Commercial Services: Human Resource Service;
         Information Technology Services: Law & Committee Services: Le^al Services A t;rncv:
                               Public Relations & Information Service.
The view of the City Council remains that even before a Scrutiny
of "new" evidence, the case for a full new Inquiry and the severe
doubts about the adequacy of the previous judicial proceedings had
been more than adequately demonstrated. As all of the Merseyside
Councils are backing the City Council in its unanimous support for
the campaign of the Hillsborough families, I am sure any
assistance you can give whatsoever at this stage will be sincerely
appreciated by all concerned.

Yours faithfully




Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
                            Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                            Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                            Your Ref:
                            Our R e f : MFCDA/CM



                                              3rd February,   1998


R t . Hon Jack Straw MP
Horae Secretary
Horae Office
5 0 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT


Dear Mr. Straw

HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

I write further to my letter dated 14th November, 19 97 concerning
the above matter and your response of 4th December.

Our correspondence was reported to a meeting of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party of Liverpool City Council, held last week
at which various Members of the Hillsborough Family Support Group
were in attendance. Many of the people present expressed concern
about some of the content of your response and I was therefore
asked to write to you again to place this concern on record prior
to any announcement which may be made about the outcome of the
Scrutiny.

The overwhelming view which emerged from the meeting is that there
is continuing dissatisfaction with the terms of reference of the
investigation and indeed with the disparaging comments about
Liverpool supporters made previously by the judge. However even
more importantly there was also considerable disquiet expressed
about the inference taken from your letter to me, that the
decision not to extend the timetable of the Scrutiny was taken by
Lor d Justice Stuart-Smith with reference only to the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire Police. The Working Party support the
contention of the Families that while the Lord Chief Justice may
have been satisfied that the information received from-the South
Yorkshire Force was adequate, nonetheless much potentially
valuable documentation which may have aided their submissions
withheld from them by the Police .
In conclusion I would ask that as you reach your decision on this
matter you take the above comments into account. Would you also
please note that Liverpool City Council by way of its Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party has re-affirmed its earlier view
that even prior to the Stuart Smith scrutiny, sufficient evidence
had already been fulsomely demonstrated to cast overwhelming doubt
on previous judicial proceedings and to therefore justify the
establishment of a full new Inquiry into the Disaster.



Yours sincerely



Colin Moneypenny
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
                                                 Q U E E N A N N E ’ S G AT E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT




Colin Moneypenney Esq
Clerk to the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party
Liverpool City Council
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool
L69 2DH




Thank you for your letter of 14 November on behalf of Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party in support of the Family Support Group's request for the
timescale of the scrutiny to be extended.

Although I indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we hoped it would be
possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale is
ultim ately a matter for the Judge to decide. I have told Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith that if he decides that more time is needed to complete his w ork, this
would certainly be w ithin his discretion. However, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
has indicated to me that he expects to keep to his original timescale for
completion of the report.

Trevor Hick s letter expressed concern about access to information held by the
South Yorkshire Police. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also assured me that he
has been given full access to the material held by the force and that the force
has co-operated throughout his scrutiny. From w hat I have been told by the
Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith it
appears that, for the purposes of the scrutiny, all the material w hich should be
available for examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been available -to him,
and th a t the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully the issues raised by the
Family Support Group and others.

The term s of reference which I have given -Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the
Scrutiny w ill allow him to establish conclusively whether any material evidence
was overlooked in the consideration of the causes of the disaster or the
consideration of criminal or other proceedings. The Judge w ill also be able to
recommend any other action w hich should be taken in the public interest. His
terms of reference are, therefore, very wide indeed and I am confident that they
wiN allow him to carry out a full scrutiny of the evidence w hich has been
submitted by the families and others.

As you know, the Judge spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families of
those who died and listening to their concerns. He has said th a t he found these
meetings fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to w rite his report
L   pk ° u ° UrSe'U"derstand the distress caused by the Judge's com ment to
Mr Phil Hammond. The Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this
remark which he made off-the-cuff and w ithou t any intention to offend or for it
to be taken seriously. He has made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not
the subject of the Scrutiny.


‘ t m u atuSfif d th3 t L° rd JuStice s tu 3 rt-s ™ th will produce a thorough report in
which the families and the public can have confidence. As I have indicated
before, I w ill make public the advice given by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his
a h n m ' tthe rf-WI" ,tak!has
            h disaster       Wh",ever aC,ion is needed if he suggests material evidence
about                          been overlooked.




                                     JACK STRAW
