              Hillsborough disaster working pasty
                       '.26th       1989 '


PRESEHT:    Councillorc H. Chase, W. Edwards, A. Jennings#
            Mary Johnston* 5. Ledwich* Peter Millea,
            K» Noon* F* Roderick and Jacqueline Siaifch.


            Councillor I*, Ruse also attended.



Appointment of Chair
Resolved that, Councillor H. Chase be appointed tho Chair
of'this■Working Party« ■

Terms of Reference of forking Party
ISm Working Party considered its terms of reference in
the light of the decision of the City Council of the 19th
April* 1.969*
Resolved that - .
   (i) the revised terras of reference be- approved# viz*
       1.    Oto ensure the submission, of propert _
             to the Taylor Inquiry on behalf of the people
             of Liverpooli
       2.    To assist, in finding out the truth of what
             occurred at Hillsborough including the
             preparations made in advance and to enable
             the Council to comment thereon.
       3.    So enable the Council to respond to any i©«uas
             arising from the tragedy and to make
             observations generally.
       4*    To cause a report on the tragedy to be made
             to the City Council via the Finance and Strategy
             Committee as soon as practicable*
  (ill the Working Party would urge all football supporters
       to give their evidence to the Official Inquiry
       but* in the case of those supporters who do not
       wish to be interviewed by the police Officers
       appointed to assist the Inquiry* the Working Party
       proposes to provide facilities for such evidence
      to be taken by the City Council. All unsolicited
      submissions so far received by the City Solicitor
      or Council members will to© held to establish
      whether those who have made them wish thasa to be
      forwarded to the IiMjuiry team* The Working Party
      lias asked the City Solicitor to. obtain fra® Lord
      Justice Baylor his vim m on whether ho would be
      prepared. to -
       (a) accept evidence from this working Party on
           behalf of parsons who do not wish to give
           their evidence to the 'Police%
       (b) provide copies of submissions made to'his
           Inquiry to this Working Party. .
 (iii) the City Estates Surveyor and the City Solicitor
       .he requested to find premises for a working office
       fear this Working Party as a matter of urgencyi
  Civ) the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Council, in
       conjunction with'appropriate Chairs*toe requested
       to be- made available appropriate staffing.and
       administrative support forthwith to ensure the
       proper workings- of this Working Party i-
   (v) the City Solicitor aatee nwi.iahM all existing
       Council reports which have been prepared covering
       the arrangements for safety at football grounds
       to be made, available forthwith to all Members
       of the Working Party?
  Cvi) the attached letter from the Football Association
       relating to ground safety'he noted and the -
       City Building Surveyor be requested to report to
       an early meeting of this Working Party upon the
       terms of the letteri
(vii) an early meeting be arranged between this Working
     . Party and the Football Supporters Association so
       that consideration can be given to making,;
       avaiUible facilities by the Council to assist
       football supporters generally in the submission of
    . evidence to the Taylor Inquiry^ XT— -- ----------
Cviii) facilities be mad© available for discxossions to
       take place with Sheffield City Council as soon as
       practicable.
                   on Football
•V*




      ?h# Working Party considered m invitation to agipoiiit
      re p re s e n ts txv®& to attend a Conference cm the F o o tb a ll
      S upporters Bill to- be held on the 16th May at
      Haa*aer«iaith Town Hall, London.
      EetakolveA that the Chair (Councillor H. Chase) or his
      noaiiiee be appointed to attend this Gonferanoe*
