                                                                               I




    *H                             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
                                       WORKING PARTY

                                          of the

                              Policy and Resources Committee

                                    13th February, 1997



    *P           PRESENT: Councillor Jack Spriggs, Chair;
                          Councillors Eddie Clein, Alan Dean, Margaret
                          Harrison, Bill Roberts, Len Tyrer and Peter
                          Tyrrell.



    *M 7.      Minutes of Previous Meeting and
               Extraordinary Meeting of City Council

               Resolved that the proceedings of the previous meeting of the
               Working Party held on 6th December, 1996 and the
               extraordinary meeting of" the City Council held on 19th
               December, 1996 be noted.


         8.    Hillsborough Campaign

                The Working Party considered a verbal Report concerning
                developments in the Hillsborough Campaign for justice for
                the bereaved families following the transmission of the
                "Hillsborough" TV Programme in December and including
                progress with regard to the legal action which is being
                instituted by the Family Support Group, support from the
                families which has been received from other Councils, M.P.'s
                and M.E.P.'s, the imminent establishment of a Campaign
                Office to be located in the City Centre and the request
                being made by the Family Support Group to the Council for
                the secondment of two Officers to provide legal and
                administrative support for the Campaign Office.

                Resolved that the Report be noted and in addition to the
                requests for support from Merseyside Councils the support of
i               the Local Government Association for the Campaign be sought.
l


i
         9 .    "No Last Rights" - Edgehill College

                The Working Party considered correspondence received from
                Edgehill College detailing the income which has been
                received so far in respect of the sale of the "No Last



               al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/Y13 0297
I




       Rights" book about the Disaster and also a request for
       assistance with additional postage costs of £339 which the
       College had incurred as a result of the sale of the book.

       Resolved that the contents of the correspondence be noted
       and the Policy and Resources Committee be recommended to
       approve the request made by the College for the payment of
       additional postage costs of £339.


    10. Freedom of the City - Jimmy McGovern

       The Working Party considered the terms of a request made by
       the Hillsborough Family Support Group at the extraordinary
       meeting of the City Council held in December 1996 for the
       Council to consider awarding the Freedom of the City to the
       writer Jimmy McGovern in recognition of his work on the
       "Hillsborough" Television Programme.

       Resolved that the Policy and Resources Committee be
       recommended to approve the award of the Freedom of the City
       to Jimmy McGovern on the basis in particular of the role
       played by his Programme in not only enabling the legal
       campaign of the Hillsborough families for justice to be re­
       established but also in demolishing the many myths and lies
       previously told to the British public about the Disaster and
       about the City and replacing such concepts within the
       national consciousness with the true story of the Disaster
       and its devastating impact not only on families and
       survivors but on Liverpool and Merseyside.




l
       al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/Y1302 97
