09/11   93    1.3:42   .©0712424270             3 RAYMOND BIDS                  ®002




                                ; *ghe Hillsborough Qacnaesfcs

        .-.             _/■'.              *&<?vi_ce .
                                                     ,             .


    I have been considering with. Edward Fitzgerald whether there is
    any prospect of a successful appeal against, the judgment of the
    Divisional Court last week.. I have already spoken on the
    telephone to Ann Addlingtoti and expressed our reluctant
    conclusion that no appeal should bebrought.
    It: is certainly our view that the Divisional Court was wrong to
    hojld that: the verdicts of accidental death should be allowed to
    stand* The jury was;not allowed a. proper opportunity to give a'
    conclusion to their verdicts that:' there werte a number of
    negligent causes of death. Bowev«r, there is no conceivable
    prospect of the Court of Appeal ordering new inquests in the
    light of the findings of fact made by the Divisional Court,
    however much we disagree with those findings.
    lit those. circumstances the Court of appeal would say that they
    Were being asked: to give a purely acad^ic opinion as- to the 1aw
    on verdicts? ajid. it has repeatedly held that the remedy of
    Judicial Review lies only for matters which have real
    consequences , such &$ fresh hearings .
    We in no way regret our decision to apply for Judicial Review;,
    based as it was primarily on the,fresh disclosures of evidence*
    However, there:is no ground on which we can hope to persuade
    another part of ;the Hi<gh Court, that; is, the Court of Appeal,
    that the Divisional Court's findings about those facts should be
    attacked*

    The outcome of an attempt “to appeal would in our1judgment, given
    t3be holding of the Divisional Court, attract only criticism and
    added frustration and disappointment.
    •Hie real problem in. the case, now that we have lost the fresh
    evidence points in the Divisional Court, is that the remaining
    points will fall away, because they were not taken a t .the
    inquest. Edward Fitzgerald and I are deeply disappointed about
    this; we are, however, at this stage,/ ham-strung by the decision
    taken by the lawyers instructed at the inquest, who conceded
    points that the Court of Appeal will not how re-examine.

    3 Raymond Buildings
    Gray's. Iiiii                                                  -• "
    London pci


   9th Itovesjber 1993                                           Alim JonesQC
