                             The City of Liverpool
                              Personnel & Administration Directorate
                             Head o f Committee & Member Services
                             Ken Corns
                             PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                             Tel: 051 -225 2430 Fax: 051 -225 2427




3 June 1994                                Enquiries to: Mr Moneypenny
                                           Direct Line: 051-225-2431
                                           Your Ref:
                                           Our Ref:      MFCDA/CM/BC




To: All Members of the
    Hillsborough Disaster
    Working Party




Dear Sir

You are requested to attend a meeting of the HTT.T.SRQROUGH DISASTER

WORKING PARTY of the Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority

to be held at a.00 P.M. on MONDAY. 6 JUNE. 1994 in Committee Room

"D" in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street, Liverpool.

An agenda for the meeting is attached.

Yours faithfully




Head of Committee andcyv
Member Services




bo /ottoo/mfoda/letter/apptment a------------------------
                    Director o f Personnel & Administration: Derek Griffin
            Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resources;
       Information Technology; Legal Services; Management Support; Public Relations.
                     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY
                                    OF THE

                        POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                                 6th JUNE. 1994

                                    AGENDA

1.     Minutes of Last Meeting
      The proceedings of the last meeting of the Working Party-
      held on 19th October, 1993 are submitted.

2.    Hillsborough Disaster - Matters Arising
      from "Cook Report" Television Programme
       To consider, in the light of the "Cook Report" Television
       Programme broadcast on ITV on 2nd June, 1994 concerning the
       Disaster:-
       (A) for the information of Members a copy of the Report
           submitted to the Working Party in 1992 detailing the
           evidence, some of which was contained in the television
           programme, which was submitted in the Hillsborough
           Families Application to the Attorney General (see
           enclosure); and
       (B) the terms of the following Motion submitted by
           Councillor P. Millea, viz:-
           That in view of the disturbing evidence first disclosed
           by this Working Party in February 1992 and referred to
           in the "Cook Report" television programme concerning
           the circumstances surrounding the deaths of several of
           the victims of the Hillsborough Disaster, and
           particularly in relation to the death there of Kevin
           Williams, this Working Party resolves to:-

           (A) demand that the Attorney General order a fresh and
               scrupulously independent Inquiry to investigate
               this evidence and related matters as soon as
               possible;
           (B)    call on the City's MP's in particular and also any
                 other MP's whose constituents were directly
                 affected by this Disaster, to fully support this
                 demand; and




     al/cttee/hillsborou/agenda/Y     0694
           (C) investigate the possibility of those funds
               remaining in the Hillsborough Disaster Trust Fund
               which was set up by the City Council, being used to
               help finance the fight of the victims families to
               establish the truth of exactly what did happen at
               Hillsborough on April 15th 1989.


3.    Television Coverage of Hillsborough in the
      United States
      To consider a verbal Report concerning the broadcasting on
      satellite and cable television of news coverage by major
      television broadcasters in the United States of
      preparations for the World Cup implying that the
      Hillsborough Disaster was hooligan related.


4.    Hillsborough Project
       To consider any information concerning the progress of the
       "Hillsborough Project" from Edgehill College, Ormskirk.




     al/cttee/hillsborou/agenda/Y   0694
