                                                                2429
                                                      2427



                                                 P&R/CW/LTN
                                                 2nd June,    1992
TO:    the City Treasurer




Dear' S i r ,

Hillsborough Project - Edge Hill College

I enclose for your attention extracts from the proceedings of the
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party held on 15th November, 1992
and the Policy and Resources Committee held on 3rd December, 1992
approving the funding for the edge Hill College - Hillsborough
Project.  This decision was confirmed at the eity Council
meeting held on 11th December, 1991.

I would therefore be most grateful if you would make arrangements
to pay the attached invoice.

Yours faithfully,




Deputy City Solicitor.
 CENTRE FOR STUDIES IN CRIME AND SOCIAL JUSTICE


 TO   :   LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL




 REE,;,.,THE HILLSBOROUGH...PROJECT; APPLICATION FOR. FURTHER FUNDING
 Introduction

 The Hillsborough Project has received two years funding to conduct in-
 depth   research and support work concerning the        aftermath    of
 the Hillsborough Disaster.  In May 1990 the Project produced its First
Report, bringing national acclaim to the work and positive response
 from the bereaved and survivors.  In September 1990 the Project held a
one-day conference attended by emergency planning officers from many
 local authorities. This has been followed by the presentation of the
Project's work to: a Home office/Crown Prosecution/judicial seminar
organised by the Nuffield Foundation; a national conference run by the
Emergency Planning Information Centre;      a regional conference of
clinical psychologists. Further, the Project team has worked closely
with disaster victims' initiatives [Inquest and Disaster Action].
Most importantly, however, has been the continuing work with the
Hillsborough Families Support Group, the Hillsborough Survivors' Group
and many other individuals who contact the workers on a personal
basis.    Over the last twelve months the Project has arranged or been
invited to many meetings with families, several of which have involved
City Councillors and officers. This work has been a vital support to
families. With many agencies withdrawing or reducing support for the
bereaved and survivors the workload of the Project      has increased.
While counselling, advice and personal support have never been part of
our brief it has been impossible to turn people away especially as
their association with the researchers is based on the             close
relationships forged on a daily basis during the inquest period and
since.     Consequently much of our time currently       is spent     in
consultation    with families demonstrating that the       Hillsborough
disaster is very much with us, many matters remaining unsolved.

Current Position

The inquests were scheduled to last five weeks.    In fact they lasted
five months.     If the time from the opening of the mini-inquests is
included   theperiod is closer to a full year. This     long drawn-out
process put back the Project by nine months. There were other 'knock-
on' consequences.   First, the researchers attended the entire inquest
hearing which meant that they were away from home for long periods of
time.   There   was no opportunity to develop other elements of the
Project through this time. Second, the sheer weight and size of the
inquest procedure together with the mass of documentation produced has
set the Project a mammoth task. The legal submissions alone run to
tens of thousands of words. Third, the suffering caused to families
and survivors by the process together with the often contradictory
advice offered by the professionals handling the case has led to
complexities, confusion and additional distress.        Despite  these
pressures the Project is on schedule to produce its Second Report
early in the New Year.   It is expected that it will be substantive,
longer even than the First Report. Its contents will include:

  (i)   The Longer Term Media Coverage andImpact;
 (ii)   The Role of the Police Before, During and After the Disaster;
(iii)   The Function of the Mini-Inquest;
 (iv)   The Inquest;
  (v)   Other Legal Procedures (inc Compensation, Criminal and Civil
        Liability)

Clearly the findings will be controversial and will endorse many
families' feelings that the criminal justice process and the inquest
procedure have worked against them and their best interests.     Put
bluntly, justice has been neglected because the procedures failed to
address the issues.

The Case for Further Funding
Clearly the aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster is not over and
several key issues remain unresolved. On the one hand the legal
processes have not been exhausted and we are working closely with
families    seeking  a judicial   review of    the    inquest, seeking
compensation for secondary trauma [November hearing] and for pre-death
trauma [January]. On the other, we are continuing to provide personal
advice and support to those with whom we have developed close
professional ties. Families pursuing legal action regard our Project
as the sole provider of free legal advice and reference. As the case
drags on, however, it has become clearly evident that there are now
long-term effects of the Disaster which could not have been foreseen.
These    effects are a diverse result of       thefrustrations   and
inadequacies of the legal process and they have created their own
problems in the lives and experiences of families and survivors.

Thus we request a further twelve months funding based on the following
principles:

  (i) That   the legal procedures governing the Hillsborough Disaster
       [Judicial Review; Compensation Cases; Disciplinary Hearings -
       Police] are not concluded and require monitoring.  Increasingly
       families pursuing legal action are turning to the Project for
       advice and support.

 (ii)   That other 'services' available to families and survivors have
         been withdrawn [some social services; Helpline; the legal
         advice through the Steering Group; the Working Party Research
        Officer] or reduced [Social Services specialist team] and our
         'case load' is increasing on a weekly basis.    This includes
         'new' cases.

(iii)   That  the long-term effects of the official responses to the
        Disaster [police; DPP ruling; disciplinary hearings;    inquest
        procedures] need to be further researched and analysed.

 (iv)   That a Third Report, published towards the end of 1992, will be
        necessary to cover the above issues. Such a Report would
        challenge the current professional assumptions that people s
        suffering and illness are caused by a reaction to the Disaster.
        It will consider      the extent to which they arecaused   by   a
        rational reaction to the procedures.

Conclusion

In making this further      application we are mindful of the support
already given by the City Council both to this Project and also to
other key interventions.However, we feel that if we do not     receive
further funding and the Project closes, we will be leaving many of the
families and survivors at a crucial stage in their fight for justice.
The City Council has received national recognition, through    the work
of this   Project, the work of the Working Party and the work of its
Social Services team, for its response to the HillsboroughDisaster.
We want   to continue and to complete that work and ask        for the
Council's full support.'

Financial. Breakdown
Full-time researcher (inc on costs)                15,855
.75 pro rata researcher (inc on costs)             11,891
Secretarial Support                                 4.500
Other costs (telephone, office,                     2.500
             equipment etc)

                                  Total




Profeasor..PhllJScraton
31.10.91
PS/BH
            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                           of the

              Policy and Resources Committee

                    15th November,   19 91




PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
           Councillors N. Chinn, E. Clein,
           A. Jennings, S. Ledwich and
           W. Roberts.




           Apologies for absence were received from
           Councillor W. Edwards.




           Ms. S. Coleman from the "Hillsborough Project"
           at Edgehill College and representatives of
           the Hillsborough Families Support Group were
           also in attendance.




           An apology for absence was also received
           from Mr. A. Doswell of the Liverpool
           Trades Council.




Minutes of Last Meeting

The proceedings of the last meeting of the Working Party
held on 23rd September, 1991 were submitted for the
information of Members.


Meeting of Members of Bereaved Families
with Members of Parliament^

Resolved that the verbal Report of M s . S. Coleman of
Edge Hill College concerning a meeting held between
members of bereaved families and Mr. G. Howarth, M.P.
and Mr. P. Kilfoyle, M.P., be noted.
Meeting of Members of Bereaved Families
and Counsel held in London on 5th November,    1991

Resolved that the verbal Report of M s . S. Coleman of
Edge Hill College concerning a meeting held in London on
5th November, 19 91 between the Members of bereaved
Families and Counsel, be noted.


Request from Bereaved Families
for Further Assistance

The Working Party considered the matter of continuing
requests being received by the City Council from
Members of Bereaved Families and Survivors for advice,
assistance and support.

Resolved that in the light of the continuing requests
for assistance being received the Chair of the Working
Party be authorised to meet with the Acting Director of
Personnel and the Chair of the Personnel Committee with
a view to investigating a method for the Authority to
provide an Officer, preferably with some legal knowledge,
to act on behalf of the Working Party as a point of
contact with bereaved families and survivors and to
report back to the Working Party on any matters which
arise from such meetings.


Edge Hill College - The Hillsborough Project

The Working Party considered an application received
from Edge Hill College for funding for a further
12 months of the "Hillsborough Project" which is currently
being researched at the College.

Resolved that -

(a)   the recommendation of this Working Party to the
      Policy and Resources Committee be that the
      application for further funding, be approved;
      and

(b)   in i t s 1 determination of this matter the Policy
      and Resources Committee also be requested to
      consider as appropriate responses received in
      respect of the request of the Working Party that
      the City Solicitor write to all the relevant
      Members of Parliament and Chief Executives of
      District Councils within the Mersey Region
      seeking contributions to assist this additional
      funding from the other District Councils affected
      by the Disaster.
                   POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                         3rd December, 1991



  PRESENT:   Councillor H. Rimmer, Deputy-Chair, in the Chair.
             Councillors J. Backhouse, G. Ben-Tovim,
             N. Cardwell, P. Clark, Flora Clucas, Rosemary
             Cooper, A. Dean, W. Edwards, Cathy Hancox, Susan
             Hogan, A. Jennings, R. Johnston, Lady Doreen Jones,
             Frances Kidd, G. Knibb, Lesley Mahmood,
             M. McCauley, Marie McGiveron, Sarah Norman,
             W. Owen, I. Scott, Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer,
             W. Snell and M. Storey.



             Councillors Vera Best, M. Bolland, H. Chase,
             N. Chinn, M.B.E., E. Clein, B. Fitzsimons and
             Ann Keenan also attended.



             Apologies for absence were submitted from the Chair
             (Councillor Vicky Roberts) and Councillor Dawn
             Booth.




2. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

 The Committee considered the proceedings of the Hillsborough
 Disaster Working Party of the 15th November, 1991.



 With the permission of the Committee, Mr. P. Scraton, Edge
 Hill College, Mr. P. Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
 Family Support Group and Councillor H. Chase addressed the
 meeting on this matter.



 Motion by the Chair, duly seconded -

 That -

 (a) the proposal in Minute 9 be deferred pending the
     submission of a report by the City Solicitor;




 PR1AAF
    POLICY
                               -   162   -



    (b) the Chair be authorised to submit a recommendation to
        the Council in relation to Minute 10; and

    (c) the remainder of the proceedings be approved.


    Amendment by Councillor M. Storey,
      seconded by Councillor A. Jennings -

    That the proceedings of the Working Party including the
    recommendation that the application from Edge Hill College
    for further funding for a further 12 months be supported
    (Minute 10) be approved.

    During the course of the debate the Amendment was agreed to.
    And on being put as the Substantive Motion and carried it
    was resolved accordingly.


323. Financial Review
     (CT/188/91)

    The Committee considered a Financial Review of the Authority
    in the light of information contained in Report CT/188/91 of
    the City Treasurer.

    Resolved that -

     (1) the Assistant City Estates Surveyor be instructed to
         report to the Legal, Land and Transportation Committee
         on the issue of deemed planning consent for retail
         development on land at Mossway/Altcross Road and that
         Committee be asked to further consider the issue;

     (2) the City Council reaffirms its commitment to collect the
         community charge and rates using all lawful means at its
         disposal, including the controlled use of bailiffs and
         attachments from all income sources, and would draw to
         the attention of all interested parties, the City
         Council's detailed policy for the pursuance of arrears
         which was contained in report CT/108/90 and reported to
         committee in June 1990. This Committee acknowledges the
         serious consequences on future years' bills, and
         resources available for services, that result from both
         the non payment and late payment of community charge and
         rates; an unfair burden is placed upon future bills and
         vital services are denied scarce resources. In turn,
         this places at risk both jobs and services. The City
         Treasurer is instructed to take action to pursue arrears
         as quickly as possible.




    PR1AAF
•EDGfc HILL COLLEGE OF HIGHfcR EDUCATION
■ST. HELENS ROAD
om&kim
LftWeA®MIRE

L39 4QP                  Telephone 0695 575171               Reg 482 B •.:>>!4 2 fa

LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL                                                      TRANSACTION           t INVOICE
CITY SOLICITORS DEPARTMENT
P.O.BOX 88                                                                            NUMBER      s A0000455
HUNICIPAL BUILDINGS
LIVERPOOL                                                                               DATE      s 27-MAY-92
LS9 2DH . ..                        LIV327



               ITEM                              qty                PRICE                  AMOUNT         VATX


AGREED GRANT RE THE                                                                     •J'4/46 ::OU          a* J }'3
HILLSBOROUGH PROJECT        AWARD
PASSED DECEMBER,, 1991


                                                                    NET                34746.00
                                                                    VAT                      0,00
                                                       TOTAL AMOUNT DUE                34746,, 00
