                                         The Cityof Liverpool
                                         Personnel & Administration Directorate
                                         Peter Rhodes, Head o f Law & Committee Services
                                         Solicitor to the Council
                                         PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                         Tel: 0151-225 2404 Fax: 0151-225 2427




                                                                 Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                                                 Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                                                 Your R e f :
                                                                 Our Ref: P&R/CM

To: All Members of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party


16th January 19 9 8


Dear Sir
You are requested to attend a meeting of the HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

WORKING PARTY of the Policy and Resources Committee to be held at

12. 00 P.M. on THURSDAY, 22ND JANUARY, 199 8 in Committee Room B

in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street, Liverpool.


An agenda for the meeting is attached.



Yours faithfully



Principal Committee C l e r k ^




                             Director o f Personnel & Administration: lan Jones
                        A d m i n i s t r a t i o n & C o m m e r c ia l S ervices: H u m a n Resource S ervice;
           I n f o r m a tio n T e c h n o lo g y S ervices; L a w <S C o m m itte e Services; L e g a l Services A g e n c y
                                          1‘ ith lie R e la tio n ';   liil'o rn ia tio n SVn'iVv
          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                          OF THE

              POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                    22ND JANUARY, 1998

                          AGENDA

Minutes of Previous Meeting

The proceedings of the previous meeting of the Working Party
held on 22nd October, 1997 are submitted for the information
of Members.

                      (see enclosure)

Secondment of Solicitor

To consider

(A) a request received by the Chair, from the Hillsborough
Family Support Group for an extension to the period - which
concluded in December - of full time secondment of the
Solicitor to the Working Party, to organise the work
associated with the judicial investigation by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith; and

(B) the present position regarding the contributions premised
by other Councils in the Region towards the cost of the
secondment.

Judicial Investigation - Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

To consider

(A) the present position with regard to the judicial
investigation into the Disaster by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith;
and

(B) correspondence with the Home Secretary regarding the
Scrutiny.

                      (see enclosure)

Memorial - Sheffield Wednesday F.C.

To consider

(A) progress in respect of the attempt by this
Council, with the support of Sheffield City Council,
to persuade Sheffield Wednesday to erect a formal Memorial at:
Hillsborough; and
(B) a further letter which has been received, since the last
meeting, from Bolton Wanderers detailing steps they have
taken to remember the victims of the 194 6 Burnden Park
Disaster.

                    (see enclosures)

Re-introduction of Terracing

To consider any further developments folowing the suggestion
previously made by the Chairman of Manchester United for the
introduction of limited standing areas at football grounds.
                                                                  A
                                                                  -L
*H                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                                  of the

                    Policy and Resources Committee

                           22nd October 1997



*p     PRESENT: Councillor Jack Spriggs, Chair;
                Councillors Eddie Clein, Steve Ellison,
                George Knibb, Peter Millea, Ian Phillips
                and Len Tyrer.



*M   5. Minutes of Previous Meetings

       The proceedings of the previous two meetings of the Working
       Party held on 4th August and 1st October, 1997 were
       submitted for the information of Members.


     6. Secondment of Solicitor

        The Working Party considered a verbal report.concerning the
        present position in relation to the secondment of the
        Solicitor to the Working Party to the Family Support Group
        to assist in presenting submissions to the present judicial
        investigation and in particular:-

        (1)(a) the responses received from Knowsley, Sefton and
               Wirral Councils in Merseyside and also from West
               Lancashire and Halton Councils offering "in
               principle" support to the request made by this
               Council for assistance with the funding of the
               secondment period;

           (b) the response received from Ellesmere Port and Neston
               Council indicating that it would provide £300
               towards the cost of the secondment;

           (c) the preliminary indication of support offered by
               Chester City Council, possibly to the same level as
               Ellesmere Port and Neston

           (d) the lack of a formal response so far from St Helens
               Council; and




      al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/A22109 7
(2)     Minute 6 9 of the meeting of the Special Delegated
        Powers Sub-Committee of the Policy and Resources
        Committee held on 15th October, 1997, which
        authorised the secondment period of the Solicitor to
        continue until 31st December, 1997 and which also
        requested the Head of Law and Committee Services to
        continue to seek contributions from other local
        authorities towards the, cost of the secondment which
        had been identified to be £14,598 for the period up
        to 31st December.

Resolved that:

(A)     the Head of Law and Committee Services, in addition
        to the Councils he has so far contacted, be
        requested to also seek contributions from Lancashire
        and Cheshire County Councils; and

(B)     the Policy and Resources Committee be recommended
        that as it is not yet fully known how many Councils
        will contribute to' the secondment and as the outcome
        of the Disaster Scrutiny will remain unclear until
        December, the Head of Law and Committee Services be
        requested to acknowledge the offers of financial
        assistance so far received and advise such Councils
        that although the City Council does intend to take
        up such offers of support, that it will not be able
        to inform them of the precise sum requested until
        December 1997 or January 1998 when in the light of
        the situation then prevailing the Council will be
        able to make a final and informed decision about the
        individual amounts which each Council will be asked
        to contribute.


Judicial Investigation - Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

The Working Party considered the progess of the judicial
investigation into the Disaster by Lord Justice Stuart -
Smith and in particular:-

 (1)    the belief that the terms of reference of the
        Scrutiny have been revealed to have been drawn too
        narrowly to allow the full facts of the Disaster to
        emerge; and

 (2.)    the remarks of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith upon
         meeting with families on October 6th referring to
         the alleged late arrival of Liverpool supporters
         which appeared to indicate that he had pre-judged
         the outcome of the investigation prior to giving
         proper and impartial consideration to all the
         submitted evidence.

1 /cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/A2210 9 7
Resolved that the Head of Law and Committee Services be
requested to :-
(A)    write to the Home Secretary following consultation
       with the Family Support Group and the Chair and
       Opposition Spokespersons of this Working Party, to
       express, on the basis of the comments made at this
       meeting, the extreme dissatisfaction and concern of
       the City Council with the entire Scrutiny process
       and in particular:-

          (i) the very restricted terms of reference which
              it is now apparent prevents the investigation
              from assessing all the evidence which families
              and the Council believe should be assessed,-
              and

         (ii) the appalling remarks made by Lord Justice
              Stuart-Smith prior to his meeting with
              families at the Albert Dock on October 6th
              which indicated a severe lack of impartiality
              in his appointed role of making an independent
              judicial assessment of all the evidence
              presented.

(B)    write to all Members of Parliament in the Merseyside
       region with a copy of the above letter and a request
       that they also write to the Home Secretary in
       similar terms.


Proposal for Re-introduction of Terracing
at Football Grounds

The Working Party considered the terms of a response to be
made to the suggestion recently made by the Chairman of
Manchester United that his Club would welcome a change in
the law which would allow a limited re-introduction of
standing areas at football grounds.

Resolved that the Head of Law and Committee Services be
requested t o :-

 (A)   write appropriate letters to the Football
        Association, the Minister of Sport and the Football
        Licensing Authority to express the concern of this
        Working Party at any proposals to return to any form
        of terracing; and

 (B)   also write to Liverpool and Everton Football Clubs
        to ascertain their viewpoint on the issue and to
        request if they have not already done so that they
        publicly state their opposition to the proposal.


1 /cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/A2210 97
. Memorial at Sheffield Wednesday
  Football Club
 Resolved that the verbal report concerning the progress of
 attempts which have been made to persuade Sheffield
 Wednesday FC to erect a permanent memorial to the 96
 victims of the Disaster, in the light of letters which have
 been sent to Sheffield City Council and to Bradford City,
 Glasgow Rangers and Bolton Wanderers Football Clubs^and the
 responses so far received from Sheffield City Council and
 Bradford City, be noted.




al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/A221097
                                                                3   s




                           Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                           Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                           Your R e f :
                           Our Ref: P&R/CM

R t . Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
5 0 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT                                14th November,   1997


Dear Mr. Straw

Hillsborough Scrutiny

You will be aware from our previous correspondence, when I
expressed the welcome of Liverpool City Council to your decision
to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to undertake a Scrutiny of
evidence related to the Hillsborough Disaster, that the City
Council, through its Hillsborough Disaster Working Party, has
continuously and unanimously supported the Hillsborough families
throughout their eight year quest for justice.

I have now been requested by a recent meeting of the Working Party
to write to you again to express the full support of this Council
for the comments contained in the letter to you, dated 9th
November, 1997, from Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group. The Council considers that in particular you
should give serious consideration to responding positively to the
requests made in that letter for you to extend the timescale of
the Scrutiny to ensure that all the concerns of the families are
properly and fully investigated and for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
to be allowed to take possession and control of all the
documentation and evidence to ensure their integrity and their
disclosure to all parties.

In endorsing the above requests, the City Council feels that for
you to act upon them would be entirely consistent with the
comments made by you on 3 0th June stating that you were determined
to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and that
you did not reach a conclusion without a full and independent
examination of the evidence. The Council, as I have said, did
support the announcement of the Scrutiny and was particularly re­
assured by your comments, even though its own position at that
time, was that sufficient reasons and sufficient cause for concern
had already been demonstrated to justify the establishment of a
new Inquiry into the Disaster.
You should be aware that Liverpool City Council has now expressed
extreme dissatisfaction with the entire Scrutiny process. There is
a specific concern, I understand being expressed to you by the
Family Support Group, which is again shared by this Council, that
its terms of reference are so narrow that they prevent the
assessment of all the evidence which the families believe, in the
interests of justice, need to be assessed.

Furthermore I have been requested also to place on record the
extreme concern of this Council that the appalling remarks made by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith - a reference to Liverpool fans arriving
late for which he subsequently apologised - prior to his meeting
with families on October 6th, do appear to indicate a severe lack
not only of judgement but more importantly of the impartiality
which should be the most crucial attribute necessary for ensuring
the independence of the judicial assessment he was appointed to
make.

While the City Council will await the outcome of the investigation
with great interest, there is no doubt there is a widespread
feeling, certainly amongst the Members of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party but also throughout the wider Merseyside
community, that the offensive comments made by Mr. Stuart-Smith at
the Albert Dock, indicating at least some pre-judgement of the
issues, may well have demonstrated that, in addition to the other
difficulties discussed above, he personally is not able to provide
the balanced a n d .fully.independent assessment of the evidence to
which the Hillsborough families after all these years are surely
entitled.

I would be most grateful if you would be able to take on board all
of the above comments in considering your response to the letter
from Mr. Hicks and in determining the future progress of the
Scrutiny.


Yours sincerely



Colin Moneypenny
Committee Clerk to the Hillsborough.
Disaster Working Party.
                                               Q U E E N A N N E ’ S GAT E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT

                                                                                0 4   O Fn




Colin Moneypenney Esq
Clerk to the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party
Liverpool City Council
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool
L69 2DH




Thank you for your letter of 14 November on behalf of Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party in support of the Family Support Group's request for the
timescale of the scrutiny to be extended.

Although I indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we hoped it would be
possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale is
ultimately a matter for the Judge to decide. I have told Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith that if he decides that more time is needed to complete his work, this
would certainly be within his discretion. However, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
has indicated to me that he expects to keep to his original timescale for
completion of the report.

Trevor Hick's letter expressed concern about access to information held by the
South Yorkshire Police. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also assured me that he
has been given full access to the material held by the force and that the force
has co-operated throughout his scrutiny. From what I have been told by the
Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith it
appears that, for the purposes of the scrutiny, all the material which should be
available for examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been available to him,
and that the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully the issues raised by the
Family Support Group and others.

 The terms of reference which I have given Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the
 Scrutiny vvTH allow him to establish conclusively whether any material evidence
 w as overlooked in the consideration of the causes of the disaster or the
consideration of criminal or other proceedings. The Judge will also be able to
recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest. His
terms of reference are, therefore, very wide indeed and I am confident that they
will allow him to carry out a full scrutiny of the evidence which has been
submitted by the families and others.

As you know, the Judge spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families of
those who died and listening to their concerns. He has said that he found these
meetings fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to write his report.
I do, of course, understand the distress caused by the Judge's comment to
Mr Phil Hammond. The Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this
remark, which he made off-the-cuff and without any intention to offend or for it
to be taken seriously. He has made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not
the subject of the Scrutiny.

I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a thorough report in
which the families and the public can have confidence. As I have indicated
before, I will make public the advice given by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his
report, and will take whatever action is needed if he suggests material evidence
about the disaster has been overlooked.




                                                             /




                                   JACK STRAW
    Telephone:    (0114)273 4000


           Fax:   (0114)273 6844


Your reference:


 Our reference:
                           GP/262/WJD                                            C    I      T         Y
                                                                                 C O U N C I L

          Date:            28th October, 1997


                                                                                 Chief Executive
            Chief Executive,
                                                ;    *V          v-'   11   /    R. W. Kerslake,   b s c , ip f a
            Liverpool city Council,             .v        '4 '         ^    S.

            Municipal Buildings,                                                 Town Hall
                                                                                 Sheffield
            Dale Street,
                                                                                 S1 2HH
            Liverpool,
            L69 2DA

             Dear Sir,                               ....

             Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Proposed Memorial

             I refer to previous correspondence concerning your request for the City
             Council to raise with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club the possibility of
             opening discussions between the Hillsborough Families Support Group and the
             Club to provide a memorial at the Hillsborough Stadium in respect of the
             Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.

             I have raised your request formally with the Club.

             I now write to inform you that your letter will be considered by the full
             Board of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited when they meet in
             December of this year.

             The Club are to contact me again after their meeting and I will therefore
             write to you when I have some further information.

             Yours faithfully




             Chief Executive




             cc             Mr. G. H. MacKrell, Company Secretary
                            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
                            Hillsborough
                            Sheffield
                            S6 1SW




             wjd/letter/lpool28.10/hr
Colin Moneypenny Esq.,
Personnel & Administration
                Directorate
City of Liverpool
PO Box 88                                                        Bolton W anderers
Municipal Buildings                                                   Football
                                                                          &
Dale Street
                                                                 Athletic Company
Liverpool L69 2DH       17th November 1997                            Limited

Dear Mr Moneypenny,

Apologies for not replying earlier to your
letter of October 7th concerning a Disaster                               President.
Memorial.         I have telephoned a couple of                 N at Lofthouse, O.B.E.

times without success.
The Burnden Park Disaster of March 1946 was
initially marked purely by a relief fund                                 C h a irm a n :
opened by the Mayor of Bolton.                 I think           G o rd o n Hargreaves
there was so much to be done generally at
that time (the war had just ended) that no
thought was given to a permanent memorial.
                                                                Ch ie f Executive/Secretary-.
However in the early 1990’s, following the                             Des McBain
construction of a Normid Superstore on the
spot where 33 people lost their lives, a
m<amorial plaque was unveiled by Club
                                                                         Manager.
President Nat Lofthouse.                 This plaque was
                                                                       C olin T o d d
fixed to the Superstore wall as close to
the actual spot as possible.                 The plaque is
now in safe keeping while we decide whether
to re-erect it after the Burnden site is                       G r o u n d & Registered Office:
                                                                   R eeb ok S tadium
re-developed or find a place for it here at
                                                                      B urn den Way
The Reebok Stadium.
                                                                          Lostock
I should add that in 1996, the 50th                                       Bolton
anniversary, we organised a private service                              B L66IW
of remembrance on the pitch at Burnden with
the relatives of those who died.                 The                   Telephone:
following day a public service was held in                           (01204)673673

the Parish Church attended by players,
                                                                         Fax No:
staff, management and directors as well as
                                                                     (01204)673773
civic leaders, representatives of fire,
police and ambulance services and the                                     e-mail:
public of Bolton.                                              adm in@ bw fc.u-net.com
The Disaster will never be allowed to be
forgotten in this part of Lancashire.                                  W eb page:
Good ^J ja e k —jr r r -^ o u r efforts,                     http://w w w .bo ltonw fc.co .uk/

Youns sincerelv.



Public Relations Officer                                         R ecb ok
                                                                 Stadium

                                                                 V.A.T. RigisfraJtou No.
                                                                       145 0299 75
                                                               Company Registration No.
                                                                  43026 England
