             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                            of the
               Policy and Resources Committee

                       16th June, 1995



  PRESENT: Councillor J. Spriggs, Chair;
           Councillors W. Craig, S. Ellison, G. Knibb,
           P. Millea, Len Tyrer and P. Tyrrell.


  Hillsborough Memorial Service

  Resolved that the correspondence received by the Working
  Party from the Premier League and Sky Television in
  response to requests made to ensure that in future
  Liverpool F.C. fixtures are not arranged at the same time
  as the Hillsborough Memorial Service, be noted.


  Hillsborough Disaster Statement

  The Working Party considered -

  (a) a letter sent to the Editor of the Liverpool Echo
      criticising their decision not to publicise the
      contents of the Joint Hillsborough Statement; and

  (b) the publication of the Statement by Liverpool F.C. in
      its Matchday Programme on April 17th, 1995.

  Resolved that the Head of Committee and Member Services be
  requested to write to Nottingham Forest Football Club to
  request that they also publish the Statement in their
  Matchday Programme.


  Comments of Tottenham Hotspur
  Manager re; Hillsborough

  Resolved that the contents of correspondence with Mr. Gerry
  Francis, Manager of Tottenham Hotspur F.C. following his
  reported comments about Hillsborough prior to the F.A. Cup
  Semi-Final between Tottenham and Everton, be noted.




al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/Y1606 95
4.     South Yorkshire Police Compensation Claim
       Resolved that the unsuccessful outcome of the claims made
       by certain South Yorkshire Police Officers in the High
       Court for compensation for trauma suffered as a result of
       their involvement in the Disaster, be noted.

5.     Hillsborough Trust Memorial Bursaries
       (DE/57/95)

       The Working Party considered matters in relation to the
       donation from the trustees of the Disaster Appeal of
       £75,000 for the provision of educational bursaries to
       Merseyside Students in the light of Report DE/57/95 of the
       Director of Education which was submitted to the Education
       Client Support Sub-Committee on 21st March, 1995.
       Resolved that -

       (A)    in view of the limited funds available for bursaries
             the appropriate Officers of the Working Party and of
             the Education Department be requested to meet to
             determine a mutually satisfactory selection process
             which should include criteria which do not discriminate
             against those who wish to pursue part time educational
             courses and which give priority to requests for
             assistance from those, in particular from bereaved
             families and survivors, who were directly affected by
             the Disaster and who wish to pursue courses which have
             a fundamental link to the core nature of the Disaster;
             and

       (B)    the Officers of the Working Party also be requested at
             the appropriate time to ascertain the present status of
             the fund and to again examine the manner in which the
             Trust Fund was established, its Terms of Reference and
             its level of accountability with a view to the Working
             Party considering the issues raised and the Council, if
             appropriate, making representations regarding the
             nature and management of similar future Funds which may
             be established.


6.     Proposed Visit of Sir Bernard Ingham

      Resolved that the action of Bootle Chamber of Commerce in
      withdrawing the invitation made to Sir Bernard Ingham to
      speak at an Awards Ceremony in the light of representations
      made to them by Liverpool and Sefton Councils regarding the
      comments of Mr. Ingham about the Hillsborough Disaster, be
      noted and welcomed.




     al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/Y160695
  Hillsborough Project

  The Working Party considered the receipt of the draft
  second Report of the "Hillsborough Project" entitled "No
  Last Rights" which has been prepared on behalf of the
  Council by Edgehill College, Ormskirk.

  Resolved that -

  (A) the co-authors of the Report be requested to:-

        (i) give consideration to acting upon the comments of
            families and survivors with regard to the draft;
       (ii) undertake to act upon the wishes of Mrs. Anne
            Williams with regard to the section of the Report
            which contains reference to her son Kevin;

  (B) the Disaster Research Consultant liaise as a matter of
      urgency with the families involved in the Judicial
      Review process with a view to the inclusion in the
      Report of a detailed analysis of this process; and

  (C) the intention to launch the final version of the Report
      in the week commencing 10th July be placed on record
      and if possible this launch be timed to coincide with
      the July meeting of the Working Party.




al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/Y1606 95
