APPLICATION FOR RESEARCH FUNDING
PROJECT : "HILLSBOROUGH AND AFTER : THE LIVERPOOL EXPERIENCE"


                       Report of the City Solicitor
            (Officer Contact : Andrew PinfoTel. No. 225-2334)

1.   Following the Hillsborough disaster E^. Phil Scraton, Principal
Lecturer in Criminology and Head of the Centre for Studies in Crime and
Social Justice at Edge Hill College, Ormskirk, approached the Leader of
the City Council with a proposal for a research project to be funded by
Edge Hill College and the City Council.

2.   The Chair of the Hillsborough Working Party and the Chair of
Finance and Strategy met with Dr. Scraton to discuss the proposed project.
At that meeting Dr. Scraton emphasised that:-

       (i) the Edge Hill Centre has established itself as a basis for
           advanced critical research into soccer-related issues
           including crowd behaviour, policing, financing and safety;

      (ii) his objective is to place the events at Hillsborough into
           their long-term historical, social and economic contexts;

     (iii) that the negative reputation of Merseyside in the media and
           national politics contributed to the disaster and its
           aftermath;

      (iv) also, having published extensively, the work at Edge Hill
           on criminal justice processes, official inquiries and
           controversial deaths provides the project with the capacity,
           facilities and resources to monitor the offical inquiries
           and media coverage.

3.   The basis for the research proposal is as follows:

     Hillsborough is the most serious tragedy in terms of loss of life/
injury, to have occurred within 'organised leisure' in contemporary Britain
It is the focus of world attention, projection and opinion. Within a few
days of the two inquiries being established there was a general concern in
Liverpool, shared by local politicians and political/academic commentators,
that the formal processes would neither have the capacity or the resources
to cover the broader issues relating to the Hillsborough Tragedy. This was
compounded in many accounts by a purposeful emphasis on Liverpool's 'bad
reputation' and the'violence' of its people. As with the events during
the Toxteth disturbances (1981; 1985) and Heysel there was an immediate
sense of 'isolation' within the City. Clearly the sequence of events in
the first two weeks after Hillsborough emphasises this problem for people
and it became apparent that some would not give evidence to the inquiry
team. The Hillsborough Working Party's remit to assist, encourage and
organise facilities for people to give evidence has responded to this
problem. The Working Party's focus on the events around Hillsborough
will help to construct a broader picture, including media and governmental
reaction to the disaster. The project will be more extensive in its
coverage of personal accounts than either of the official inquiries.
                                 -   2   -




4.   The research project would and will cover issues more broadly
defined than those within the remit of the Working Party. Apart from
taking in-depth accounts of the post-Hillsborough progression of events
within the City the main objectives of the project will be to:

       (i) consider the background and impact of 'hooligan hysteria'
           and its emphasis on controlling football supporters
           through police policies and practices;

      (ii) examine the significance of prejudiced attitudes held by central
           government and the authorities concerning Merseyside's
           negative reputation and the control of Merseyside supporters;

     (iii) monitor all Inquiries into Hillsborough, providing a full
           evaluation of the adequacy of the Inquiries, and their
           selective use of evidence; and

      (iv) also, inquire into events related to Hillsborough which will not
           be covered by the official investigations (treatment of relatives
           by the authorities; intrusive journalism; impact on the Social
           Services, etc.).

5.   The research project intends to work alongside the Working Party to
place this full range of material within the longer term historical,
political and economic developments of soccer and its recent emphasis on
control and regulation - both from the official bodieswithin the sport
and from those with responsibility for policing it. The recentprojects
completed, published and to be published from the Edge Hill centre
demonstrate their expertise in the fields of, criminal/civil justice,
police powers and accountability, soccer and media research. It is envisaged
that the project will take approximately 12 months to complete from its
inception. Dr. Scraton highlighted the academic independence of his
research proposal and the Chair of the Working Party identified the brief
of the Working Party's Research Officer who would liaise closely with
Dr.'Seraton to develop a comprehensive coverage of Hillsborough and related
issues.

6.   In order to develop the project the costings are estimated as follows:

     Staffing:

     Research Assistant (IB Scale) inc. all 'on costs'            £13,500
     Research Assistant (IB Scale) inc. all 'on costs'            £13,500
     Project Secretary (Scale 1/2) inc. all 'on costs'            £ 6,500

     Project expenses:

     Stationery/mailing etc.                                         £300
     Purchase of Reports etc.                                        £250
     Travel (^beffield/London)                                       £600
     Discs/D a e Programme                                           £250


                                                                  £34,900
                                 -   3   -




Other expenses carried by the    Centre': Project Director's salary;
Capital equipment (inc. word processor, D^Base etc.,); library searches;
consultancies; office and telephone. This would be worth approximately
£25,000 if fully costed.

7.   The College have requested that a grant of £34,900 be made available
to help finance the project.

8.   There is no budgetary provision for the proposal.
