                              The City of Liverpool
                               Personnel & Administration Directorate
                              H ead o f Committee & M em ber Services

                              Ken Corns
                              PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                              Tel: 051 -225 2430 Fax: 051 -225 2427




3 June 1994                                 Enquiries to: Mr Moneypenny
                                            Direct Line: 051-225-2431
                                            Your Ref:
                                            Our Ref:      MFCDA/CM/BC




To: All Members of the
    Hillsborough Disaster
    Working Party




Dear Sir

You are requested to attend a meeting of the                             h t t .t .fi BOROUGH   DISASTER

WORKING PARTY of the Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority

to be held at 2L.00 P.M. on MONDAY. 6 JURE. 1994 in Committee Room

"D" in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street, Liverpool.

An agenda for the meeting is attached.

Yours faithfully




Head of Committee a n d c>v
Member Services




bo/ottoe/mfoda /-l-e%-t og/appfemonfeg------------------------
                    Director o f Personnel & Administration: Derek Griffin
             Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resources;
        Information Technology; Legal Services; Management Support; Public Relations.
                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY
                               OF THE
                    POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE
                            6th JUNE. 1994
                               AGENDA
 Minutes of Last Meeting
 The proceedings of the last meeting of the Working Party
 held on 19th October, 1993 are submitted.


 Hillsborough Disaster - Matters Arising
 from "Cook Report" Television Programme
 To consider, in the light of the "Cook Report" Television
 Programme broadcast on ITV on 2nd June, 1994 concerning the
 Disaster:-

  (A) for the information of Members a copy of the Report
      submitted to the Working Party in 1992 detailing the
      evidence, some of which was contained in the television
      programme, which was submitted in the Hillsborough
      Families Application to the Attorney General (see
      enclosure); and

  (B) the terms of the following Motion submitted by
      Councillor P. Millea, viz:-

     That in view of the disturbing evidence first disclosed
     by this Working Party in February 1992 and referred to
     in the "Cook Report" television programme concerning
     the circumstances surrounding the deaths of several of
     the victims of the Hillsborough Disaster, and
     particularly in relation to the death there of Kevin
     Williams, this Working Party resolves to:-

      (A) demand that the Attorney General order a fresh and
          scrupulously independent Inquiry to investigate
          this evidence and related matters as soon as
          possible;

      (B)    call on the City's MP's in particular and also any
            other MP's whose constituents were directly
            affected by this Disaster, to fully support this
            demand; and




al/cttee/hillsborou/agenda/Y     0694
      (C) investigate the possibility of those funds
          remaining in the Hillsborough Disaster Trust Fund
          which was set up by the City Council, being used to
          help finance the fight of the victims families to
          establish the truth of exactly what did happen at
          Hillsborough on April 15th 1989.


  Television Coverage of Hillsborough in the
  United States
  To consider a verbal Report concerning the broadcasting on
  satellite and cable television of news coverage by major
  television broadcasters in the United States of
  preparations for the World Cup implying that the
  Hillsborough Disaster was hooligan related.


  Hillsborough Project
  To consider any information concerning the progress of the
  "Hillsborough Project" from Edgehill College, Ormskirk.




al/cttee/hillsborou/agenda/Y   0694
                                                                  1
*H                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                                  of the

                     Policy and Resources Committee

                           19th October, 1993



*P     PRESENT: Councillor J. Spriggs, Chair;
                Councillors C. Curry, F. Hegarty, P. Millea and
                K. Noon.



*N              Apologies for absence were received from
                Councillor S. Ellison.



     1* Minutes of Last Meeting

        The proceedings of the last meeting of the Working Party
        held on 26th April, 1993 were submitted for the information
        of Members.


     2• Hillsborough Project - Edge Hill College

       The Working Party considered the progress of the
       Hillsborough Project which is being undertaken at Edge Hill
       College, Ormskirk with Council funding in the light of:-

        (A) a letter received from Dr. P. Scraton, the Director of
            the Project, following the previous meeting of the
            Working Party dated 20th May, 1993 and detailing the
            progress at that stage of the Project;

        (B) a verbal Report of Dr. Scraton explaining that it is
            the intention to publish the 80,000 word second Report
            of the Project soon after the conclusion of the
            Judicial Review Hearing and also informing Members of
            the nature and contents of the second Report;

        (C) the comments of Ms. S. Coleman who is a co-author of
            the Project and a former employee of the College and
            who as a result of her involvement with the Project has
            been acting for a considerable time in an unpaid
            capacity on behalf of the Council in assisting the
            Liaison Officer on Hillsborough related matters and in
            particular in acting as joint co-ordinator of all work
            concerned with the successful application made by six
            families for a Judicial Review of the Inquest verdicts


     al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Yl91093
         and of the impending hearing of the Judicial Review in
         November.

  Resolved that -

   (1) the letter and Report of Professor Scraton be noted;

   (2) Edgehill College be requested to provide as soon as
       possible a financial statement which details how the
       finance which has been provided by the City Council as
       funding for the Project has been allocated; and

   (3) the Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons of
       the Policy and Resources Committee be requested to
       consider as a matter of urgency and if possible prior
       to the Hearing of the Judicial Review in November the
       question of recognition of the services which have been
       performed and expenses which have been incurred by Ms.
       Coleman in providing essential assistance to the
       Liaison Officer in Hillsborough matters.


3. Hillsborough Disaster Trust Fund

  The Working Party considered a verbal Report concerning the
  confirmation which is awaited from the Hillsborough
  Disaster Trust Fund Manager that financial assistance which
  has been requested from the Trust Fund with regard to
  travelling and subsistence expenses to be incurred by
  families attending the Judicial Review Hearing in London in
  November will be made available.

   Resolved that the Report be noted and the Liaison Officer
   inform the Chair of the outcome of the matter.


4. Judicial Review - Hearing

  The Working Party considered a verbal report of the Liaison
  Officer concerning the current situation with regard to the
  Hearing of the Judicial Review of the Inquest verdicts
  which is to take place in London on 1st, 2nd and 3rd
  November, 1993.

  Resolved that -

   (A)   the Report be noted; and

   (B)    the Committee Clerk to the Working Party request the
         Head of Legal Services, on behalf of the Working Party,
         that in order to ensure that the highest level of
         priority is attached to obtaining a favourable
         determination of the Judicial Review, he ensure that
         the Liaison Officer is provided with the appropriate


al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Yl91093
      assistance to enable her to perform the role of co­
      ordinator in the period leading up to the Judicial
      Review Hearing.




al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Yl91093
                                                                           I.
HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY
HILLSBOROUGH FAMILIES' APPLICATION
TO ATTORNEY GENERAL

Report of Ann Adlington (Liaison Officer), and Sheila Coleman (Researcher
Hillsborough Project) in consultation with and the approval of Mrs.
Williams.’



1.   Members are aware that a number of families assisted by
an eminent barrister from London, are in the process of apply­
ing to the Attorney General for him to exercise his fiat and
order the High Court to scrutinise the Inquest proceedings.
The High Court may then order a new inquest. The Attorney
General will exercise such fiat if satisfied that an inquest
has been held, and by reason of fraud, rejection of evidence,
irregularity of proceedings, insufficiency of inquiry, the
discovery of new facts, evidence or otherwise, it is necessary
or desirable in the interests of justice that another inquest
should be held.

2.   The purpose of this Report is to inform members of an
important development which the families' barrister has described
as "a very significant development which gives good grounds for
the Attorney General to grant his fiat because it indicates a
suppression of evidence".

3.   At this stage members should note that although the latest
development relates to only one family, it does strengthen the
case of the families as a whole.  Each of the families involved
in the Application to the Attorney General, themselves have
legitimate grievances. This Report, therefore, in no way demeans
those grievances.

4.   Recent developments centre on the death of Kevin Daniel
Williams who died at Hillsborough at the age of 15 years.

5.    Members will recall that the mini-inquests into all those
who lost their lives at Hillsborough began on 18th April, 1990.
At the start of the mini-inquests the Coroner emphasised that
the purpose of such inquests was to ascertain 'who' the deceased
were,.and |when' and 'where' they had died. He ruled that no
controversial questions could be asked because of the pending
investigation by the DPP as to whether or not criminal proceedings
ought to be brought. The guestion as to'how' the deceased died would be dealt with
at tfte resumed inquests which would-be held after the DPP had concluded his investigatia
6.    The mini-inquest into Kevin Daniel Williams was held on
2nd May, 1990.       When Kevin's parents arrived at the inquest venue
they were shown into a small room.          Somebody present in the room
took hold of Mrs. Williams' hand and told her that when Kevin had
been placed in the gymnasium,a special constable from South
Yorkshire Police who was with Kevin, had heard him say one word -
"Mum". Mrs. Williams was extremely distressed by this revelation
and asked where this special constable (Witness 'A') was as she
wanted to talk to her. She was told that Witness 'A' was not
present that day.
7. The mini-inquest into Kevin then coitunenced.
Understandably Kevin's parents do not recall much of what was
said at Kevin's mini-inquest due to their state of distress.
They remember something being said about body twitches.  It later
transpired that a Witness 'B' had tried to resuscitate Kevin.

8.   At the conclusion of Kevin's mini-inquest Mrs. Williams
approached the West Midlands Police Officer who, during the
mini-inquest, had read out a summary of Kevin's movements
prior to death together with certain details of statements
made by witnesses.  She asked the officer for the time that
Kevin had died. The officer replied that he did not know.
She also asked for transcripts of the hearing and was told
that these would be forwarded.

9.   The following day 3rd May, 1990, Mr. and Mrs. Williams
were visited at their home by an officer from the West Midlands
Police Force. The officer stated that he had visited Witness 'B'
who had now changed his statement as he realised that he must
have been mistaken. He said that since Witness 'B' made his
first statement a year ago he had been on a medical course.
Witness 'B' was now saying that there was no vomit near to
Kevin, that it could have been mucous. Witness 'B' was also
saying that Kevin wasn't convulsing when he attended him,that
it must have been body twitches, and that he must have been
mistaken about the pulse in Kevin's neck. The police officer
told Kevin's parents that it would be better if the family did
not speak to Witness 'B' as he did not wish to speak to them.
He stated that Witness 'A1 was still sticking to her original
statement but that she was young and inexperienced and that she
had undergone a traumatic experience.

     The officer then went on to inform Kevin's parents that
another inquest would be held into Kevin's death the following
day, Friday, 4th May.    Mrs. Williams stated that she wouldn't
go back to Sheffield. The officer told Kevin's parents not to
worry as the purpose of the second inquest was to convince the
jury that Kevin either could not have spoken or would not have
been alive.   (Mrs. Williams is unsure as to which of these two
reasons was stated as the purpose of the second inquest).
According to Mrs. Williams the police at this stage had convinced
her that Kevin could not have spoken.

10. During the next few months Mrs. Williams states that the
family were in a world of their own. They were too ill to attend
the resumed inquests.



                                1 Throughout this stressful period
Mrs. Williams knew deep down that Kevin would have tried to call
her name.

11.   In the meantime, Mrs. Williams had asked her solicitor a
number of times for a copy of the transcripts relating to Kevin's
inquest. These were not supplied.    Eventually in September, 1991,
she contacted Phil Hammond of the Hillsborough Family Support Group
who obtained a copy of the transcripts for her. Certain other
families directed Mrs. Williams to the Liaison Officer for the
Hillsborough Working Party, and Sheila Coleman, researcher on
the Hillsborough Project at Edge Hill College. Both have since
worked very closely with Mr. and Mrs. Williams.

12. On reading the inquest transcripts relating to ^2nd May, 1990l
the following evidence emerged:- Kevin's friend who had travelled
with him to the ground lost sight of Kevin immediately after the
first surge in enclosure 3. Shortly before 3.32 Witness 'B' saw
Kevin lying on the pitch near to the Spion Kop end of the ground.
Witness 'B' stated that Kevin was having convulsions. Witness 'B'
on seeing Kevin went on to the pitch where he gave mouth to mouth
rescuscitation and an ambulanceman carried out cardiac massage.
They were later joined by an ambulancewoman who took over from
Witness 'B'. After a short time the St. Johh's Ambulanceman
stated that Kevin was dead. Witness 'B' then left the scene.
Some time later Witness 'A' assisted in carrying Kevin from the
pitch to the temporary mortuary.  She claimed that when they
reached the mortuary he stopped breathing.  She then gave him
mouth to mouth resuscitation and did some heart massage, after
which he opened his eyes, said the word "Mum" and then died.
At 4.06 p.m. Kevin was certified dead by a Dr. Cupen.

     A medical expert stated in his evidence that Kevin died of
traumatic asphyxia. His case was one of the worst of those he
dealt with from the Hillsborough incident.  In his opinion Kevin
would have fallen unconscious within 3 to 5 seconds of being
crushed.  He stated that persons suffering from asphyxia can
have fits. He was not of the view, however, as Witness 'A' had
suggested, that Kevin could have spoken. The autopsy showed
that Kevin had four fractures of his voice box and irreversible
brain damage, both of which he believed, would on their own
have prohibited communication.  Any sound that might have emerged
he put down to the expulsion of air from Kevin's stomach but
stated that this would not explain the opening of Kevin's eyes.
He believed that because of the seriousness of Kevin's case,
he would have suffered irrecoverable brain damage and brain
death within 3 to 6 minutes.

     The Coroner commented that he did not wish to run Witness 'A'
down "because she had a very hard day but it is right she was
obviously from   her statements very distressed?"The West Midlands
Police Officer   presenting the evidence replied that he had
interviewed Witness 'A' twice "and she was particularly upset as
indeed many people were but it affected her particularly badly
the events of that day".

     Some visual evidence was then produced and the inquest into
Kevin was then   adjourned to a date to be fixed.

13. The events of the 3rd May, 1990 have been set out in
paragraph 9 above.

14. The transcripts relating to 4th May, 1990 show that the
Coroner adduced further evidence in relation to Kevin's death.
The Coroner stated that after the hearing on 2nd May, 1990 his
"attention was drawn by some of my legal colleagues . . .
privately first". He stated that the point which they were
bringing to his attention was that one of the witnesses appeared
to say that when he came to Kevin at the Spion Kop end that Kevin
was having convulsions and that (he) the witness could feel
a pulse.   (N.B. This was the first reference to a pulse
being felt). He stated that this apparently was happening
after 15.32; the question was, therefore, What on earth
was going on?".

     The following further evidence which was obviously
available on 2nd May, 1990 was put before the jury:-
When Witness 'B' went to assist Kevin who was convulsing he
felt a pulse. Witness 'B' referred to Kevin vomiting and
being sick. Witness 'B' and an ambulanceman together tried
to revive Kevin for a total of 13 minutes. Whilst Witness 'B'
was attempting to resuscitate Kevin he observed an ambulance
entering the stadium. He asked the St. John's Ambulance
colleague who was assisting him to stop the ambulance as he was
considering utilising it. During resuscitation efforts he
noticed Kevin's face going grey and withdrawn.

     The West Midlands Police Officer then confirmed that he
had visited Witness 'B' the previous day. He stated that
Witness 'B' on reflection thought that the word "convulsions"
was not applicable, that twitching was a more appropriate term
to describe Kevin's condition and that if he had seen any part
of the body move, it was the head. He reported that Witness 'B'
said that he may well have been mistaken about feeling a pulse.
He added that, in contrast to his original statement, he could
no longer say that he definitely saw Kevin's skin colour change
from normal to grey; nor did he now think Kevin had vomited,
but that the fluid he saw coming from Kevin's mouth might have
been spittle or phlegm. Witness 'B' had confirmed that he
attempted to resuscitate Kevin   for a period of time of between
10 and 15 minutes and that the   ambulance he saw was definitely
entering the stadium and not exiting.

     In his further evidence the medical expert in effect
stated that Kevin was brain-dead by the time Witness 'B' got to
him.

     A further medical expert was of the view that Kevin was
probably dead before he was even removed from enclosure 3, in
the sense that he was brain-dead and was going to die. He
also thought it conceivable that his heart continued to operate
for a time as did his peripheral nervous system. But after
Kevin had suffered brain death   the only way to keep him alive
would have been by artificial means.

     The mini-inquest into Kevin then concluded.  It is important
to note that Kevin's mini-inquest was the last to be held.  The
mini-inquests were then adjourned pending the outcome of the DPP's
investigation.
15. On reading the transcripts Mrs. Williams was confused and
concerned. The matters causing her particular anxiety are
as follows

    The Coroner concluding Kevin's mini-inquest on 2nd May
when it later transpired that certain matters had not been put
before the jury in particular the fact that Witness  'B'
had felt a pulse and that he had made attempts to stop an
ambulance as he wanted to use it. His attempts were apparently
unsuccessful. Witness 'B' apparently changing his statement
overnight more than a year after the event when he made his first
statement approximately a fortnight after the disaster at a time
when his recollection must have been more accurate.

    The fact that neither Witness 'A' nor Witness 'B' were
called to give verbal evidence to the jury.

    On the 2nd May 1990 the medical expert referred to Kevin
have 3 small scratches on his neck. On 4th May, 1990 this expert
stated that Kevin had 3 very large scratches on his neck. This
medical expert on the 4th May, 1990 also admitted to "having a
word" with Witness 'B' as he wanted to be sure that he understood
this witnesses evidence personally.

16. Mrs. Williams was then further alarmed by an article in the
British Medical Journal which states that 9 of the injured who
arrived at hospital after the Hillsborough tragedy were
convulsing upon admission. A further 6 were confused upon
arrival and then began having convulsions.  It is known that
some of these people survived with no long term physical effects.

     In the light of all the documentation Mr. and Mrs. Williams
feel that Kevin was alive for some time after 3.32 and that he
may have been saved had he been taken to hospital promptly.
The above concerns will form part of the families application to the Attorney General
17. Because of all the uncertainty surrounding Kevin's death
attempts have been made to obtain copies of the statements made
by Witness 'A' and Witness 'B'. These were eventually received
by Mrs. Williams on 19th February last.

    There are some very disturbing points made in the statements
of Witness 'B'. Mrs. Williams may report verbally to the Working
Party on these points.

     In relation to Witness 'A' she made her first atement on 8th
May, 1989. This statement refers to her carrying Kevin to the
gymnasium which was used as a temporary mortuary. Kevin stopped
breathing so Witness 'A' gave him the kiss of life and heart
massage. He started breathing and opened his eyes, his only
word was 'mum' and then he died.

    Witness 'A' had also made a further statement on 17th March,
1990. In this statement she says that when Kevin was taken to
the gymnasium she didn't know what to do. She didn't want to
believe the boy was dead.  She didn't know if he was dead or not
but she decided that she had got to attempt to revive him. She
stated to give him mouth to mouth but somebody touched her on the
shoulder and told her Kevin was dead.          She states that by this
time her head was gone.

18. At the same time as efforts were being made to secure copies
of the witness statements, attempts were made to contact
Witness 1A 1.

    Mrs. Williams received a phone call from Witness 'A' on 20th
February 1992 which culminated in a meeting between the two at
Mrs. Williams' home on 22nd February 1992. It transpired at that
meeting that Witness 'A' still sticks by the contents of her
first statement made on 8th May, 1989, which incidentally was
made up from notes which she made in her pocketbook immediately
after the disaster.  She explained that her later statement
dated 17th March, 1990 was compiled by an officer from the West
Midlands Police Force who visited her at her home. This officer
tried to convince Witness 'A' that her original statement was
untrue. Witness 'A' signed the statement prepared by this
officer without reading it. She was unable to read it due to
the state of distress brought on by the officer's behaviour.
She signed the statement because of the pressure exerted by
the officer and because she wanted to put Hillsborough behind
her.

    Witness 'A' has now signed a statement, in the presence of
a solicitor, confirming the truth of her original statement dated
8th May, 1989, and explaining the circumstances relating to the
compilation of the later statement dated 17th March 1990.

    As stated in paragraph 2 the families' barrister has stated
that this latest development indicates a suppression of evidence.

19.   Members are asked to consider the contents of this Report.
