                 From: The Right Hon. David Hunt,         M.P.




                          H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                              L O N D O N SW1A OAA


10 February 1997




Further to my letter of 23 December I enclose the reply I have received from
Michael Howard, the Home Secretary, following the points I raised on your behalf.
I hope this is helpful.




Colin Moneyper Esq
Committee Cler]
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
City of Liverpool
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool L69 2DH
                                                Q U E E N A N N E ’ S GATE L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT




The Rt Hon David Hunt MBE MP                     Our Ref:       P W /9 7 5 / 2 1 8 0 /4
House of Commons                                                PO 5 0 1 /9 7
LONDON
SW 1A0AA
                                                                 - 3 FEB 1097




Thank you for your letter of 2 3 December, enclosing one from Liverpool Council
about the tragic events at Hillsborough.

As you will be aware, I have undertaken to consider carefully the points which
w ere made in the programme "Hillsborough", and the representations which have
been made by the bereaved families and by others. I will not take the decision to
reopen the inquiry lightly but will need to be convinced that it is in the public
interest to do so and that it will stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of w h at happened on that terrible day.

In coming to my decision, I will consider w hether there is any new evidence. I will
also consider whether that evidence appears to be of such significance that had it
been put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide a detailed
report of all the points raised by the programme. I shall decide whether any
further action should be taken as soon as I am able to consider all the issues.




                                MICHAEL HOWARD
