                      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                                    of the

                        Finance and Strategy Committee

                              6th September,   1989



          PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
                     Councillors W. Edwards, A. Jennings,
                     S. Ledwich, Peter Millea, Jacqueline Smith
                     and I. Templeman.



    37.   Minutes of the Working Party held
          on 1st September, 1989

          The Working Party considered the proceedings of the previous
          meeting held on 1st September 1989.

          Resolved that -

          (a) the Minutes be amended to include the attendance of
              Councillor Peter Millea; and

          (b) the remainder of the proceedings be approved.


    38.          Recommendations of the Hillsborough Interim
          Report by Lord Justice Taylor
0         (CBS/323/89)

          The Working Party considered Report CBS/323/89 of the City
          Building Surveyor concerning the recommendations of the
          Hillsborough Interim Report by Lord Justice Taylor.



          Councillor Peter Millea expressed concern regarding the
          current signposting arrangements at the Anfield Road End
          at Anfield.



          Resolved that the Report be noted.

    39.   Chair's Interim Report on the Interim
          Report by Lord Justice Taylor

          The Working Party considered the Interim Report and
          Recommendations prepared by the.Chair of the Working Party
          in response to the Interim Report of Inquiry of Lord Justice
          Taylor into the Hillsborough Disaster.
Resolvedthat

(a) the final sentence in paragraph 2 on page 5 of the
    Report be amended by the removal of the apostrophe
    from the word "Clubs";

(b) the remainder of the Report be approved;

(c) the Recommendations attached to the Report be adopted by
    this Working Party; and

(d) the Officers of the Working Party be commended for their
    assistance in the preparation of the Report.


Visit to Coventry to view Police Video

Representatives of the Working Party then visited Coventry -

(a) to view a Police Crowd Surveillance Video of the match
    between Coventry City and Everton on Saturday, 19th
    August, 1989; and

(b) to meet with Senior Officers of West Midlands Police
    and representatives of Coventry City Council and
    Coventry City F.C. to discuss the various allegations
    made by Everton supporters in respect of occurrences at
    this match.
