RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INTERIM REPORT BY LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

(CBS/323/89)

REPORT OF THE CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR
(Contact Officer : L.N. Bush - Tel. 225 3395)



1.   The Interim Report on the Inquiry by the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor
     contains, in Chapter 24, 43 recommendations with regard to future
     safety standards at football grounds.   Of these, 28 were asterisked
     to identify them as matters which he thought needed urgent attention,
     which should be carried out before the 1989/90 season started.   When
     considering the City Council's responsibility in relation to all the
     recommendations made, there is a need to distinguish between those
     which require action by the City Council and those which must rely,
     for their implementation, on other parties.   In addition, when acting
     upon those recommendations which call for primary action by the City
     Council, there is a need to identify those measures which are
     presently enforceable under the existing legislation and those which
     are not.  The recommendations which fall into the last category are
     being considered by the Home Office.   In that Department's circular
     to Local Authorities, which accompanied the publication of the Taylor
     Interim Report, it was explained that these matters could be the
     subject of a statutory order under the provisions of Section 15A of
     the Safety of Sports Grounds 1975.   That could only follow the
     statutory consultation, required in that respect, under Section 18 of
     the 1975 Act.  The City Building Surveyor is corresponding with the
     Home Office on some of these recommendations and has urged an early
     resolution of the matter.

2.   Meanwhile it may be noted that, some of the recommendations made do
      not apply to the City's two football grounds of Anfield and Goodison
     Park, and that many of the recommendations, capable of enforcement by
      the City Council, had been forejudged to be necessary and were taken
      care of in the approval and certification of those two grounds
      previously.  The remainder, which are enforceable through the Safety
      Certificate procedures, were implemented, with effect from 8th August
      1989, by positive amendments made to the Safety Certificates, held by
     both the Liverpool and Everton Clubs.

3.   A brief summary of the classification, and any action taken by the
     City Council, for all the 43 recommendations contained in the Interim
     Report is set out in Appendix A attached to this report.  That covers
     both clubs, except where otherwise stated.  Those 28 measures which
     were asterisked in the Report are similarly asterisked in Appendix A.




HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY
6TH SEPTEMBER, 1989
APPENDIX A

*1    Not applicable to the City's two grounds.

*2    Both grounds' Safety Certificates have been amended in accordance
      with this recommendation.

*3    These arrangements already existed at both grounds.

*4    Implementation relies upon the Football Clubs and the Police.
      However, the recommendation is a matter for some concern of the City
       Council because it implies a division of responsibility for crowd
       safety and control, which is not provided for, or envisaged, by the
       current legislation.  The matter has been the subject of discussion
       and it has been emphasised that, in the absence of any delegation of
       those responsibilities which clearly fall upon the Club, according to
       the 1975 Act, the Certificate Holder and the Club must remain wholly
       responsible.  The legality of passing any or all that responsibility
       to the Police, which Lord Justice Taylor considered had been done at
       Hillsborough, is currently a grey area.   It is understandable that
       the Merseyside Police do not wish to alter that fundamental
       allocation of responsibility, but at the same time, it is appreciated
       that the Police uniformed presence within the ground, implies an
       authority and perhaps therefore an accompanying responsibility.
       Football clubs traditionally employ the Police, by private contract,
       to assist with keeping law and order in the ground.   They would need
       to be called if law and order broke down.   The arrangement probably
       arose from the fact that no other security forces were available when
       it began, and because the Police needed a public presence outside the
       ground.  Correspondence is in progress with the Home Office on this
       matter, and the City Building Surveyor will monitor this situation
       although the City Council is not required to take any action itself.

*5    Both grounds' Safety Certificates have been amended in accordance
      with this recommendation.

 6    Both grounds' Safety Certificates have been amended to include the
      additional training of stewards called for by this recommendation.
      Training of both those stewards and Police Officers is being assisted
      by photographs taken of the standing terraces concerned, with
      different densities of occupation, and also by further photographs
      which have been, and still continue to be, taken during matches at
      the grounds.

*7    The need for this at the City's grounds is very limited, and was
       implemented before the season started.

*8    Not applicable   to the City's two   grounds.

*9    Not applicable   to the City's two   grounds.

*10   Not applicable   to the City's two   grounds.

*11   This is done every six months at both grounds.
                                             -    2 -



         *12   This review was carried out during the closed season.

          13   Such a review is carried out annually at both the City's grounds
               during the closed season.

          14   Not applicable to the City's two grounds.

          15   As stated at Item No. 13 above, such a review is carried out for both
               the City's grounds.  However, a formal annual renewal of Safety
               Certificates is not a current provision of the 1975 Act.   It is
               something which the Home Office has refused to change previously,
               when recommended by the Popplewell Final Report in 1986.   It is
               assumed that that earlier decision will now be reviewed.

          16   This is being done by the Chairs of the Hillsborough Working Party
               and the Licensing Sub-Committee in consultation with the City
               Building Surveyor.

          17   This advisory group has been set up.     Its first meeting was held on
               the 25th August 1989.

         *18   This has been done for the home games at both Clubs to date.  The
               Club and the Police will be continuing this computer monitoring and
               feeding the information to the City Building Surveyor.

         *19   The initial monitoring referred to in the last item indicates, as
               anticipated, that this recommendation is, and will continue to be
               satisfied for the capacities now fixed at both grounds.

         *20   These arrangements already existed at both grounds.

          21   These arrangements already existed at both grounds.

         *22   This has been done at both grounds.

         *23   Both clubs have undertaken to comply with this recommendation.

         *24   Both clubs have undertaken to comply with this recommendation,      in
               consultation with the Police.

          25   This is a matter for the Clubs.  Any arrangements made for any
               particular matches will require the prior approval of the City
               Council through the Safety Certificate procedures.

         *26   These arrangements already existed at both grounds.

         *27   This is a matter for the Police, and is related to the    earlier
               recommendation No. 4.

         *28   This is a matter for the Police.

         *29    Both grounds' Safety Certificates  have been amended in accordance
               with this recommendation, to give the Police the necessary authority.




NBEAAO
                                                -     3 -



          30   These facilities already exist at both grounds.        The training of the
               officers involved is a matter for the Police.

          31   This is a matter for the Police.

          32   These arrangements already existed at both grounds.

          33   The facility for the Police to cut into the public address system at
               both grounds already exists.  The possibility of increasing the cover
               to areas, both inside and outside the grounds,  is under discussion
               with sound experts.  The Home Office is taking an interest in the
               o utco me .

          34   Arrangements to do this at Goodison Park have been made.  There is no
               illuminated advertising board at Anfield.  The second part of this
               recommendation, for a simple code ofhand signals to be used by the
               Police, is a matter for the Police.

         *35   This is a   matter   for the Police and already   existed.

         *36   This is a   matter   for the Police.

         *37   This is a matter for the Police, and is undertaken in the       course of
               the liaison required under item 35 above.

         *38   This is a   matter   for the Police.

         *39   Both Clubs have made arrangements to comply with this recommendation.
               The specific responsibility will be included in the revised Safety
               Certificates being prepared.

          40   These arrangements already existed at both grounds.  The specific
               needs will be included in the revised Safety Certificates being
               prepared.

         *41   Both grounds' Safety Certificates have been amended in accordance
               with this recommendation.

         *42   These arrangements already existed at both grounds through the
               St. John Ambulance Brigade.

          43   Both Clubs have made provisional arrangements for the Ambulance
               Authority to provide two ambulances, to stand by at all first team
               home matches, as a voluntary compliance with the recommendation.
               Whether the current legislation authorises this provision to be
               included as a requirement of the Safety Certificate, or whether it
               needs to be included in an order issued under Section 15A of the 1975
               Act, is being considered by the Home Office.




NBEAAO
