12-DEC-S6   10=34     FROM= CLIVE        NICHOLLS       QC                  ID = 0 7 1 2 4 2 4 2 7 0                 PAGE   2




                I am asked to advise on the di'afting o f a ‘'i.no unci til” (formal statement) u> |.he
                Aitore.ev~< ienm ii: to advi.se on whether and how ;.i complain! may hi: made as to
                cv'ii.k’iK-; o l'a iim n iii misconduct in ihe suppression oL’ ovitlcuco: and upon o lhn
                remedies, i.isiiiy, ovtt o f the contents o f [he affidavit. ol’ KogcT I |oiiklv.\orth o f .15li'
                November 19%.

                I have approached Cfvis exercise w ith caution, conscious o N lv diltivuiUes inherent in
                scckin); to persuade ihu Atinrney-Ocncrat to reopen the inquest nearly rig h t years after
                the i:i\u.:ed\.. mid ihi'cc years alter the High Court dot lined to order ,i fresh inquest. I
                Ulii «!ki>i-oiincioilH thf.it, i.vi the emotional atmosphere sum.Hindini; the television
                prou.ruriinn.’ hist week',, it is important to he twili^tie. ;}nd not In r.tise expectations o f
                success which may he disappointed later.

                However. the affidavit o f Hoy,or l.louldsworth doe;., in my opinion, in-;tily the
                application to Ihe Artomey-Lieneral under section 13 o f llu: ( omners Act, and a
                complaint to Ur- Director o f Public: P r o s c c u t 1!rider seelion 1.5>. where the High
                Court is siitisfied on Ihc application o f the Attorney-General Ilia! "whether by reason
                o l'ltiind. injection o f evidence, irregularity ol'proeealin^s, in-iiilficivitcy or'Inquiry,
                the disLoverv oj'rievv facts or evidence or otherwise- it is neecssar. or desirable in the
                interest - o f justice that another inquest he lickl'Vil. ni;t\ ordet llutl a licsii inquest he
                held. I lie High Court lias power to quash a verdict, whether or not it orders a new
                inquest.

                    .I:\vry lei-iil instinct of the High Court w ill pi'utc.-a      the iile;.i i>l n fresh inquvsi ;-o
                    k»v, aHer the event. Re-litigaiion is nonietliiiig judges ioyard w iiii .nispk:ioii or
                    di:-;t:iv-ie. Th.e families w ill recognise this from Lhe 1(W procevdiiii;'s. in which the
                    coiilI was deeply host.ile io the idea o f another uupicst lusting several mouths*, when
                    the grounds and iiryninetlb we then had were strong and oonip: Ii i n^v I f the attempt iM
                    (o he sii.uk-. the approach to the Altomey-Cicucryl must be someiliinu more than a
                    formal :aa’ einent. More is needed than a lawyer's draft Lelleis fmm [datives should
                    be included, statements should he served from those who have had dealings with the
                    families' Members ol'Pat’liamcjit and leading lignres in the City Council should he
                    asked to support the request-; a video o f the drama-documentary should be submitted;
                    ihe .suppon of members o f Piirliarncnl should be s<m>.lil. Alsn material should be
                    st.ilnmi.led that is new and relevant to any individual eases.
1 2 —D E C - 9 6       10=34     FROM= CLIVE        NICHOLLS      QC                  I □=   0712424270                           PAGE   3




                            The importance o f M o u ld w o rth 's evidence is considerable. („>uite opart Irum ihe
                            question whether his evidence is new, is the exlnton.lini.iry fact that is iltitl he was not
                            called as ;i witnosfi either at the Taylor enquiry or ;.u Ihe inquest. i ha\e set-it his
                            slaiomcm made dated KV1' May 1‘m it was made, i ant (old i.iiihotls'h ihc t'aeeol'tlie
                            statement does not prove this), lo lawyers I'rom, Shelheki Wednesday Fuodiall Club:
                            l i i;ni.nii!,is ii detailed description o f the I vm> elosi J eircub television .systems in
                            operation, otic for t ilt club, the other lor the police.


                   o        M r I iouldswoi'lh explained that he attended the ground on Ik? da\ o f I he match in ei-ise
                            tcchuoiue.ieal assistance was needed. I lis evidence shm\;t ihut tin.1pi>!icc sysicm was
                            eveelienl. and capable o f observing ail points o f the ground. snl*jeel In one small litnll
                            which M r Jhuildsw onh rectified lie fore the [uimo. lie h im se lf w;is able In m onitor (In:
                            h u ik k ip H i l l s i d e the Loppings I .-me gates, ant! commented in I'.C (inesl at :>..S()pm
                            that they should postpone the match. I I« also deals w ith the circumstances in which
                            the e.au.-'. were opened, because someone said, ‘I f someone is jroins*. lo die, open the
                            yale"

                   /           flu- second pari o f M r Hoa Ids w orth's sutietnenl denis with Ihe smislcr disappearance
                            o f videotapes overnight. l ie relates how he locked a cupboard ermtainiiijj, litem about
                            <:s,;‘t <.> pm ir f llie day o f the in ig a jy , and then looked the dooi to the mm askiiij.' tfie
                            s m ir u y ruLirds t.o activate the alarm system lo r the room. f .iitei Ik - usketl a security
                               {.iniifd in e U x k that fn>-one entered the room dwt lu^hl. K'e\I morning, M r
                               Houldsw o ilh discovered dial two o f thy tapes had bi?en remoVi.Nl, ^th o u g h the alarm
                               had noi !'one olT, but was >;till activated.

                   K        iIn s .'diiU.rneni does not deai expressly w ith die ulle.t’ ations l.iiei1made by the police
                             that video equipment was inadequate. Then, was no reason, ol course, why, sltoriiy
                               fitter ihe event', it should do so, M r Houldsworth could not anticipate. thal police
                               evidence

                   !>       W!iy u M r Moulds worth tun culled as a wiiric.vs al the inquir;. < > r Ihc inquest';' He
                            wa> able -u imvc evidence about crucial aspee.b n ith c events under ii;vest.ij.wtiou
                               before Pie M : ' point. He |iavc evidence about the ;,',aie,s; why and in what
                               c ia mii ■.tanccs the t;ale was opened, the means hy w hich the crowd could be. and was.
                               moniior^i.l: the systems used by tin; club; trruwtl control. Mad lie been called, o f
                               eom’se I"’' won id no doubt have been ero.ss-e sum i tied about his a ln liiy. and l.tiv «biJiiy
                               o f I he poiicii. io -we through the monitor,s the distress o f those in dying in the pens.
                               His part v*as restricted lo playing some very lim ited purl, in I lie control room, in a
                               visit th'.: i Dry made to various parts o f the ground, at their reqtiesi. in !he course of the
                               inquest.

                       10   In ;i siaicmeiil o f 2 V November 1996, M r I h'juldswoilh deals with mailers liud have
                             since h s v in e contentious, hut which he. had not rea-ion to deal w:lh in M ay )‘WP,
                               Tha statement sets out. two very important matters. Hit's!, he says that lie can.no!
                               undvt’siuiii! how the cideoevidence t'eeonjin;,; evidence oi en ishiii!1 on ihe ten,iec,s h<«1
                               gone inn.stuL;.. Tw o VIKS machines in (he police ooiilrol ho.\ sh.mld have been
1 2 —D E C —S B    1 0 =3 5     FROM:     CLIVE     NICHOLLS      QC                   ID:   0712424270                           PAGE   4




                         re c o rd iiv picture,s from ait live cameras. 1le also sUilos e M ^ 'o r io H y lhat he was able
                         lo see from the club control room ihc condition:; in the I .eppiiii'S I unepeny as ihc
                         pre:'Mi;v built up; and Unit in his control room In.1 looked ai the police m onitor in the
                         club to iitir.l room whieh showed that the pens were full .is the on lei w as given to
                         open t in : ; .iiv    The police had- tlie same piciuiv^

                  11     The                  whether the poliee were awaio o f ihe pressua- on ( lv pens when the jjalc
                          was u|>. ni.d wa.s , o f course. a crucial issue m tlu* I nii.sbomi;,yh imiucKt. 1he ( 'oruner
                          him self said on l")ny 77-

                          “ I h i:   11tont o f t he tern'iccx is .... a very important liictor, j h’| may         be I.ho single
                          most important fai t or in l:hc whole iuqucst.'1

                  1,?    Belw-wt1 ihe lime tlu.it the clu b’ s lawyers took the .staiemeni and the uupiest, someone
                          hi!'; tailed. af some suige, n> hand on tlu: statement to those hearm;1 the evidence at. the
                          inquiry and inquest.. When I represented sik ol Ihe here;.tvei.! families in I w h e n
                          w r ahem pled to quash the iirjl. verdict, I v\;r.-, particularly shuck by Ihe way in which
                          Inform m m ii had been withheld fro in us, I'oi e\am pk.\ ii was novieenhle that police
                          wiUiC-se ■ 1fOtsiite court, had luii.i topics ot ihcir own witness sluienicols at tile. ilK|Uesl.
                          which li e ' fmd obviously l>een given Ion;.: hi-lore te keep. and Ut i .\nl betme y m n g
                          e ' i d e m . S h e families had bean shown KhuemcrtUs briefly minute:'. iv to re giviriy
                          evuJeiu.v. . and had to hand t.beii'i buck when they bad <ead ihi-m. \'o
                          sLlateitioiii■: o l'lh e witnesses g ivin g evidence were copied for the i’n miiies. To this clay,
                          no-one hum the Liverpool camp has .seen any o f ilb iild s w o rlh ’ s !hree staleruents
                          niii.de. to ihc police in 1W f


                  1.3     l-'ur yeai.". du. Liverpool 1'ym.ilies have Celt aggrieved ill ihe h.itidiiny id'th e inquest.
                           I lie nl'.MiH ?>.l pm cut■oiTt.m u\ which even M r Popper. Ih-- < up'iic!'. now. seems to
                          accept may liii.vo been wrong (in contrast to hit. attitude m ilie 1ln;h t 'ourt it) I ' M ) lias
                          always been the mosi obvious ground lor complaint, 1lie appeataiKc o f bias at the
                          mque;;t r . ,un.Hlicr powerful and legithiw te grievance. The mque--! was held in
                          Sheffield. when the conduct o f the SheffieM ( ’ it)' ( Vmnril. the South Yorkshire police,
                          the local anibidiiticc ^ervicc . and the Ibotbali c lu b was in qneMion: and ii was held
                          bet'uiv -.1 a a y o f Sheffield or .South York.shnv m te p a y v rx and voj alni'ied by ;■.( coroner
                          whti, i>y e.uute, agrees his solar}' w ith the meal eouni'il amioollv.


                  14          In no ei;!i,. r eoi.nt than ihe eoroner’ s would litis appearaiH.-c ol'bi;!'. Ih: tolerai.ed. Any
                          jiidff.e i -1;;,vl it, lo announce hi:, connection w ith a.ii\ ini crested pail;   I find it.
                           inconipivhcnsiblt: that [he inquest w;-ts not idovvU to anoihei Iowa              Ihti where such
                          iippai'ein bias cxtiits, the cinccgcncc o f new evidence, apparently i'kldcn before, is a
                              major e.i n \auce, It omit led the tam ilies o fth u iie ivho died to ask !oi the vei'dicts to be
                          q ii:v ;lie i.;.n e w ini|ueKi, at..td fo ra police inquiry into how and why M r Ifonld.sworfh's
                          eviden;:.: was kept from public view.
1 2 —DE C - 9 6     10:35      FROM. -     CLIVE   NICHOLLS      QC                   I D=   0712424270                           PAGE




                           The suiuumcv o f t he memorial lo the A uonicy-G enaa t should be sent in ihc Director
                           o f Public Prosecutions. The statement o f Roger Moulds worth c.mimns allegations that
                           mui.cii:;i evidence was destroyed or conecaled. I k direct! v conuadiei.'. what sonic o f
                           Ih t Si.uivh V nrkidiirc police tuld ihe ju ry. A person ;\ho c!uslro>.-, ui conceals evidence.
                           knowJn;.: »i may be material to legal proceeding,‘i. «nmrnii.s tiie trl’lVni.e o f aitem ptiiiy
                           Us perv..:*i tho course ol justice. It i.s not nt'cessuiy that o rim iiu l m ei v il'p ro e m lm g s
                           haw         :it (he time Ihe nets are done to constitute ihe o fie m v . Ii is enough that the
                           person w im docs the nets eomcmphiles lhal c iv il or crim inal proceedings may result. R
                           v._^dv.diiiJ i; iL M o iiia u (1982) 73 Cr. App. k . 333; R v . J M t iu e <I 993) 97 Cr. App,
                           R-          A ermiimU- em.] li try is called for. I he DPP should he asked to set one tip into
                           this iitij 'fii.miL area o f the case. Such an etkjUtrv would he coiteeiisraiul on
                           lloulds'A nrih, his statements and the (apes, li would not need a.) u n y c over the whole
                           of I In: d i.viistcr.


                           1 notice irom the press I hut a senior representative oi the South Nuikshire I’olice has
                           said-tluti. he will investigate anv new evidence. .Clearly ilk- leiie ra n d material sent to
                           the Dir. oi. ir o f Public Prosecutions should includc as I'dptesi that this matter be
                           ni\eMi:„: ucd as <i matter ufurgvncy hy a police lorce that has iiui. hcen involved m the
                           ui\esin;:;;u>ri to date. 1he ld u s o fth e local police im ccj.f i p , n t i l i n n^.clvc'j is
                           ridivtilc.i..:


                           1 IhiVt* diM.ussed w ilh Ann Adlinyton hou we should coivip.iL* the memorial; letters
                           from relatives: advisers, members o f 1‘arhamenf. religious loaders: Iw d iiip figures
                           irom I he cun o l'L iv c rp o o l. I shall prepare ihe presentation aiul analysis o f the
                           new .mo cm siing evidence, and ol course discuss it it) detail w ith ihosc instructing me.
                           1 vvouk; hope (hat we might be able to submit the memorial ;ind repot; to ihe Director
                           o f I'ub t.c Prosectniojis either al the end o f Us month ui tin; hejdniiinj.’. o f Ihe New




              3 Raymond Ik,ddinys                                                       Alim .fnm::* t>C
              OJray’ .s Inn
              Loudon W (         '\




                  * 2 th Decern her l ’ >%.




                                                                        4
