              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY
                           of the
               Policy and Resources Committee
                       6th June, 1994



 PRESENT:    Councillor J. Spriggs, Chair;
             Councillors E. Clein, P. Clein, K. Coyne,
             A. Dean, Marilyn Fielding, G. Knibb and
             P. Millea.


             Apologies for absence were received from
             Councillor S. Ellison.



 Minutes of Last Meeting
 The Working Party considered the proceedings of the last
 meeting of the Working Party held on 19th October, 1993.
 Resolved that with regard to the matter referred to in part
 (3) of the resolution contained in Minute 2 requesting the
 Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons of the
 Policy and Resources Committee to consider the question of
 recognition of the services which have been performed by,
 and expenses which have been incurred by, Ms. Sheila
 Coleman in providing essential assistance to the Liaison
 Officer in Hillsborough related matters this Working Party
 urges that this recognition is now accorded to Ms. Coleman
 by the City Council, she be requested to submit an
 appropriate claim for the expenses which she has incurred
 in acting on behalf of the Working Party and the Policy and
 Resources Committee and Council be recommended to give
 favourable consideration to the payment of such expenses.

 Hillsborough Disaster - Matters Arising
 from "Cook Report" Television Programme -
 2nd June, 1994
 The Working Party considered in the light of information
 contained in the "Cook Report" television programme
 broadcast on Independent Television on 2nd June, 1994
 concerning the Disaster, the Inquests and the subsequent
 judicial proceedings:-

al/cttee/hillsborough/finalmin/Y060694
  (A)   a Report submitted to the Working Party in 1992
        detailing the evidence, some of which was contained in
        the television programme, which was submitted in the
        Hillsborough Families Applications to the Attorney
        General; and
  (B)   the following Motion by Councillor P. Millea, seconded
        by Councillor J. Spriggs -
          That in view of the disturbing evidence first
          disclosed by this Working Party in February 1992 and
          referred to in the "Cook Report" television
          programme concerning the circumstances surrounding
          the deaths of several of the victims of the
          Hillsborough Disaster, and particularly in relation
          to the death there of Kevin Williams, this Working
          Party resolves to:-
           (i)      demand that the Attorney General order a
                    fresh and scrupulously independent Inquiry to
                    investigate this evidence and related matters
                    as soon as possible;
           (ii)     call on the City's MP's in particular and
                    also any other MP's whose constituents were
                    directly affected by this Disaster, to fully
                    support this demand; and
           (iii)    investigate the possibility of those funds
                    remaining in the Hillsborough Disaster Trust
                    Fund which was set up by the City Council,
                    being used to help finance the fight of the
                    victims families to establish the truth of
                    exactly what did happen at Hillsborough on
                    April 15th 1989.
  Resolved that -
  (A) the Motion be approved;
  (B) with regard to the demand for an Inquiry the
      appropriate measures be taken to enlist the support
      of :-
        (i)      the Home Affairs Spokespersons of the Labour and
                 Liberal Democrat parties; and
        (ii)     the Association of Metropolitan Authorities;
  (C)   arrangements be made for the Chair and Opposition
        Spokespersons of this Working Party to meet with the
        Trustees of the Disaster Trust Fund to discuss the
        matter referred to in part (iii) of the Motion; and
  (D)   a Special Meeting of the City Council be held as soon
        as possible to consider the matters contained in this
        Minute.

al/cttee/hillsborough/finalmin/Y060694
  Television Coverage of Hillsborough in the
  United States
  The Working Party considered a verbal Report concerning the
  broadcasting on satellite and cable television of news
  coverage by major television broadcasters in the United
  States of preparations for the World Cup and in particular
  a broadcast made by CBS television on 31st May, 1994
  implying that the Hillsborough Disaster was hooligan
  related.
  Resolved that this matter also be referred to the Special
  Meeting of the City Council for consideration.

  Edgehill   College - "Hillsborough
  Project"
  Resolved that the Head of Committee and Member Services be
  requested to write to the Director of the "Hillsborough
  Project" at Edgehill College to request, as a matter of
  urgency, information regarding the publication of the
  second Report of the Project.




al/cttee/hillsborough/finalmin/Y060694
