                               The City of Liverpool
                                Personnel & Administration Directorate
                              Head o f Committee & Member Services

                               Ken Corns
                               PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                               Tel: 0151 -225 2430 Fax: 0151 -225 2427


9 June 1995                                Enquiries to: Mr C Moneypenny
                                           Direct Line:  0151 225 2431
                                           Your Ref:
                                           Our Ref:      PR/CM/HLJ



TO:    All Members of the
       Hillsborough Disaster
       Working Party



Dear Sir
You are requested to attend a meeting of the HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
WORKING PARTY to be held at 1.00 P.M. on FRIDAY 16TH JUNE. 1995 in
Committee Room 'D' in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street,
Liverpool.
An agenda for the meeting is attached.


Yours faithfully




Head of Committee and Member Services


N.B.    Please note that it is intended to hold a further meeting of
        the Working Party in July to consider any matters arising
        from this meeting and also to discuss correspondence
        received by the Chairman from Family Members. The meeting
        is to be held then to allow for the attendance of the
        appropriate Member(s) of Parliament.




al/cttee/mfcda/letter/hillsborou
                      Director o f Personnel & Administration: Derek Griffin
  Administration & Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resource Service;
                    Information Technology; Legal Services; Public Relations.
           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                         of the
             Policy and Resources Committee
                     16th June, 1995


                         AGENDA


  Hillsborough Memorial Service
  To consider correspondence received by the Working Party
  from the Premier League and Sky Television in response to
  requests made to ensure that in future Liverpool F.C.
  fixtures are not arranged at the same time as the
  Hillsborough Memorial Service.

  Hillsborough Disaster Statement

  To consider
  (a)   a letter sent to the Editor of the Liverpool Echo
        criticising their decision not to publicise the
        contents of the Joint Hillsborough Statement; and
  (b)   the publication of the Statement by Liverpool F.C. in
        its Matchday Programme on April 17th, 1995 and the
        possibility of requesting Nottingham Forest to
        undertake a similar publication at the commencement of
        the 1995/96 season.

  Comments of Tottenham Hotspur
  Manager re: Hillsborough

  To consider the contents of correspondence with Mr. Gerry
  Francis, Manager of Tottenham Hotspur F.C. following his
  reported comments about Hillsborough prior to the F.A. Cup
  Semi-Final between Tottenham and Everton.

  South Yorkshire Police Compensation Claim

  To consider any matters arising from the unsuccessful claim
  in the High Court of certain South Yorkshire Police
  Officers for compensation for trauma suffered as a result
  of their involvement in the Disaster.



al/cttee/mfcda/agenda/Al60695
5.     Hillsborough Trust Memorial Bursaries

       To consider matters arising in respect of the award of
       educational bursaries from the Disaster Trust Fund.


6•     Proposed Visit of Sir Bernard Ingham
       To consider any matters arising from the withdrawal by
       Bootle Chamber of Commerce of the invitation made by them
       to Sir Bernard Ingham to speak at an Awards Ceremony.


7.     Hillsborough Project

       To consider the receipt of the Second Report of the
       "Hillsborough Project" undertaken by Edgehill College,
       Ormskirk on behalf of the City Council.




     al/cttee/mfcda/agenda/A160695
                                                                  1




29 March 1995                    Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                 Direct Line: 225 2431
                                 Your Ref:
                                 Our Ref: POL/CM/ADL

Mr Rik Parry
Chief Executive
F A Premier League
Lancaster Gate
LONDON

Dear Mr Parry
ANNIVERSARY OF HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
I am instructed to write to you by the meeting of the
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party of the City Council held
on 21 March 1995.
You may be aware that there was considerable concern amongst
families and survivors of the Hillsborough Disaster about the
proposal to stage the fixture between Manchester City and
Liverpool on 15 April 1995, the sixth anniversary of the
Disaster and it was only as a result of a considerable number
of representations being made that the date of the fixture
was amended thus enabling the annual Memorial Service to take
place with the full participation of players, officials and
supporters of Liverpool Football Club.
The Working Party is therefore requesting that in future when
the Premier League fixtures are prepared serious
consideration is given to ensuring that such clashes with the
Anniversary, and in particular with the Memorial Service, are
avoided. The views of the Members is that as fixtures are
changed on many occasions, primarily for television purposes,
it should be feasible to ensure that Liverpool Football Club
do not play on this particular date. Such forward planning
would ensure that the unseemly last minute discussions which
have occurred this year are not repeated and that the
families and survivors of the Disaster can plan the Memorial
Service without the added concern that the Club and its
supporters will not be able to attend.

                                                     /Cont'd

al /cttee /hi 11 sborou /letter /Anniv
I am copying this letter to Liverpool Football Club and to
Sky Television who of course will need to be consulted as
their views.
Yours sincerely




Ken Corns
Head of Committee and
  Member Services




al/cttee/hillsborou/letter/Anniv
                                     Enquiries to : Mr C Moneypenny
                                     Direct Line:   051 225 2431
                                     Your Ref:
                                     Our Ref:       P&R/CM

Head of Programming,
Sky Sports T.V.




23rd March, 1995


Dear Sir,
                   Hillsborough Disaster Anniversary

     I enclose for your attention a copy of the letter which I
have been requested by the meeting of the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party of the City Council held on 21st March to send to
the Chief Executive of the Premier League requesting on behalf of
the families and survivors   of the Disaster that in the light of
the recent re-arrangements   of the game at   Manchester Citywhich
was due to take place on the sixth anniversary of the Disaster,
careful consideration is given to avoiding this particular date
when the fixtures for Liverpool Football Club are determined prior
to the commencement of future seasons.

     In view of the nature   of the Premier  League allowingfixture
re-arrangements to allow Sky Sports to cover games I would also be
pleased to receive any observations you may have on this proposal
as clearly it would involve the agreement of Sky Sports not to re­
arrange Liverpool games for April 15th.


                          Yours faithfully,




              HEAD OF COMMITTEE AND MEMBER SERVICES
                                                                         T H E F.A. P REM IE R LE A G U E



                                                                        RICK PARRY
                                                                        C h ie f Executive


                                                                        The F.A. Premier League
                                                                        16 Lancaster Gate
                                                                        London W 2 3LW

4th April 1995                                                          Telephone: 071-402 7151
                                                                        Fax: 071-262 3397
RNP/ND/328

K Corns Esq
Head of Committee and Member Services
City of Liverpool
 Personnel & Administration Directorate
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool, L69 2DH

Dear Mr Corns
ANNIVERSARY OF HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
Thank you for your letter of 29th March.
I understand the concerns that are being expressed and it is unfortunate that uncertainty
surrounded the timing of this season’s fixture at Manchester City. We were supportive of
Liverpool FC’s desire to change the kick off time.
We will certainly give serious consideration to the points which you make and it should be
possible to avoid problems in the future.
Y




RICK PARRY
CHIEF EXECUTIVE


cc:




                                                                         The Football Association Premier League Limited
                                                                         Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate
                                                                         London W 2 3LW
                                                                         No. 2719699 England
31 March 1995


Mr K. Corns
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool
L69 2DH


Dear Mr Corns


RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER ANNIVERSARY

Thank you for making contact regarding the annual memorial service on April
15th.

We have been aware of the sensitivity surrounding this date and have been
involved in several discussions with the F.A. Premier League.

Of course, we shall keep it in mind in future years and shall not request
Liverpool games on that date.


Yours sincerely.




VIC WAKELING
Head of Sport




cc:      Rick Parry




REF: EBWW1648


                                                   British Sky Broadcasting Ltd
  Head Office and Registered Office: Grant Way, Isleworth, Middlesex TW7 5QD. Telephone: 0171-705 3000 Facsimile: 0171-705 3030
                                            Registered in England No 2906991 Vat Registered No 440 6274 67
24th March 1995             Enquiries to: Mr C Moneypenny
                            Direct Line: 225-2431
                            Your Ref:
                            Our Ref:

Mr Peter Robinson
Chief Executive
Liverpool Football Club
Anfield Road
LIVERPOOL

Dear Mr Robinson
RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER ANNIVERSARY
I enclose for your attention a copy of the letter which I have
been requested by the meeting of the Hillsborough Disaster Working
Party of the City Council held on 21st March, to send to the Chief
Executive of the Premier League, requesting on behalf of the
families and survivors of the Disaster that in the light of the
recent re-arrangement of the game at Manchester City which was due
to take place on the sixth anniversary of the Disaster, careful
consideration is given to avoiding this particular date when the
fixtures for Liverpool Football Club are determined prior to the
commencement of future seasons. I should of course be pleased to
receive any observations which you may have on this matter and
will of course convey such views to Members of the Working Party.
I have also been asked to request that you consider the
publication of the attached Statement regarding Hillsborough, of
which your Chairman Mr Moores is a signatory, in a match programme
around the time of the sixth anniversary of the Disaster. It is
considered that its message would be of comfort and interest to
the vast majority of Liverpool supporters who have been offended
by the recent comments which have blamed them for the Disaster. I
realise that this is short notice but perhaps at least some
mention of the Statement could be given in the issue for the
Anfield fixture on April 17th.
I look forward to your response.
Your sincerely


Ken Corns
Head of Committee and
Member Services
10 April 1995               Enquiries to: Mr Moneypenny
                            Direct Line: 225 2431
                            Your Ref:
                            Our Ref:

Mr Peter Robinson
Chief Executive
Liverpool Football club
Anfield Road
LIVERPOOL
L4 OTH


Dear Mr Robinson
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER ANNIVERSARY
Further to my letter dated 24th March I now enclose for your
attention copies of responses to my letters to the Premier League
and Sky Television which seem to give a favourable response to the
request to, if possible, avoid setting Liverpool fixtures on the
anniversary of the Disaster in future years.
I will soon be placing the responses before a meeting of the
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party and would be pleased to
receive any observations you may have.
Yours sincerely



Ken Corns
Head of Committee and
Member Services




al/cttee/hillsborou/letter/P Robinson
                   Hillsborough statement
                            F'RCM LWlgRPCxX. F^O
                            ftfrviL. l~i% vcH S
                              Issued jointly by Liverpool
                                 Football Club,
                                 Nottingham Forest FC
                                 and the Liverpool and
                                 Nottingham City Councils
  THE statem ent is signed by Liverpool
Chairman Mr. David Moores, Forest
Chairman Mr, Fred Reacher and the
Council Leaders - Councillor Harry
Rimmer, Liverpool and Councillor John                  1 The layout of the Leppings Lane End.
Taylor, Nottingham . It reads a s
follows:                                               2 Lack of fixed capacities for the pens.
     W e are concerned that in the pa st year          3 Lack of effective monitoring of the
considerable efforts have been m ad e by
certain individuals to dismiss o r distort the           terraces.
findings of Lord Justice Taylor with regard
to the causes of the Hillsborough Disaster
                                                       4 Build-up a t the turnstiles                         and
by placing blam e on Liverpool FC                        inadequate turnstile facilities.
supporters, d e sp ite the overw helm ing
contrary evidence gathered by the judicial             5 The blunder on opening the gates and
investigation.
   Therefore, on behalf of all the people                failure to close the central tunnel.
w h o still suffer to d a y a s a result of
Hillsborough a n d who have needlessly                 6 The deficiencies of the barrier system
been c au sed additional pain by these                   in Pen 3.
gratuitous a n d offensive comments, we
choose to renew the special bonds formed               7 The crushing in Pens 3 and 4 w as not
betw een the two clubs a n d the two cities
following the disaster by publicly placing               recognised.
on record our joint endorsem ent of the
conclusions of Lord Justice Taylor a n d his           8 The slow response of the Police
identification of the principal factors which
in combination created the trag ed y of April          9 The perimeter gates w ere too small.
15th, 1 9 8 9 .?




   N1VIR MISSYOURFAVOURITI PROGRAM!!
                      Why not obtain your REDS/ANFIELD             (E) Europe and Republic of Ireland £61
                      REVIEW on subscription basis.'               (FJ Rest of the World £8?
                       Rato#! Horae Programmes - League,           Indicate your order by using (A) (BJ (C) etc™
                        FA Cup & Coca Cola Cup matches.            Please send a Cheque or Postal Outer
                         (AJUK& Northern Ireland £S5               (Do not send stamps) made payable to
                          (B} Europe and Republic of Ireland E61   Liverpool Football Club.
                           Ifl        # » W iv W PR7
                               The City of Liverpool
                                Personnel & Administration Directorate
                               Head of Committee & Member Services
                               Ken Corns
                               PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                               Tel: 0151-225 2430 Fax: 0151-225 2427


2 1 March 1995                             Our Ref:                 P&RES/CM


Mr John Griffiths
Liverpool Echo
Old Hall Street
LIVERPOOL


Dear Mr Griffiths

JOINT HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER STATEMENT
I write on behalf of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
following the meeting of the Working Party which was held today.

The meeting considered a number of Hillsborough related matters
which included the decision of Manchester City FC not to re­
arrange the kick off time of the fixture at Maine Road with
Liverpool on the sixth anniversary of the Disaster. Elected
Members were pleased to note the robust coverage given by the Echo
to- this matter, which clearly assisted the satisfactory outcome
which has been achieved.
However in contrast the Working Party was considerably disturbed
that your newspaper made no use whatsoever of the attached Joint
Statement concerning the Disaster which was signed by the Chairmen
of Liverpool and    Nottingham Forest   Football Clubsand the    Leaders
of Liverpool and    Nottingham City Councils. The statement was
submitted to you    via Mercury Press   Agency and wascovered    by your
sister paper the    Daily Post.
In view of the disgraceful allegations which have been made
particularly in the past year by Sir Bernard Ingham and Brian
Clough suggesting that Liverpool fans caused the Disaster the
Statement which was undertaken on the initiative of Liverpool born
Nottingham MP Alan Simpson is intended to respond formally to the
continuing and unfounded slurs which are being made against a
section of the Merseyside Community.

It is a shame therefore that many people who still feel angry
about the lies spread outside Merseyside about the Disaster are
not aware of the Statement particularly given that Mr Clough's
comments .have now been effectively disowned by his former employer
and by the City of which he is a freeman. It is also sad that the
Statement received more coverage in the Nottingham Post than it
did in the newspaper which bears the name of the city most deeply
affected by the Disaster.


al/efe-fcC'e/mf cdn/lctfcer/JnfcllillDis---------------------------
                      Director ofPersonnel & Administration: Derek Griffin
  Administration & Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resource Service;
                    Information Technology; Legal Services; Public Relations.
The Working Party is aware that the Echo has produced intelligent
coverage and comment on many aspects of the Hillsborough Disaster
and indeed devoted editorial space to both the Ingham and Clough
allegations. It is in this knowledge that the meeting today on
behalf of the bereaved families and survivors of the Disaster
wished me to express to you their great disappointment that you
did not see fit to publicise a document which is intended not only
to deter those who may in future wish to call into question the
findings of the Taylor Report but also to bring comfort to the
many who have undeniably suffered great added pain each time such
sickening accusations receive glaring and unwarranted press
attention.

Yours sincerely




A.K. Corns
Head of Committee and Member Services




al/cttee/mfcda/letter/JntHillDis
                                                  EDDIE O’HARA M.P.
                                                         (Knowsley South)

                                                                               Westminster:
                                                                               Tel: 0171 219 4538 / 5232
                                                                               Fax: 0171 219 4952
                                                                               Constituency:
12th April 1995                          H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                                                               Tel: 0151 489 8021
                                                 L O N D O N SW1A OAA          Fax: 0151 449 3873
Mr. Ken Corns
City of Liverpool
Personnel & Admin. Directorate
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool L69 2DH




Dear Mr. Corns,

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - JOINT STATEMENT.

Thank you for sending me a copy of the statement signed by Liverpool and Nottingham
City Councils and Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Football Clubs, which I note with
interest

It is indeed of interest to my constituents and I should be interested to hear of any
further outcome from this initiative.



Yours sincerely,




Eddie O'Hara MP




                  I "' " i   i i i f i a i i i i l B I M i i M
          From: The Right Hon. David Hunt,           M.P.




                       H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                          L O N D O N SW1A OAA
                                                                  Rtf




   (M.                                                            W     l




 h>Jrenr\iA^r o

QQoX                                         a
                                                 L it'
                                                 t   t id f y ^




                   p     i

                                                       I
                               The City of Liverpool
                                                                                                 3
                                Personnel & Administration Directorate
                               Head o f Committee & Member Services
                               Ken Corns
                               PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                               Tel: 051-225 2430 Fax: 051-225 2427




6 April 1995                               Enquiries to             Mr. C . Moneypenny
                                           Direct Line:             225 2431
                                           Your Ref:
                                           Our Ref:                 MFCDA/COL/BB

G. Francis, Esq.,
Manager,
Tottenham Hotspur F.C.,
White Hart Lane,
London.
Dear Mr. Francis,
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
I have been asked to write to you by the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party of the Liverpool City Council regarding your recent
reported comments about the possibility of a Hillsborough-type
situation arising at the F. A. Cup Semi-Final at Elland Road,
Leeds, between your Club and Everton F.C.
The Working Party is concerned that you have utilised the Disaster
in your complaint about the Semi-Final venue and that you appear
to be confused about the causes of the Hillsborough Disaster.
Therefore, I enclose for your attention a copy of the Statement
which has recently been signed by both Liverpool and Nottingham
Forest Football Clubs, and Liverpool and Nottingham City Councils,
which clarifies how and why the tragedy occurred.
Whilst complacency must be guarded against and no large crowd
gathering can ever be deemed entirely "safe", it is the view of
the elected Members of this City Council as represented by the
Working Party that to compare the present safety regime at Elland
Road with the appalling "pen" system which was in existence at the
Leppings Lane End at Hillsborough in 1989 - a system which had
indeed failed to a lesser degree at numerous other Semi-Finals in
the 1980's - is irresponsible and offensive to the survivors and
bereaved families of the Disaster, particularly in the light of
other comments, such as those recently made by Brian Clough, which
have malevolently sought to distort the findings of Lord Justice
Taylor.




bc/cttee/c moneypen/letter/Hillsboro/bb


                     Director o f Personnel & Administration: Derek Griffin
             Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resources;
        Information Technology; Legal Services; Management Support; Public Relations.
I am sure you can appreciate the considerable sensitivity of this
subject on Merseyside and would be grateful if you could take on
board these comments in the spirit in which the Council intends
and use whatever future opportunities you may have as an important
figure in the football world to contribute to countering the
ignorance which still prevails in some quarters about the
Disaster.

Yours sincerely,




A. K. Corns
Head of Committee and
Member Services




Enc.




bc/cttee/          'letter/Hillsboro/bb
                                               Jotbenham
                                                Hotspur
                                   748 High Road, Tottenham, London N17 OAP
                                  Telephone: 0181-365 5000 Fax: 0181-365 5005




             25 April 1995


             Mr A K Corns
             Head of Committee and Member Services
             PO Box 88
             Municipal Buildings
             Dale Street
             Liverpool L69 2DH


             Dear Mr Corns

             Thank you for your letter with regard to my alleged comments prior to our semi-final
             game against Everton.

             As unfortunately is so often the case these days the Press have written their "story" as
             they wish. In my actual comments to the Press I made reference to the recent troubles
             that Chelsea have encountered in European Competition games with regard to
             supporters travelling without tickets. I stressed the benefit of staging games such as
             the semi-finals at Wembley for a number of reasons, not least of which is that Wembley
             are used to handling large crowds and can accommodate a lot more supporters from
             each team and thus avoid any possible problems.

             I commented on a number of other factors which influenced my view that Wembley
             was the best place to stage the semi-finals e.g. the segregation of the supporters, car
             parking and access to the stadium as well as the players' safety. At the end of the semi­
             final unfortunately my fears for the safety of my players were confirmed and a number
             of them were frightened as they fought their way to the tunnel through the Everton
             supporters,who made their way past the Leeds security onto the pitch.

             At Elland Road, due to the construction of their stadium, to give each set of supporters
             an equal number of seats the ground was split with the Everton supporters occupying
             three sides of the ground and I felt that this affected the atmosphere at the game for
             our supporters. This is a situation which would not have arisen at Wembley as the
             stadium could have been literally "split down the middle".




                                 FOOTBALL           & ATHLETIC CO. LTD.
                                  MEMBERS OF FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND THE PREMIER LEAGUE

League Cham pions                    Wlxmere o f th e "Double” F.A. ( Alp and Ix^agtie Cham pionship 19C>0-<)1   W inners of FA. Cup
   1951 1961                     The European Cup W inners Cup 1962-63 & th e U.E.FA. Cup 1971-72 & 1983-84      1901. 1931, 1961,
League Cup W inners                    R egistered Office: 748 High Road, Tottenham , London N17 QAP             1963, 1967, 1981,
    1971 1978                                          Registered Number: 57186 England                              1982, 1991
                                          -2-



I am aware of the situation surrounding the Hillsborough Disaster but thank you
nevertheless for the enclosed copy which clarifies how and why the tragedy occurred.
Unfortunately each time reference to this is made in the Press it will, I am sure, bring
back many unpleasant and horrific memories for the survivors and the families of the
deceased, but like every other tragedy you cannot stop the Press from reporting on it
or making reference to it.

I do however feel that due to the terrible tragedy at Hillsborough the FA looked at the
semi-finals in a different light in the last few years and it was due to the safety of
supporters that they opted for Wembley as a semi-final venue.

I am sorry if anyone has been offended by the reference that was made to a situation as
sensitive as Hillsborough, but I assure you this is something which the Press
themselves "headlined", I did not make the reference to this as has been suggested.

I hope the above gives you a better insight into the reasons for my reservations about
Elland Road as a semi-final venue and I can assure you they were not, as the papers
suggested, just because I feared it would be "another Hillsborough".

Yours sincerely
V•*
                                                                                5   y

                      The City of Liverpool                      Agenda Item No




 REPORT TO             EDUCATION CLIENT SUPPORT SUB COMMITTEE/HIIiSBOROUGH
                       WORKING PARTY

 REPORT NO             DE/57/95

 DATE                  21 MARCH 1995

 REPORTING OFFICER                      HEAD OF SERVICE

 CONTACT OFFICER

  SUBJECT              HILLSBOROUGH TRUST MEMORIAL BURSARIES FOR FURTHER
                       EDUCATION STUDENTS



PURPOSE OF REPORT

To advise the Sub-Coramittee and Working Party of the arrangements made for the
award of bursaries from the Hillsborough Trust.

RECOMMENDATION

The Director of Education be approved to commence administering bursaries from
the Hillsborough Trust in line with the criteria set out below.

INFORMATION

Members will recall that at a meeting of Education Client Support
Sub-Committee on 23 March 1994 it was agreed that as the Trustees of the
Hillsborough Memorial Trust have made financial provision to establish
bursaries for FE students throughout Merseyside the Director of Education be
authorised to undertake the administration of such a scheme.

After consultation with the other Merseyside Authorities a selection process
and criteria have been drawn up.' These criteria (see appendix A) have been
approved by the .Trustees of the Hillsborough Memorial Trust and measures are
now being taken to put the procedures in place.

In order for all authorities to contact the appropriate colleges and for
sufficient advertising of the scheme to take place, it is anticipated that the
first bursaries will be made in the academic year 1995/96.




                                    -    1   -
CTEE3:GF1860.95
%   i ■ *-




    FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS

    None.

    EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IMPLICATIONS

    None.

    BACKGROUND PAPERS

    Report DE/91/94.




                                     2
    CTEE3:GF1860.95
                     HILLSBOROUGH TRUST MEMORIAL BURSERIES




Selection Process

In 1995 the Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal will donate £75,000
for the establishment of Bursaries for Merseyside students attending Further
Education Courses.

It is anticipated that for the next ten years bursaries will be made in the
sum of approximately £7,500 per year.

This money will be used equally between the five colleges.

The selection Committee will determine the amount of bursary allocated to each
student.

Each of the five Merseyside Colleges to nominate 4 students for consideration
by the Selection Committee.

The selection Committee to comprise of Awards Officers from each of the five
Merseyside Authorities.

If in any year the selection Committee should determine not to make an award
or if the value of the Bursaries awarded is less than the money allocated for
that year, the residual income for that year may be added to the capital of
the fund or carried forward as income to provide additional bursaries in
future years.

Selection Criteria

students must have at least 3 years uninterrupted residency in Merseyside.

Student must be attending a full-time (22 hours) non-designated further
education course.

BUrsaries wil be given to students who cannot afford to purchase the
additional specialist equipment needed to participate in thecourse eg
Photography Courses - Camera, Catering Courses - Knives etc.

Each case will be considered on its merits but particular consideration will
be given to those dependent students whose parents are in receipt of income
support/family credit or independent students whose partner is in receipt of
income support/family credit.

students should also include details of any access funds, student loans
etc., they have tried to secure.

All application forms to be distributed to the appropriate College for the
start of the new academic year.

Colleges to submit 4 nominations by mid-October to their Local Authority.




AWARDS/LETMEM:AEl8902.94
\     The Selection Committee will meet end October/mid November and all monies will
    Nfce paid before end of first term.'

     The Student must provide a receipt of purchase for the equipment by the end of
     the second term or they will be billed for the return of the money
     accordingly.




      AWARDS/LETMEM:AE18902.94
