COVENTRY CITY Vs EVERTQN
COMPLAINTS REGARDING CROWD SAFETY


                    Report of the City Solicitor
                Contact Officer Andrew Pink 225-2500



1.     On the opening day of the new football league season on
Saturday 19th August, 1989 Everton F.C played Coventry City F.C.
at Highfield Road, Coventry.


2.     After the match many Everton supporters contacted the local
media to complain about the lack of crowd control by the West
Midlands Police and various shortcomings in relation to the Coventry
City Stadium.


3.     Following radio interviews with the chair of the Hillsborough
Working Party several supporters contacted the Working Party
Office and some 20 statements have been taken.  It is intended
that these statements should form part of a submission to Coventry
City Council, the West Midlands Police, Coventry City Football
Club, Football League, Football Association, Lord Justice Taylor
and the Minister of Sport.


4.     The basis of the supporters complaints a r e :-


          severe crushing and unrelieved pressure at the 4 turnstiles
          allocated to visitors in the Sky Blue Stand.  Arrivals at
          the back exceeded the rate of flow through the turnstiles
          and no queuing regime was imposed throughout;

          severe crushing and unrelieved pressure occurred at the
          egress gate, adjoining the stand and terracing areas,
          which stand occupants had to exit after the game;

          overpacking occurred on the visitors pen behind the goal
          causing police officers at half-time, to open up the pen
          allocated to Coventry supporters to relieve the pressure;

          police officers misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off
          and many fans were blamed for the absence of a queuing
          system.


5.     Initial representations have been sent to the Midlands
Police, Coventry City Council, the Football League and the Football
Association.  Replies have been received from Coventry City Council
and the West Midlands Police (See letters enclosed)
6.     The West Midlands Police have agreed to make available a
video of the crowd situation outside and inside the Stadium and
have invited the chairman of the Working Party to visit Coventry
to view the video and discuss further the fans complaints.




Hillsborough Working Party
1st September 1989
                                              Hillsborough Working Party,
                                              Chief Executives Office,
                                              Room 5,

LIVERPOOL                                     Municipal Buildings ,
                                              Dale Street,
                                              LIVERPOOL L69 2DH

Ci£y,C4X*h4*&                                 Telephone: 0 5 1 - 225 2334/3
                                              Fax: 236 2047
                                              DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                              Your ref

                                              Our ref

                                              Date       2 3rd August,     1989
 Mr. J. D. Dent,
 Secretary,
 The Football League,
 Lytham St. Annes,
 LANCASHIRE.
 FY8 1JG




 Dear Mr. Dent,

 With reference to the crowd management problems involving supporters
 of Everton Football Club at Coventry City F.C. on Saturday,
 19th August last.

 Following a telephone conversation between my research officer and
 Chris Whalley at your office on Monday, 21st August.  I write to
 confirm the nature and seriousness of the incidents discussed.

 A deluge of complaints continue to pour into this office regarding
 serious allegations about the conduct of the crowd management
 operation at the visitors sections of Highfield Road.  The
 allegations basically identify four p r o b l e m s :-

       severe crushing and unrelieved pressure of the 4 turnstiles
       allocated to visitors in the Sky Blue Stand.  Arrivals at
       the back exceeded the rate of flow through the turnstiles and
       no queuing regime was imposed throughout;

       severe crushing and unrelieved pressure occurred at the egress
       gate, adjoining the stand the terracing areas, which stand
       occupants had to exit after the game;

      overpacking occurred on the visitors pen behind the goal causing
      police officers at half-time, to open up the pen allocated to
      Coventry supporters to relieve the pressure;

      police officers misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off and
      many fans were blamed for the absence of a queuing system.
 Currently we are formulating a dossier based on fans statements.  The
 consistency and clarity of the allegations thus far clearly suggest
 that an investigation by the Football League into these incidents is
 clearly warranted.


                                                         NUCLEAR FREE
                                                         LOCAL AUTHORITY

 When calling or telephoning please ask for                C o n t ' d.
                                    -   2   -




     A copy of the dossier will be forwarded to your office, Lord Chief
     Justice Taylor and the Football Association on completion.

     Yours sincerely,




      ft   ( j ^   -
     Councillor H. Chase,
     Chair,
     Hillsborough Working Party.




**
                                               Hillsborough Working Party,
                                               Chief Executives Office,
                                               Room 5,

JTuTT7"C1'R
   l V H i l vP rHU HU TL
                                              Municipal Buildings ,
                                              Dale Street,
                                              LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
Cvt^Gc<Ai^ci£                                 Telephone: 0 5 1 -2 2 5 2334/3
                                              Fax: 236 2047
                                              DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                               Your ref

                                              Our ref

  Mr. Glen Kirton,                             Date        23rd August,     1989
  Football Association,
  16 Lancaster Gate,
  LONDON.
  W2 3LW




  Dear Mr. Kirton,

  With reference to the crowd management problems involving
  supporters of Everton Football Club at Coventry City F.C. on
  Saturday, 19th August last.

   Following a telephone conversation between my research officer and
   yourself on Monday, 21st August I write to confirm the nature and
   seriousness of the incidents discussed.

  A deluge of complaints continue to pour into this office regarding
  serious allegations about the conduct of the crowd management
  operation at the visitors sections of Highfield Road.  The allegations
  basically identify four problems

        severe crushing and unrelieved pressure at the 4 turnstiles
        allocated to visitors in the Sky Blue Stand.  Arrivals at
        the back exceeded the rate of flow through the turnstiles and
        no queuing regime was imposed throughout;

        severe crushing and unrelieved pressure occurred at the egress
        gate, adjoining the stand and terracing areas, which stand
        occupants had to exit after the game;

       overpacking occurred on the visitors pen behind the goal causing
       police officers at half-time, to open up the pen allocated to
       Coventry supporters to relieve the pressure;

       police officers misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off and
       many fans were balmed for the absence of a queuing system.

  A copy of the dossier will be forwarded to your office, Lord Chief
  Justice Taylor and the Football Association on completion.
  Yours sincerely,


       *
  Councillor H. Chase,
                                                          NUCLEAR FREE
  Chair,                                                  LOCAL AUTHORITY
  Hillsborough Working Party.

 When calling or telephoning please ask for
                                              Hillsborough Working Party,
                                              Chief Executives Office,
                                              Room 5,

LIVERPOOL                                     Municipal Buildings ,
                                              Dale Street,
                                              LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                              Telephone: 051 - 225 2334/3
                                              Fax: 236 2047
                                              DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                              Your ref

                                              Our ref

   M r. G e o f f r e y D e a r,              Date        23rd August,    1989
   Chief Constable,
   West Midlands Police H.Q.,
   Colmore Circus Queensway,
   BIRMINGHAM.
   B4 6NQ




   Dear Sir,

   With reference to the crowd management problems involving Everton
   supporters at Coventry City's Football Ground on Saturday,
   19th August last.

   Following a torrent of protests from Everton fans, to this office, we
   wish to solicit a response from you regarding the police operation
   at the visitors sections of Highfield Road on the day in question.
   The basic corroborated allegations are as follows :-

        That the officers on duty to the visitors turnstiles area of
        the Sky Blue Stand did not operate a queueing regime.  No
        attempt was made to filter and channel people in this area.
        Given only four turnstiles were available at this point to not
        operate a crowd flow system would compromise recommendation 2 8
        of Lord Chief Justice Taylor's Interim Report.

        That repeated requests by fans for a delayed kick-off were met
        with firm refusals.  Given the consistency of fans statements
        to the failure of crowd supervision at the Sky Blue Stand it
        would appear this decision was somewhat misplaced as many
        fans did not access the turnstiles until after 3.15 p.m.

        Police communications were confusing and on occasion failed.
        Officers are reported to have held heated arguments amongst
        themselves on the terracing behind the goal concerning the
        overfilling of the Everton section.  Instances of police radio
        failures have also been identified.  In the wake of Lord
        Justice Taylor's comments on police communications this matter
        is of some concern.

        Reasoned complaints to police officers from individual fans,
        were often met by abusive language and misleading claims.




                                                IF      NUCLEAR FREE
                                                        LOCAL AUTHORITY

When calling or telephoning please ask for                 C o n t 'd.
V
                                   -   2-


    As officers of the West Midlands force acted as agents for Lord
    Chief Justice Taylor it concerns this authority that recommendations
    3,9,19,27,28 and 29 of his Interim Report appear to have been
    compromised on the basis of these allegations.

    Quite clearly Coventry City Football Club and the local authority
    have much to answer for and a dossier of fans statements will
    be forwarded to Lord Chief Justice Taylor, the Football Association,
    Football League, Football Supporters' Association and Coventry
    City Council.  With regard to the police operation at the visitors
    sections of Highfield Road I suggest the enclosed allegations
    require investigation.

    Yours faithfully,




    Councillor H. Chase,
    Chair,
    Hillsborough Working Party.
                                                       Hillsborough Working Party,
                                                       Chief Executives Office,
                                                       Room 5,
                                                       Municipal Buildings ,
LIVERPOOL                                              Dale Street,
                                                       LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
CvtyQoiAi+tit                                          Telephone: 0 5 1 - 225 2334/3
                                                       Fax: 236 2047
                                                       D X 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                       Your ref

                                                        Our ref HWP/HC

                                                        Date 23rd August, 1989.

Mr. Ian Roxburgh,
Chief Executive,
Coventry City Council,
Earl Street,
COVENTRY
CV1 5RR.


Dear Mr. Roxburgh,

With reference to the crowd management problems involving Everton supporters at
Coventry City's ground on Saturday April 19th last.

Following a torrent of protests from Everton fans to this office I wish to
solicit a response from you regarding the existing General Safety Certificate
for the Highfield Road stadium.

The allegations, listed below, raise serious questions about the adequacy of
the Safety Certificate in the wake of Lord Chief Justice Taylor's Interim
Report particularly in relation to recommendations: 3; 9; 13; 18; 19; 27; and
28. As the licensing authority we are concerned that Coventry City Council, as
a responsible authority, investigate these matters forthwith.

The basic allegations are as follows:-

-      severe crushing and unrelieved pressure at the 4 turnstiles allocated to
        visitors in the Sky Blue Stand-. Arrivals at the back exceeded the rate
        of turnstile flow and no queueing regime was imposed throughout:

-      severe crushing and unrelieved pressure occurred at the egress gate,
        adjoining the stand and terracing areas, which visiting stand occupants
        had to exit after the game:

-      overpacking in the visitors' pen behind the goal was not relieved until
        half-time when police officers allocated an adjoining pen to a nuir.ber of
        Everton fans. This pen already contained Coventry City supporters:

-      Police officers misled and misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off.
        Some officers blamed the overcrowding to the turnstiles on the fans
        themselves.




                                                                                  i    W
    When calling or telephoning please ask for
Currently we are formulating a dossier based on statements taken by my staff.
The consistency and clarity of the allegations suggests that an investigation
is warrented by yourselves, the football authorities and the Football
Association.

I am sure you will treat this matter with the utmost urgency.   I await your
reply in anticipation.

Yours sincerely,




Cllr. Harry Chase,
Chair Hillsborough Working Party.
                                                           £^bai>
                                                            0(jnded ^

                              THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1|G. T elephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                         Secretary |. D. Dent



2/6211                                                                                  24th August, 1989


Councillor H. Chase,
Chair,
Hillsborough Working Party,
Chief Executive Office,
Room 5,
Municipal Buildings,
Dale Street,
Liverpool,
L69 2DH.


Dear Councillor,

      I acknowledge receipt of your le tte r of 23rd August, 1989, concerning the
complaints received from Everton F.C. supporters regarding the crowd control
arrangements at the Coventry City F.C. ground on Saturday, 19th August, 1989.

     This m atter is receiving urgent attention, contact has already been made
with the Secretary of Coventry City F.C. and steps are being taken by the club
to prevent any repeat of the incidents complained of.

       I     am calling for a full report from the Secretary of Coventry City F.C.
and I will communicate with you again in due course.

                                                     Yours sincerely,




                                                         J.D. Dent,
                                                        SECRETARY.




              All correspondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
Your Reference
Our Reference        DEDP;P(BC)5/DJG/CS/SSGA
                                                                       City of TI .
Please ask for
Direct Dialling No
Date
                     831200
                     25 August 1989
                                                                            Coventry
                                                                       DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC
                                                                       DEVELOPMENT AND PLANNING
                     Councillor Harry Chase (Chairman)                 Harry Noble DipTP. ARIBA. MRTP1.
                     Hillsborough Working Party                        Director of Economic Development
                                                                       and Planning,
                     Liverpool City Council                            Tower Block,
                     Chief Executive’s Office                          Much Park Street,
                                                                       Coventry CV1 2PY
                     Room 5
                     Municipal Building                                Telephone : 0203 83 33 33
                                                                       Telex       265451 (MONREF G)
                     Dale Street                                                   Attention LMX810
                     Liverpool L69 2DH                                 Telecom Gold Mailbox: 76 :LMX810
                                                                       Fax       : 0203 831257


                     Dear Councillor Chase

                     SAFETY A T SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                     COVENTRY CITY V EVERTON
                     19 AUGUST 1989

                     Your letter dated 23 August 1989, received by facsimile transmission
                     addressed to Hr Iain Roxburgh, my Chief Executive, has been passed to me
                     for reply as it is this Department in conjunction with the City Secretary
                     that has responsibility for overseeing safety at sports grounds.

                     Your Working Party would seem to be making a number of serious allegations
                     concerning safety standards at Coventry City Football Club’s Highfield Road
                     Stadium, however, as a preamble to my reply you should be aware of the
                     following facts.

                     Immediately on publication of the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor’s interim
                     report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster a meeting was called by the
                     City Council of all those parties interested in safety at sports grounds,
                     namely:-

                     1   The Local Authority
                     2   Coventry City Football Club
                     3   West Midlands Police
                     4   West Midlands Fire Service

                     This group which has always met on a regular basis was immediately
                     reconstituted into a Formal Advisory Group and it was agreed that future
                     meetings would also include representatives from the West Midlands
                     Ambulance Service and a Supporters Group.

                                                                                       Continued




                                                                       Head of Planning:
                                                                       Bernard Dowell
                                                                       Head of Economic Development:
                                                                       Christopher Hammer
                                                                       Head of Administration:
                                                                       Roy Davies
The immediate responsibility of this group was to make sure that the 28
points of the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor’s interim report were implemented
as far as was practically possible before the commencement of the 1989/90
football season.  I am satisfied that this was achieved.

As you are no doubt aware, Coventry City Football Club had considerable
foresight in attempting to create an all seater stadium for viewing
football many years ago, but this was frustrated by fans who wished to
stand.  Be that as it may the total spectator capacity of the stadium was
significantly reduced by the experiment and currently is a mere 26,218.

A new General Safety Certificate was issued to the Club on 24 August 1988
and this has been amended once since that date.  Coventry City Football
Club have recently made application for a further amendment of their
General Safety Certificate concerning reduction in ground capacity in the
light of recommendations.  Furthermore, the City Council will be carrying
out a review of the Safety Certificate in its entirety, also as
recommended.

There have never previously been allegations of crowd problems, either
inside or outside the ground, which were beyond the control of Police or
stewards and which could have prejudiced safety.

The problems which were encountered on Saturday 19 August were in the
opinion of the Advisory Group - many of whom were present - of a minor
nature and certainly not beyond the capabilities of the Police to control.

Taking your allegations point by point

1    The Coventry City Football Club have acknowledged that there was a
     problem concerning the rate of admission of visiting spectators to the
     seated areas of "The Sky Blue Stand".  This has been identified by the
     Advisory Group as being due to spectators possessing tickets and those
     wishing to pay by cash attempting to pass through the same turnstiles.
     The problem has been addressed, a solution put forward and adopted by
     the Advisory Group.  It must be said that the situation was
     exacerbated by the late arrival of Everton supporters.

     At no time was there "severe crushing and unrelieved   pressure" and the
     Police did impose a queueing regime.

2    It has been the policy, as it is at many football grounds, for the
     Police to keep "away" supporters inside the stadium until such time as
     the home supporters have dispersed.

    Although it is acknowledged that there was crowding, there was nothing
    exceptional in the size and density of the crowd which would have
    warranted any Police or steward intervention.

     I believe it is the intention of the Match Commander (Police)
     to elaborate on the point in his reply to your letter to
     Mr Geoffrey Dear.
                                                                         /3
                                         3

    3   I must entirely refute this suggestion. On analysis of the figures,
         at no time was a density of more than 44 person per 10 m 2 of terrace
         prevailing on the visitors terrace.  The pen did not contain any
         Coventry City supporters.

    4   The Match Commander (Police) in charge of policing matters on
         19 August entirely refutes the claim that his officers misled and
        misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off.   There was never any
         suggestion of delaying the kick-off.  Police officers are there to
         assist the fans, not to attribute blame.

    I would be pleased to inspect your dossier of complaints when it is
    complete, but I must say that on the unchallengeable information available
    to me I feel that the matter does not warrant any further investigation.

    Yours sincerely________




    Director of Economic Development and Planning




«
W e s f M id lan d s P o lice
                                                                     W DIVISION H EADQ UARTERS
                                                                     LIT TLE p a r k s t r e e t
                                                                     COVENTRY
                                                                     C V 1 2JX

                                                                     TELEPHONE:   0 20 3 555333




  Cllr Harry Chase                                                  vC-_cRECEHE
  Hillsborough Working Party
  Chief Executives Office                                           o.=                      KGJB/AJD
  Municipal Buildings
  Dale Street                                                       DiTE                 24 August 1989
  LIVERPOOL   L69 2DH




  Dear Sir

  I am directed by the Chief Constable to reply to your letter dated the 23
  August 1989 about the difficulties experienced on 19 August 1989 by some
  Everton supporters, and other related matters.

  I am aware of the content of the letter sent by you to the Chief Executive
  of Coventry City Council which arrived in time for its content to be
  discussed by our Advisory Group. The Director of Economic Development and
  Planning will reply to you on behalf of the Advisory Group, but as
  Match Commander on the day I will comment on the points in both letters
  which relate solely to the policing of the event.

  Since the Taylor Enquiry, recommendations 1, 2 and 3 have been addressed by
  the Advisory Group, and as a result the capacity of the Highfield Road
  Ground has been re-adjusted to 26218. Of that number, 5849 is allocated to
  visiting supporters; 2789 for those seated and 3060 for those standing.
  On the date in question the attendance was 17981 which included 5540
  visitors, 2578.of whom were seated and 2962 standing.

  Closed season improvements carried out in the visitors seated areawere
  designed to separate the covered from the uncovered area. Those
  improvements allowed the club to re-introduce reserved seating for the
  convenience of seated supporters and to make marshalling and stewarding
  more effective.

  For the match itself, our intelligence indicated that between 4-5000
  Everton supporters would attend the match and that the overall attendance
  would be in the region of 19,000. It became apparent quite early on in the
  week that the seated and standing overspill areas for visiting supporters
  would be required. That information was relayed to the club and
  re-inforced on Friday morning as a result of information received from
  Liverpool. The policing operation was adjusted to accommodate a capacity
  crowd in the visitors areas. The tactics used by the Police have been well
  practiced in the recent past and reviewed in the light of the events at
  Hillsborough and the recommendations made by Taylor.




Th e OFFICER OCA LIN G W ITH THE CORRESPONDENCE IS
                                                     Supt K Birch                      3351
We have experienced larger visiting support and never before had
allegations of crowd problems, either inside or outside the ground which
were beyond our control and which could have prejudiced safety.

At the pre-match briefing the potential for a capacity visiting contingent
and our response to it was dealt with in detail, and sufficient reserves
identified, again in line with the recommendations made by Taylor.

The club informed us that almost 2000 tickets had been sold before the
match and that a further 600 were to be made available for sale on the day;
again a normal practice.

The four turnstiles in question are described by the club as being slow.
Their potential rate of flow indicates an ability to admit one person every
k seconds, that rate correlates very well with the capacity for that
viewing area (recommendation 19).

Two of the four turnstiles into the Sky Blue Stand were initially allocated
to ticket holders and two for those wishing to pay. Our deployment
comprised 8 officers and a Supervisor and 2 mounted officers. At
2.15pm we were aware of a build-up of supporters at those four turnstiles.
This was seen on the ground cameras and reported by the Officer Second in
Command of Operations, who was at the scene. It was apparent that the
queuing was to the two pay gates but at that time, the queue was orderly
and good humoured. There was no queuing at the ticket turnstiles. At that
time there was not need to increase Police presence at that location.

The situation was monitored and at 2.25pm there was evidence of an increase
in the size of the queue and an additional 10 officers and 2 mounted
officers were deployed to that area. It was congested in the immediate
vicinity of the turnstiles but along its length, supporters were queuing in
twos and threes. At that time, it is true to say that more people were
arriving than were passing through the turnstiles. Those joining the queue
again did so in twos and threes. There was a separation of ticket and cash
queues and it is reported by the Sector Commander that those wishing to pay
cash formed orderly queues, whereas those with tickets were not so orderly.
There was an attempt made to form the ticket holders in to some sort of
order using horses and foot patrols, but because of complaints, the tactics
used by mounted officers were eased. I was able to view the events on the
video and there was no request from the Sector Commander to deploy other
available officers to the scene. I was satisfied with the tactics being
used and the number of officers deployed to what was a relatively small
crowd. By 2.40pm the cash sale gates were re-designated "ticket only" to
ease the congestion outside the tickets turnstiles.

There is no funnelling at those turnstiles and therefore, the verbal
advice and containment tactics from the mounted and the 18 officers was
ample to control the 400-500 supporters who were outside the ground. I
think you will agree that the number of officers at that location was
appropriate to deal with the numbers waiting, but we could do nothing about
the rate of flow through the turnstiles. Our tactics and availability of
resources was fully in line with the letter and spirit of recommendation 28.
I am aware that by 3.12pm there were no queues at any of the four
turnstiles mentioned. There were the inevitable late arrivals who
experienced no difficulty in gaining access to the seated area. You will
see from the details given in the third paragraph of my letter that the
number of visiting supporters was under the reviewed capacity. The "Green
Guide" density recommends 54 persons per 10 square metres. A 15% reduction
in that figure results in a recommended density of 46. On Saturday the
actual density averaged out at 44 persons per 10sq.m. I have had the
opportunity to view the video of the crowd which shows there to be ample
room in the visiting standing area. The Director of Economic
Development and Planning will respond to you in more detail about
densities and video footage which completely refutes the allegations
contained in your letter to the Chief Executive.

At 3.00pm it was estimated that there were 400 spectators waiting at the
four turnstiles, and at that time I still had 18 patrol and 4 mounted
officers in attendance. The presence of that crowd did not constitute
either a public order or a public safety risk. I was able to police the
crowd inside and outside the ground, and the mere fact that there were
people who could not get in in time to view the kick-off is not sufficient
justification to warrant a delay in the kick-off. That option was
considered by me prior to the players taking to the pitch. That fact was
relayed to those still waiting outside the ground. They were
understandably unhappy and frustrated about their delayed entry, but in the
circumstances were quite orderly. It is interesting to note that one
complaint related to a persistent refusal to delay the kick-off, yet in the
letter to the Chief Executive one of the complaints was that we misled fans
about a delayed kick-off! There was little the Police could do to
relieve that frustration as we had no control of the speed of entry of
those fans into the ground. I saw no justification to order the kick-off
to be delayed and on reflection I still consider that to be the right
decision.

There is no doubt that a number of people were frustrated at not being able
to get into the ground in time, even though most had arrived early enough
to do so. I would say that the 400 outside the ground probably arrived
near to the kick-off time. Nevertheless, the fact that quite a few of
them were frustrated can have implications for public order with
consequential safety ramifications. The mood of a few visiting supporters,
and only a few, made marshalling and stewarding thereafter more difficult
than it should have been, but I can fully understand their feelings. On
Monday morning I expressed my views to the club on the delay caused by the
turnstile configuration and other related matters. That was discussed at
the Advisory Meeting on 23 August. The outcome of that meeting will be
outlined in the letter from the Council.

In relation to your third point, I recollect that the communications on the
day were good and that there were no systems failure. The volume of radio
traffic was reasonable and did not pose any operational problems to the
experienced operator, nor did the volume of information being fed into the
Command Post. I am not aware of any heated arguments or disagreements
between Police Officers in the overflow section behind the Everton goal, or
in any other area. It is true that officers spoke strongly to one or two
fans. I have viewed the video of that section of the crowd and it
appeared well behaved, requiring little intervention by the Police.
Nothing occurred which would have led to a 'discussion' on policing tactics
or action. I certainly saw no arguments between officers. My enquiries
since receiving your letter confirms that fact.

Referring now to the last allegation about the attitude of my officers.
They were briefed to act in a courteous, firm and positive manner and to
communicate a philosophy of professionalism in dealing with both home and
visiting supporters.

We tried to deal with a frustrated section of the crowd with firmness and
understanding but it was perhaps inevitable, where the tempers of some of the
fans were becoming frayed, that there was a breakdown in effective
communication.   At the end of the day, allegations of curtness from both
sides were inevitable and understandable.

If I may touch briefly on the letter you sent to Coventry Council, there is
no evidence whatsoever from the video to support the allegation that there
was severe crushing or over-packing of the visitors pen which we refer to
as the overspill area. I can make the video of this available to you,
which will show quite clearly that conditions within the crowd generally were
comfortable and in the pen referred to specifically by you, you will see that
conditions were very comfortable indeed.

I listened with interest to some of the comments made on Radio Liverpool
and you may have heard that I responded to them all. Some of the comments
about the absence of police , the time taken to get into the ground and
that some fans were still queuing at 3.40pm were wholly inaccurate and
unhelpful.

Like many other grounds, including Goodison Park, the visiting supporters
are kept in until the streets are relatively clear of home supporters. You
will fully understand the reasons why we continue to employ that tactic.
There were 6 announcements made to the visiting fans that this would be
done and as far as I am aware, there was no severe overcrowding on the
approach to the exit gate. Bearing in mind we were under the reviewed
capacity for that area, there was nothing exceptional in the size or
density of the crowd which would have warranted police or steward
intervention. Our Police box is situated just 10 metres from that exit
gate. It is elevated some 5m above the crowd and the windows at the front
face out on to the main exit gate and have excellent views of the
crocodile which forms behind that gate. Police Officers manned those gates
and assisted with the stewarding of the exiting fans and I, as Match
Commander, had an un-restricted view of the exodus of fans, saw nothing
exceptional to justify the allegation that there was severe crushing at
that location.

I hope the above comments have eased your fears over the conditions
reported to you. I can assure you that everything possible was done on
the day to allow the match to take place in a safe environment. Having had
the opportunity to again review the events of the day I am satisfied that
the spirit and letter of the Taylor report were followed and that there
were no safety problems at the ground.




         KWOOD
Chief    4rintendent
                       THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                      L IM IT E D
                                                      Founded 1863

                                    Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                  President: H . R . H . T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                        Chairman.F. A . M i l l i c h i p

   Chief Executive:                                                                          Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
R. H. G. K   e l l y fc is                                                                          Telex: 261110
                                                                                               Facsimile: 01-402 0486


                             16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
 Our Ref:    GK/JC/2094                            Your Ref:



  Cou ncillor H. Chase,                                                                      2 9th August,          198 9
  Hillsborough Working Party,
  Chief Executive Office,
  Room 5,
  Municipal Buildings,
  Dale Street,
  Liverpool,       L69 2DH.




  Dear Councillor Chase,


             Th ank you for your letter of 23rd August.


        I have noted the contents and have asked our Club for its
  comments.


             I shall come back to your shortly.




                                                                                      Yours sincerely




                                                                                      Glen Kirton
                                                                                      Head of External Affairs




                                 Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, L o n d o n W2 3L W
                                 Incorporated in L o n d o n Registration N u m b er 77797
           EVERTON/LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUBS -
              GROUND SAFETY ADVISORY GROUP

                   25TH AUGUST,      1989

PRESENT:

Councillor S. Ledwich,       Chair

Councillors H. Chase and F. Roderick

Mr. R. Greenwood,    Everton Football Club

Mr. P. Robinson,    Liverpool Football Club
                        tt             tl      I*

                    Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority



Chief Superintendent Lyons,          Merseyside Police

i               ~| Merseyside Ambulance Service

                 Football Supporters Association

                Liverpool Supporters Club



Mr. T. Smith,    City Solicitor's

Mr. A. Pink,

___________________, City Solicitor 1s
Appointment of Chair

It was agreed that Councillor S. Ledwich (Chair of the
Licensing Sub-Committee) be appointed as Chair of this
Advisory Group.


Terms of Reference

The meeting considered -

(a)     suggested terms of reference for the Everton F.C./
        Liverpool P.C. Ground Safety Advisory Group, viz:-

          "to consider all matters concerned with crowd
           safety at Goodison Park and Anfield and to
           make recommendations regarding those matters
           to Liverpool City Council";

(b)     whether separate Advisory Groups should be formed
        for Everton and Liverpool Football Clubs.

Resolved that -

  (i)     the terms of reference as submitted be approved;

 (ii)    matters relating to both clubs be considered by this
         group; and

(iii)     Minutes of the Advisory Group be submitted to the
          Licensing Sub-Committee.


Recommendations of the Lord Justice Taylor
Interim Report

The Advisory Group considered the recommendations (Numbers
1 - 4 3 ) contained in Chapter 24 of the Inquiry Report and
made the following comments, viz:-

Recommendation Number       Comment

 1.                         This is not applicable.

 2.                         Capacities have been reduced in
                            accordance with the recommendations

 3.                         There are no penns at either
                             football ground and that
                             spectators were counted on entry
                            to the s t a d i u m s .

4.                          Discussions are continuing between
                            the police and both clubs in
                            consultation with the City
                            Building Surveyor in drafting this
                            agreement.

5.                           Additional stewards have been
                             employed to monitor the crowds.
Recommendation Number   Comment

 6.                     All Stewards/Police Officers with
                        duties in relation to the terraced
                         areas are fully briefed and
                        trained to the required specifications.

 7.                     This is not applicable to Liverpool
                        Football Ground, in the case of
                        Everton, work has been completed
                        to modify the fencing at Bullens           |
                        Road in line with current recommendations.

 8.   )                 These are not applicable to either
 9.   )                 ground.

10.                     Suitable and sufficient cutting
                        equipment has been provided.

11.                     All crush barriers have been inspected.

12.                     The layout of barriers have been
                        revised to ensure compliance with
                         recommended criteria.

13.                     Safety Certificates of both Clubs
                         are reviewed on an on-going basis.

14.                     This is not applicable.

15.                     Annual reviewing of Safety Certificates
                         is normal practice for this authority.

16.   )
      j                 These have been arranged.
17.

18.                     Reports have been requested from
                         both Clubs and responses are
                         expected in the immediate future.

19.                     This has been calculated.

20.                     Arrangements already exist.

21.                     Close circuit television exists in
                         the grounds and to a limited
                         extent outside the ground and the
                         Police are considering any additional
                        equipment as required.

22.                     All sign posting has been reviewed
                         and supplemented.

23.   )
                        These recommendations     are being
24.   )
                        adhered to.

25.                     A matter for each Club.

26.                     Assistant Chief Constable Richard Adams
                        is the nominated Chief Officer.
Recommendation Number         Content

27.                           This is in hand and there are written
                              orders in relation to t h i s .

28.                           Arrangements have been made and
29.                           discussions are continuing.
30.
31.
32.

33                            Investigations are in hand for the
                              improvement of the interior and
                              the exterior public address systems.

34                            This is not applicable to Liverpool
                              but at Everton, Police are investigating
                              ways of communicating messages to
                              the general public.

35.
36,                           Whilst plans already exist these are
37                            being reviewed by the emergency
38,                           services.

39,                           First aid provision is in accordance
                              with the recommendation.

40,                           First Aid Rooms have been up-graded.

41                            Both Clubs have a medical practitioner
                              in a t t e n d a n c e .

42 .                          Currently at each Club two ambulance
43.                           authority vehicles are provided
                              plus 1 St. John's Ambulance vehicle.
                              This is under review.

In addition the City Building Surveyor advised the group and it
was noted that -

(a)    twice during the football season meetings take place with
       the relevant officers and all football stewards concerned
       with the Club for the reinforcement of their responsibility
       for the safety of the spectators.  Furthermore if problems
       arise with individual stewards found not to be carrying
       out their functions correctly, they are dismissed; and

(b)    there have been two amendments to the Clubs Safety
       Certificates, viz:-

        (i)   a change in the crowd capacity;   and

       (ii)   improvements in the stewarding of the crowds and
              crowd watching.

Frequency of Meetings

The Advisory Group considered the frequency of meetings and it
was agreed that -

(a)    a site visit to Liverpool Football Club be arranged to take
       place on Monday, 25th September at 10.30 a.m. and thereafter
       further discussions take place at the Club to -
         (i)   determine how regularly the Advisory Group
               should m e e t ;

        (ii)   select a date for a site visit to Everton
               Football Club; and

       (iii)   consider further the arrangements for a site
               visit during the progress of a football
               match.

Consideration of Supporters Complaints

The Advisory Group considered complaints received from
supporters in respect of the following, viz:-

(a)   Gwladys Street   -    no gates in new fence.

(b)   Anfield Road      -    extra row of seats at front impedes
                            egress.

                            tunnel reduced for more seats -
                            egress restricted.

                            complaints regarding moat in Spion
                            Kop.

The City Building Surveyor advised Members on the formation
of the safety corridors at both Everton and Liverpool Football
grounds and furthermore in respect of Anfield Road, plans
were deposited with the City Building Surveyor and evacuation
times were checked and found to be within the stipulated
times of the Guide to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
and the comments of the City Building Surveyor were noted.

It was agreed that in future any complaints received from
supporters would be immediately passed to the City Building
Surveyor for investigation.
