ARSENAL FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.
Secretary: K .J. FRIAR                         (Arsenal                       ARSENAL STADIUM
Manager: G. GRAHAM                                                        HIGHBURY, LONDON N5 1BU
                                                                             TELEPHONE: 01-226 0304
                                                                            TELEX: 298083 ARSNAL G.




Ref: DM/SA
                                                                           28th September 1989

Cllr. H Chase
Chair Hillsborough Working Party
Liverpool City Council
Room 5
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
LIVERPOOL L69 2DH


Dear Cllr. Chase

Re; LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL - HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY

We acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 24th August containing
a questionnaire regarding our Stadium.

We are providing the information requested on the condition that it is
for the sole use of your Working Party, it will not be published in
any form and will not be passed on to any other party for any purpose
without written agreement by Arsenal Football Club.

i)       No high pitch perimeter fencing has ever been provided.
         A barrier fence approximately 1100 high surround the pitch.

          Radial fencing was introduced in 1979 and has been added
          to up to 1988. Arsenals radial fences all have been
          designed to allow transverse movement across the terrace,
          each having 3 No. openings and 2 No. unlocked gates.

ii)      Sufficient fencing is provided to segregate the various
          sections of the ground otherwise movement of terrace
          spectators towards the stands would take place.

          North Terrace - Home Spectators - 3 No. radial fences.
          South Terrace - Home and away Spectators - 5 No. radial
                          fences.

iii)      The radial separation fences were installed to split the
          high capacity terraces into smaller units and segregate Away
          Spectators. More fences were needed on the South Terrace
          to allow flexibility regarding the numbers of travelling
          Away Spectators to be accommodated. The radial separation
          fences were initially introduced to contain incidents to

                                                         cont/...




                             Company Registration Number 109244 England
                                      -   2   -




one area of the ground and to ease policing when these incidents arose.

iv)   Initial response has been to remove further panels of radial
      separation fences in order that they cannot be defined as a fence.
      This has created serious problems regarding the flexibility of
      the number of Away Spectators that can be accommodated at each
      Home Match. Arsenal are considering reintroducing radial
      separation fences to allow the most economic use of the South
      Terrace with varying combinations of Away and Home Spectators.
      These new fences will be demountable or will when necessary
      have sufficient openings in them so that they cannot be defined
      as a fence.

v)    Not applicable to Arsenal Stadium, see i).

vi)   Radial Separation Fences were initially a police requirement
      but they were installed with both the GLC's and Arsenal's
      agreement.

vii) Arsenal have always resisted having pitch perimeter fencing on
     safety grounds. The police have always supported this decision.


Yours sincerely




D Miles
Assistant Secretary
