1.




     *H                    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                                          of the

                              Policy and Resources Committee

                                   27th February, 1998



     *P      PRESENT:      Councillor Jack Spriggs, Chair;
                           Councillors Eddie Clein, Alan Dean, Steve
                           Ellison, Dot Gavin, George Knibb, Peter Millea,
                           Bill Roberts, Len Tyrer and Peter Tyrrell.


                           Councillor Margaret Harrison also attended.


                           The attendance at the meeting of George Howarth
                           M.P., Jane Kennedy M.P., the Chairman and Members
                           of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, Phil
                           Scraton of Edgehill College, representatives of
                           the Hillsborough Survivors Group and the Football
                           Supporters Association and Councillor Tony Hill
                           of Sefton Borough Council was recorded.


                           Prior to the commencement of the meeting the best
                           wishes of the Working Party were extended to Phil
                           Hammond, Secretary of the Family Support Group,



     *M   15. Minutes of Previous Meeting

              The proceedings of the previous meeting of the Working
              Party held on 22nd January, 1998 were submitted for the
              information of Members.


          16. Hillsborough Scrutiny

              The Working Party considered:-
i

              (A)                 all aspects of and matters arising from, the
r                   announcement made by the Home Secretary in the House of
                    Commons on 18th February, 1998, to the effect that
                    following the scrutiny of evidence by Lord Justice
                    Stuart-Smith, there will be no further investigation of
                    any sort into the Hillsborough Disaster, with
                    particular reference to:-

                     (1)   the scrutiny document;

                     (2)   information relating to resolutions of other
                           Merseyside Councils regarding this matter;

            al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/Y2 702 98
             (3)   a further letter sent to the Home Secretary,
                   prior to the announcement, on the instruction of
                   the previous meeting;

             (4)   letters sent to the Home Secretary, prior to his
                   announcement from a member of the Family Support
                   Group;

        (B) verbal submissions made by George Howarth M.P. and Jane
            Kennedy M.P. outlining their view of the rationale
            behind the decision of the Home Secretary;

        (C) a verbal submission by Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the
            Hillsborough Family Support Group detailing the initial
            views of the Group about the decision;

        (D) other verbal submissions made by members of the Family
            Support Group, Phil Scraton of Edgehill College and
            Shiela Spiers of the Football Supporters Association;
            and

        (E) the resolution concerning this matter contained in
            Minute 3 99 of the proceedings of the meeting of the
            Policy and Resources Committee held on 23rd February,
            1998, viz:-

This City Council is acutely aware of the outrage from its citizens
following the Home Secretary's presentation of Lord Justice
Stewart-Smith's report on the Hillsborough Disaster, in which the
decision was to take the issues no further.

This decision flies in the face of considerable evidence and has
left the families, the City Council and citizens stunned beyond
belief.  Lord Justice Stewart-Smith quite clearly, on his arrival
in Liverpool left many people in no doubt that he would produce a
negative report.

This City Council therefore calls upon the Home Secretary to look
again at the evidence provided by the families and many others, and
set aside Lord Justice Stewart-Smith's submission. Furthermore,
this City Council'continues to support the Hillsborough Family
Support Group until justice for the 96 victims is finally achieved.

The City Council further calls upon the Party Leaders at
Westminster and M.P.'s on Merseyside to mount a campaign for the
rejection of Lord Justice Stewart-Smith's findings and for the Home
Secretary to institute a new Inquiry.

Failing to do so would be an affront to the families and the
victims.




      al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/Y2 702 98
    Resolved that the resolution of the Policy and Resources
    Committee be endorsed and any further action be determined
    at a further meeting when the Family Support Group have had
    the opportunity to determine the precise nature of their
    response to the decision of the Home Secretary and of the
    campaign necessary to support that response.


17. Memorial - Sheffield Wednesday F.C.

    The Working Party considered information that.there had
    been no progress of any sort in relation to the calls
    previously made upon Sheffield Wednesday F.C. by way of
    Sheffield City Council to erect a permanent Memorial to the
    victims of the Disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium.

    Resolved that:-

    (A)   the Chief Executive be requested to write again to the
          Chief Executive of Sheffield City Council to ascertain
          if their meeting with Sheffield Wednesday with regard
          to a Memorial has taken place and if so what was
          decided;

    (B)   the Chief Executives of other Merseyside Councils be
          encouraged to take similar action; and

    (C)   the Leader of the Council be encouraged to discuss
          this matter with his counterpart in Sheffield City
          Council to attempt to ensure their full support.


18. "No Last Rights"

   The Working Party were informed that as of 12th February,
   1998 a "surplus" of £632 existed on the sale of the "No
   Last Rights" book about the aftermath of the Disaster
   prepared on behalf of the Council by Edgehill College.


19. Hillsborough Disaster Trust Fund

    Resolved that if possible the issue of the Trust Fund and
    the distribution of its monies be considered at a future
    meeting and also the Director of Education be requested to
    report on the present situation with regard to the
    Hillsborough bursaries, which were to be provided by the
    Trust Fund.




 al/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/Y2 702 98
