                                                                       W. 1. Murray, LL.B.
                                                                       City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                                       P.O. Box No. 88
                                                                       Municipal Buildings

  LIVERPOOL                                                            Dale Street
                                                                       LIVERPO O L L69 2DH

 CiXy'QoiA'hdJt                                                        Telephone: 051-225 3911         Ext:
                                                                                     0 5 1 -2 2 5 2431 (Direct Line)
                                                                       Fax: 0 5 1 -2 3 6 2047
                                                                       DX 14206 LIVERPOO L


                                                                       Your ref

                                                                       Our ref    F&S/CM/BC
                                                                       Date       12th September, 1989

   TO:      All Members of the
            Hillsborough Working Party.




   Dear Sir,

            Further to my letter dated 11th September, 1989, requesting
   you to attend a meeting of the HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY
   to be held at 10.00 A.M. on FRIDAY, 15TH SEPTEMBER , 1989 in
   Committee Room "A" in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street, Liverpool,
   I now enclose for your attention the report of the meeting held
   between Members of the Working Party and representatives of West
   Midlands Police, Coventry City Council and Coventry City Football
   Club on 8th September, 1989, which will be considered under
   Item 3 of the Agenda.

                                           Yours faithfully,




                                            City S o l i c i t o r , V J




When   calling of   telephoning   please ask for   jy[r . Moneypenny
                                     PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL


           MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD BETWEEN
           MEMBERS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH WORKING
           PARTY AND REPRESENTATIVES OF WEST
           MIDLANDS POLICE, COVENTRY CITY
           COUNCIL AND COVENTRY CITY FOOTBALL
           CLUB ON WEDNESDAY 6TH SEPTEMBER, 1989
           IN POLICE DIVISIONAL HEADQUARTERS,
           COVENTRY


PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair of the Hillsborough
                                         Working Party;
           Councillor S. Ledwich, Chair of the Licensing
                                                Committee;
           Mr. T. Smith, Research Officer;
           Mr. C. Moneypenny, Committee Clerk;
           Chief Superintendent P. J. Swingewood, West Midlands
                                                   Police;
           Superintendent K. Birch, Match Commander, West
                                           Midlands Police;
           Superintendent K. Hibbs, West Midlands Police;
           Mr. D. Giles, Coventry City Council;
           Mr. G. Hover, Coventry City Football Club;




           Other Officers of West Midlands Police also
           attended the meeting but took no substantial
           part in the discussions.




NO.                         MINUTE

           INTRODUCTION

           Councillor Chase opened the meeting by indicating
           the background against which the necessity for the
           meeting had arisen i.e. the complaints of Everton
           supporters regarding ground safety matters at the
           Highfield Road Stadium on the occasion of the match
           between Coventry City and Everton on August 19th,
           1989. The Working Party had found it incumbent
           upon them to investigate the legitimacy of the
           allegations it had received and following preliminary
           correspondence had been invited to this meeting in
           order to view the Police Crowd Surveillance Video
           of the match and to discuss the matter in detail.
                  MINUTE

Superintendent Birch, the Match Commander on the
day began to outline the allegations as he under­
stood them. However, it immediately became clear
that there was a degree of misunderstanding as to
the precise nature of the complaints and therefore
Councillor Chase offered to assist by listing the
eight main areas of dissatisfaction, which were as
follows:-

(a)   Lack of Signposting;

(b)   Poor Turnstile facilities;

(c)   Lack of Police Control outside Stadium;

(d)   Manner of Police response to complaints;

(e)   Over-crowding on terraces;

(f)   People standing on staircases and sitting
      in gangways at back of Sky Blue Stand;

(g)   Inaudibility of Tannoy Accouncements; and

(h)   Poor exiting facilities from terraces and
      stand.


Superintendent Birch explained that the Operational
Order employed by the Police on the day was drawn
up with Safety as the primary consideration and
Public Order only of secondary importance.
Inconvenience to supporters he said would rank
below both in the concern of the Police.


Police on duty were those, based in Coventry's
'M' Divisio, who were familiar with the City and
with the policing of Highfield Road.  In detailing
the precise nature of the police arrangements,
Superintendent Birch indicated that some 130 Officers,
including Special Constables and Members of the
Operational Support Unit, were on duty with a
similar number of Club Stewards also in attendance.
He was particularly concerned to point out that the
Special Constables deployed at Gate 9, i.e. in the
area of visiting supporters access to the Sky Blue
Stand, had been deployed on match duty in that
area for some 3 years.
                   MINUTE

THE POLICE VIDEO

The video was then shown with Superintendent Birch
providing a commentary. The edited tape had been
compiled by the Police to reveal, in their view,
the most significant events which had been actually
recorded by their video machine from the different
cameras scanning various locations during the
afternoon. With just one machine to record numerous
simultaneously occurring events it was therefore
inevitable that the film would not provide a full
visual record of events and would thus not fully
resolve all the points of contention.   Superintendent
Birch later expressed concern that the Working Party
might consider the Police had deliberately edited
the tape in their own favour but Councillor Chase
assured him that this had neither been thought nor
implied.


The varying quality of the film was another problem
which the Working Party encountered in attempting
to use it as meaningful evidence. Whereas the shots
of inside the Stadium were of a high quality colour
resolution and included "zoom" pictures, those outside
the Stadium in which Members were particularly
interested were taken in poorer quality black and white
film from a fixed location and with an obstructed
view.


The contents of the video revealed the following:-

(A) VISITORS STANDING AREA

    No evidence of over-crowding with supporters
    appearing relatively comfortable spaced.
    However, at 15.11 in the sterile overflow area
    behind the goal into which supporters had been
    allowed there is a view of people climbing over
    a barrier towards the back of the terrace.
    Superintendent Birch claims they are being lazy
    as there are steps to the rear only yards away,
    although such steps are not visible on film.
    Mr. Giles of Coventry City Council at this point
    said that all the terraces have been re-surveyed
    following Taylor to assess the correctness of the
    previous capacity before enforcing the further
    recommended 15% reduction.

(B) SKY BLUE STAND

    Of particular note are the numbers of spectators
    sitting in an aisle in the upper stand, the ease
    of movement between the upper and lower stand via
    an open staircase and the apparently severe
    congestion upon exiting at the end of the game.
                MINUTE

(C) TURNSTILE ENTRANCE TO STAND

   Black and white pictures of the alleged
   congestion outside the stand prior to the game
   commence only at 15.03. The police estimate
   there are some 400 spectators in the area at
   this point and claim that there is a more than
   adequate police presence in the vicinity.
   By 15.15 most spectators appear to have gained
   access although the poor quality of the available
   film and the wall obstructing the cameras line
   of view renders accurate assessment difficult.


DISCUSSION OF VIDEO

Following the viewing of the video Councillor Chase
commenced the discussion by providing his immediate
reaction. While conceding that no over-crowding
could be discerned on the terrace he said the
film did highlight exiting problems, while in
certain other respects, notably the allegations of
poor turnstile access to the Stand and poor Police
control in this area, its provision of evidence,
was inconclusive either way.


(A) TURNSTILE ACCESS AND POLICE CONTROL OUTSIDE
    THE SKY BLUE STAND

    Mr. Smith emphasised that the majority of
    complaints about problems outside the Stand
    concerned the build-up between 2.15 and 3.00 p.m.
    and in particular the anxiety and fear for
    safety created by such a build-up in the period
    immediately prior to kick-off.  Hie video had
    unfortunately shown nothing of this period.


The Police re-asserted that a queuing regime had been
imposed by them although they accepted that the
Working Party could only take their word for that
and they also accepted the Working Party's view
that the number and consistency of supporters claims
made them impossible to ignore. However, Superintendent
Birch believed that he had responded to the initial
build-up problem which had been observed at the
Stand at 2.25 p.m. by sending an extra man and 2 extra
Police horses and by introducing a queuing regime.
He claimed those with tickets had formed a crowd
and wouldn't queue, and that the police responsibility
was only to form them into manageable groups.
Thereafter responsibility lay with the Club and with
the fans to "manage themselves".
                 MINUTE

Councillor Chase suggested that this sounded
similar to South Yorkshire Police's policy of
allowing fans "to find their own level", and that
the very fact that extra police were deployed
outside the Stand suggested there must have been
a problem in the area. Mr. Smith also took issue
with the use of the phrase "manage themselves" and
highlighted the limited turnstile access to the
visitors section of the Stand as well as the
difficulties created by the poor physical nature
and layout of "Gate 9".


The Police replied that "Gate 9" was more than adequate
in terms of both the Greeen Guide and Taylor and
that the speed of the turnstiles though "slower
than the Club would like" was something outside their
control.


(B) THE OTHER AREAS OF COMPLAINT

The discussion moved from the unresolved issue of
what had occurred outside the Stand to the other
general areas of supporters allegations.  It was
agreed the matter of signposting could only be
resolved by a site visit to Highfield Road.


In the matter of Police response to complaints, the
Police believed neither side could fully substantiate
allegations of abuse.  Superintendent Birch hoped
that, even if his Officers were the objects of abuse
themselves, their response would be professional
and that they would not respond in kind, but he
could not, of course, guarantee their behaviour in
practice.  Councillor Chase questioned the use of
Special Constables in such a delicate area but the
Superintendent believed that they were well-trained
and had performed the same function capably for
several years.


The Working Party accepted on the basis of the video
evidence, which had been highly selective, that there
had been no serious over-crowding on the terrace but
expressed concern at the supporters being allowed to
sit in passageways in E and F Blocks of the Upper
Visitors Stand, as had been confirmed by the video.
The response was that this was a n ongoing problem at
the Stadium caused by the ease of access between
lower and upper Stand and the greater desire of many
fans to view from the Upper Stand. The problem was
now being met by the effective separation of upper
and lower tiers.
                  MINUTE

On the question of tannoy announcements the Police
said they had attempted to make them in natural
lulls in play e.g. at half-time and during injury
breaks. They insisted that six had been made but
accepted that they may not have been heard.


In discussing the contention of poor exiting
facilities from both terrace and stand the Working
Party believed the film evidence had only confirmed
their concern about the adequacy of such facilities
or indeed the full use of all the facilities
available.

Mr. Giles stated categorically that he was satisfied
that the number of exits was adequate and complied
with the Green Guide. Exits, he said, could all
be thrown open at the flick of a switch, if
necessary.


"LATE ARRIVALS*

Mr. Hover from the Football Club said Coventry
had always been at the forefront of developments
in spectator facilities and was continuously
reviewing such facilities. He said they had always
had problems with Liverpool and Everton supporters
who refused to come to the ground early "to soak
up the atmosphere".


Mr. Smith explained that whether right or wrong,
a culture of arriving late did exist and it was
a known factor which could and should be anticipated.
It did not excuse the inadequacy of turnstile
facilities.  Coventry, as with many other Clubs,
only provide the absolute minimum facilities
required with a general lack of regard for the
comfort of spectators as consumers. More turnstiles
would also make the Police's job far easier.


Superintendent Birch concurred with this view.
This was a responsibility of the Club. The Police
were concerned with Crowd Safety and Public Order
and getting the fans into the Ground was up to the
Club. On August 19th he had believed the situation
outside the ground to be manageable as there was
no public order or safety implications but he was not
entirely happy because of the "inconvenience" to
spectators, yet this was largely outside his control.
                 MINUTE


Mr. Giles said it was a matter, not of legislation,
but of re-educating supporters to arrive earlier.
Mr. Hover said it was not that easy just to put
in new turnstiles. He wasn't saying there hadn't
been a problem on the day but the Club did not
think it necessary to make changes at the moment.
Of course, if a similar event occurred again, they
would consider it again. Re-education was more
important. Even people with allocated seats must
learn to arrive earlier to take up their seats.
Mr. Hover concluded by saying, "We feel we've taken
enough action to suffice for the time-being".


CONCLUSION OF MEETING

Mr. Giles and Mr. Hover refused the Working Party's
request for access to the inside of the Highfield
Road Stadium. Mr. Giles believed Members of his
Licensing Committee would be offended by Members
from another Authority visiting premises for which
they were responsible. The Club was answerable to
Coventry City Council, not Liverpool.


Superintendent Birch attempted to find areas of
common agreement for release in a joint press
statement. Councillor Chase thought that apart
from the vindication that there was no substantial
terrace over-crowding, there didn't seem to be
many areas of common ground.   He said he was very
unhappy with the decision not to allow the Working
Party representatives access to the Stadium and also
the attitude of Mr. Hover that the Club had "done
enough" and the refusal to consider extra turnstiles
in the visitors Stand area. He said that the fact
that large numbers of Everton fans had claimed it
was their worst experience in many years of Football
supporting indicated there had been a serious problem
which was not just a result of heightened post -
Hillsborough critical awareness.


Superintendent Birch made concluding remarks 1to the
effect that the Club have improved their arrangements
and now meet the spirit and letter of Taylor and the
Green Guide. He did not deny problems on 19th August
but some were exaggerated and he entirely refuted
claims that anyone had waited 75 minutes to get into
the ground. The Police Order had been completely
re-written post - Hillsborough to emphasise Public
Safety, but there was also a Public Order issue
and this was a national issue not just confined to
Coventry.
                 MINUTE


The Police allowed the Working Party to take away
copyright Black and White photographs of the crowd.
Councillor Chase requested a copy of the video tape
but Superintendent Birch asked that such a request
be made formally to his superiors in writing.
    COVEKTRY   CITY F. C.    STADIUM




                                  THACK
                                                          '    NORTH STAND
                                                                             m&m
                                                                             /   VISITORS   /          /
                                                                                                           / CCTV\
                                                                                                              o l vN <' ^^-
                                                                             ^   SEATING    '
                                                                             '//)^////A_

                                                          NO GO          ^ V IS IT O R S
                                  HOME     SEATING                       /S E A T IN G y
                                         fencing          AREA
    LU
                                                                                                HO


                                                                SUPPORTERS                      STANDING]
                                                                OVERSPILL
                                                                AREA


                                                                                                                              NO GO
                                                                                                                              AREA
                            t—
                                                                                                      Score
                                                                                                      board

                                                                                                VISITORS
                             cn                                                                 STANDING


                                                                                                     CCTV,




                                                              CCTV

                                                     MAIN STAND


                                                                                                     POLICE CONTROL ROOM!

                                                                                  DETE




L
