                                The City of Liverpool

                                 Personnel & Adm inistration Directorate
                                Peter Rhodes, Head o f Law & Committee Services
                                Solicitor to the Council
                                PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                Tel: 0151-225 2404 Fax: 0151-225 2427




                                              Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                              Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                              Your Ref:
                                              Our Ref: MFCDA/CM
To: All Members of Parliament
for Merseyside

21st November,1997


Dear Sir/Madam

Hillsborough Scrutiny

I have  been asked to write to you by the members of the
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party of Liverpool City Councilto
ask if  you would write to the Home Secretary to support theterms
of the  attached letter to him from the Council.

The letter supports comments made in a separate letter to Jack
Straw from Trevor Hicks detailing difficulties relating to the
Hillsborough Scrutiny which are being experienced by the Family
Support Group. The letter essentially criticises delays in the
production of documentation by South Yorkshire Police and in
calling for an extension to the present end of year timescale for
the Scrutiny suggests that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith should be
enabled to take possession of all the documentation to ensure
their full and timely disclosure.

While it may or may not be still possible to influence the above
matters the City Council does hope that M.P.'s would also share
its concerns about both the narrowness of the terms of reference
which has only come to light following the commencement of the
Scrutiny and the appalling comments made by the Lord Justice at
his meeting with families on October 6th.

The overall worry is that all of the above factors may have a
negative impact on the outcome of the Scrutiny and may indeed call
into question the fairness of its deliberations. For this reason
the Council has been determined to register its concerns with the
Home Secretary in advance of the outcome of the Scrutiny and
I am sure families would also appreciate any assistance which you
may be able to provide.

Yours faithfully           ^______


Colin Moneypennfs^|
Committee Clerk to -Mejcareyside Fire and
Civil Defence Authority

                    Director o f Personnel & Administration: Ian Jones
                  Administration & Commercial Services; Human Resource Service;
        Information Technology Services; Law & Committee Services; L egal Services Agency;
                              Public Relations & Information Service.
FAX SENT BV                                         ANN ADLINGTON              A4->A4    10/11/97        11:45      PG




   FAX FROM         !                                                                    1 B /1 1 /9 7   1 0 :51    PS
    10-NOy-gn 10T53            TREUOR HICKS                                       ^                            :   P01




         S ''
       ,NV
      *




             SUP?<^                                                                                      Stfppo*
                                   Hillsborough Family Support Croup


                Rt. lio n Jack Straw MP
                Home Secretary
                Home Office
                50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                London
                SW1H 9 AT
                                                                                             9lh No vein bar 1997
                                                                                           BY FAX AN p POST

                Dear M r Straw,                                                                            i
                                                                                                           i
                rc ; H illsborough S crutiny                                                               i
                                                                                                           i


                Tt w with deep regi’el lhal we feel we have no aUerruUive but to write to you to seek ycjut*
                intervention in the timetable for the scrutiny. Sincc your announcement o f the scrutuiyon the
                30(h June the problems o f slow or non-disclosure o f infornurtion by South Yorkshire Police
                and otfiers have continued unabated., It is o f such scale and regularity as to render any
                arguments o f mistake, oversight or pressure o f w ork totally untenable. We believe il is a
                deliberate tactic, to disadvantage the families and is dearly a cynical Httcmpi to influence thu
                outcom e o f the scrutiny,

                We hitve already mndo direct representation and ensured the problems were known to JLoid
                Justice Stuart Smith’s town / the Home Office but despite small temporary improvements, till
                our attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation o f our ease are being thwarted.

                Y ou will recall from our meeting at Ihe Commons that lamlllcs expressed concern Ibut custody
                (and apparently control!!) o f the evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
                Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster is central to the scrutiny. j
                Rattier Hum the spirit o f “openness" so vigorously espoused by New Labour the conlinaation
                o f the problems o f the hist eight and a half years is realising our worst fears.
                                                                                                           j
                They appear io have absolute power to determine what we xee find when, if ever, w e ^ee it,
                It cannot be right, fair or just that they have the scope to manipulate the proceedings by denial
                o r delay o f information.                                                               I

                lixamples o f the problems we are encountering are:-

                I ) As late as the 6”' November we received ibur important photographs - they were requested
                over three months ago!!!
     FA* SEN? B¥   :                                ANN ADLINGTON               A4->A4    1 0 /11/97      11:48   PG:    1
'I




        FAX FROM : 8153S 691483                                                           1 0 /1 1 /9 7   10:51    PG:   2
         10-NCW-S1 10:54  TREUOR HICKS                                             0   01535 S914B3               P02




             2)SevemI families arc still waiting to receive all o r parts o f their loved ones “bodyfiles" :

             3)On the 24’ September our solicitor was denied acccss to medical records despite having
             written authority from the relatives coneerncd. Access is still being denied!!

             4)Medical records o f the Into Phillip .Hammond have apparently been trade tivtiilablc to lo rd
             Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such records did not exist,

              i he initial ‘’deadline” for submissions was 1Sl September but this had to be relaxed when it
             became clear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with requests for !
             information until late August. The Uf'SCJ made preliminary submissions mid*Scptcmbcrand
             lodged others on the 25s' September. Both o f those documents made it clear that our efforts
             were being hampered by tho painfully slow information release by South Yorkshire Police.

             Clearly if the scrutiny attempts to report Mat the turn o f the year” full consideration o f newly
             disclosed evidence cannot take placc and hence it could not form part oJ any deliberation or
             conclusion.

             It is our belief that Lord Justice Stuart Smith should take possession and control o f all the
             documents/evidence to safeguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely disclosure to all
             parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim to the truth than the families o f the deceased.

             Wc farther submit that it is now imperative that you extend tlw timesoale ibr submissions and
             then' proper consideration hy the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the families and the
             public as fair and exhaustive.                                                             !

             All o f us want this m ailer concluded, bul having waited for so many years the families implore
             you to Introduce a 011c or two month extension to the timcscalc to ensure all our eoncefns can
             be properly investigated and “ scrutinised” . It is the families view that this is our lust ebancc
             for .justice to be done and clearly it must be “seen to be done properly” if faith in the judicial
             process is to be regained by the many thousands o f volet s who wrote to you, attended the
             justice concert, and wrote/telephoned the media in support o f our cause.

             W c shall be writing under separate confidential e n w r regarding deep concerns relating ko the
             Terms o f Reference you have set down for I/>rd Justice Stuart Smith and these may also give
             rise for revision o f the scrutiny programme.

             Yours sincerely,




             Trevor Hicks
             Chairman. - liFSCi
FOX SENT BV   :                             ANN ADLINGTON               A4->A4    10/11/97        11:45      PG:




                                                                                  1 0 /1 1 /9 7   10.51      PG:
   FAX FROM   !
    10-NOY-9n 10:53     TREUOR HICKS                                                                         P01




                                                                                              * *.«

                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                  4'O'PPO^
                            Hillsborough ramilv Support Group


         Rt. I Ton Jack Straw MF1
         Home Sccrctary
         Home Office
         50 Queen Anne’s Gate
         London
         SW1H 9 AT
                                                                                      9lh Novcm
                                                                                             member 1997
                                                                                    BY l'A X A N p POST

         Dear M r Straw,

         re ; H illsborough Scrutiny                                                                !
                                                                                                    i
         Tt is witli deep regret that we teel we have no alleinittive but to write to you to seek ytjur
         intervention in the timetable for the scrutiny. Siricc your announcement o f the scrutiny on the
         30th June the problems o f stow or non-disclosurc o f information by South Yorkshire Police
         and otlrcrs have continued \uiab«ted., It is o f such scale and regularity as to render any
         arguments o f mistake, oversight or pressure o f work totally untenable. We believe il is a
         deliberate tactic to disadvantage the families and is clearly a cynical attempt to influence the
         outcom e ol'Lhe scrutiny.
                                                                                                    i
         We hitve already mado direct representation and ensured the problems were known to lo r d
         Justice Stuart Smith’s team / the Home Office but despite small temporary improvements, till
         our attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation o f our case arc being thwarted.

         You will raeall from our meeting at the Commons that lamilics expressed concern tbui custody
         (and apparently control!!) o f the evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
         Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster Is central to the scrutiny.  |
         Rattier than the spirit o f “openness" so vigorously espoused by New Labour the eonl nutation
         o f tlw problems o f the hist eight and a half years is realising our worst tears.

          They appear to have absolute pow er to determine what wc see find when, if ever, w e sjee it,
         It cannot be right, fair or just that they have the scope to manipulate the proceedings by denial
         or delay o f information.                                                               I
                                                                                                  i
          lixamples o f the problems we are encountering arc:-

          1) As late as the 6th November we received four important photographs - they were requested
          over three months ago!!!                                                            J
Ffti; SENT BY   :                                ANN ADLINGTON                A4->A4     10/11/97        11:48   PG:   1




   FAX FROM     :                                                                        1 0 /1 1 /9 7   10:51   PG:   Z
     10-HOy-9n 10:54        TREUOR HICKS                                         m                         ;     PB2




          2)SevemI fomliits arc still waiting to receive till o r parts o f their loved ones “body files" :

          3 )0 » the 24tt September our solicitor \va.s denied access to medical rceords despite having
          written mithoriry from the relative;?; concerned. Access is still being denied!!

          4)Mcdicat records o f t ho lats Phillip Hammond havft apparently been made tivuijablc to lo rd
          Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been lold sueh records did not exist,

         The initial "deadline” for submissions was 1Sl September but this had to be relaxed when it
         became clear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with requests for
         information until late August, The IIPSC made preliminary submissions mid-September and
         lodged others on the 25"' September. Both o f (hose documents made it clear that our efforts
         were being hampered by the painfully slow information release by South Yorkshire Police.
                                                                                                          |
         Clearly if the scrutiny attempts to report “at the turn o f the year” full consideration o f newly
         disclosed cvidcncc cannot take place and hence it could not form purl o f any dcliberatioii or
         conclusion.

         It is our belief that Lord Justice Stuart Smith should ink* possession and control o f all the
         documents/evidence to salfcguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely disclosure to wM
         parties. Surely, no one can have greater, claim to the troth than the families o f the deceased.

          Wc further submit that it is now imperative that you extend the timescale for submissions and
          their proper consideration by the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the families and the
          public as fair and exhaustive.                                                                  !

          All o f us want this m atter concluded, bul having waited for so many years the families implore
          you 10 introduce a one or two month extension to the timescalc to ensure all our concerns can
          be properly investigated and “ scrutinised”. It is the families view that this is our lust chance
          for justice to be done and clearly it must be “seen to be done properly” if faith in tbe judicial
          process is to be regained by the many thousands of voters who wrote to you, attended the
          justice concert, and wrote/telephoned die media in support o f our cause.

          We shall be writing under separate confidential e n w r regarding deep concerns relating to ihe
          Terms o f Reference you have set down for Ix>rd Justfcc Stuart Smith anti these may also give
          rise for revision o f the scrutiny programme.

          Yours sincerely,




          Trevor Hicks
          Chairman. - IIFSO
FAX SENT B¥                                  ANN ADLINGTON              A4->A4     10/11/97        11:45      PG:




   FAX FROM   !                                                                    1 0 /1 1 /9 7   10-51      PG:
    10-NOM-9n 10:53     TREOT HICKS                                        m [                                P01




         Sl/ppO*1                                                                                  4'f/ppCF
                            Hillsborough Family Support Group


         Rl. lio n Jack Straw M P
         Home Sccrctary
         Home Office
         50 Queen Anne’s Gate
         London
         SW1H 9AT
                                                                                       9lh Novcm
                                                                                              ;cmher 1997
                                                                                     BY FAX A ANN f) POST

         Dear M r St raw,

         re i H illsborough S crutiny

         It is with deep regret that we feel we have no aHet nnl.ive but to write to you to seek yijuf
         intervent ion in the timetable for the scrutiny. Sincc your announcement o f the scrutiny'on the
         30lh June the problems o f stow or non-disclosurc o f information by South Yorkshire Police
         and others have continued unabated, , It is o f such seal® and regularity as to render any
         arguments o f mistake, oversight or pressure o f w ork totally untenable. We believe il is. a
         deliberate tactic to disadvantage the families and is clearly a cynical itltcmpi to influence the
         outcome o f Lhe scrutiny.

         We bitve already ntado direct representation and ensured the problems were known to l o r d
         Justice Stuart Smith’s team / the Home Cilice but despite small temporary improvemejnts, nil
         our attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation o f our ease are being thwarted.

         You will racall from our meeting at the Commons that lamilics expressed concern tbut custody
         (and apparently consol!!) o f the evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
         Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster ix central to the scrutiny. j
         Rattier than the spirit o f “openness" so vigorously espoused by New Labour the continuation
         o f Uw problems o f the last eight and a half years is realising our worst fears.

          They appear io have absolute pow er to determine what we -see f.tnd when, if ever, we sjee it,
         it cannot be right, fair or just that they have the scope to manipulate the procopdings % denial
         ov delay o f information.

         tixamplcs o f the problems we arc encountering are:-

         1) As iatc as the 6th November we received lour important photographs - they were requested
         over three months ago!!!
FAX SENT B¥    :                                ANN ADLINGTON                A4->A4     10/11/97        11:48      PG:    1




   FAX FR0H :                                                                            1 0 /j i/9 ?   10:SI       PG:
    1 0 - N W - m 10:54    TREUOR HICKS                                          0[                                P0E




         2 ) Several families arc still waiting to receive all or parts o f their loved ones “body files" :
                                                                                                 !
         3)Gft the 24,b September our solicitor was denied access to medical records despite having
         written authority from the relatives concerned. Access is st ill being denied!!

         4)Mcdical records o f the late: Phillip Hammond havtt apparently been trade available to t.ord
         Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such records did not exist,

         The initial “deadline” for submissions was l sl September but this had to fce relaxed when! it
         bceame clear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with requests tor '
         information until late August, The UFSCj made preliminary submissions mid-September'and
         lodged others on the 25“' September. Both o f (hose documents made it clear that our efforts
         were being hampered by the painfully slow information release by South Yorkshire Police.

         Clearly if the scrutiny uUempis to report "at the turn o f the year” full consideration o f newly
         disclosed evidence cannot take place and hence it could not form part o f any dcliberatioh or
         conclusion.

         It is our belief that Lord Justice Stuart Smith should take possession and control o f all the
         documents/evidencc to salfcguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely disclosure to all
         parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim to the truth than the families o f the deceased.

         Wc further submit that it is now imperative that you extend the timesoale for submissioAs and
         their proper consideration by the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the families and the
         public as fair and exhaustive.                                                                   !

          All o f us want this mutter concluded, but having waited for so many years the families implore
          you to Introduce a one or two month extension to the timcscale to ensure aU our concerns can
          be properly investigated and “ scrutinised” . It is the families view that this Is our lust chance
          for justice to be done and clearly it must be “seen to be done properly" if faith in ^ j u d i t i a l
          process is to be regained by the many thousands o f yiHc» who wrote to you, attended the
          justice concert, and wryle/tclcphoned the media in support o f our cause.

          Wc shall be writing under separate coolldcntial c u w r regarding deep concerns relating ito the
          Terms ofK eferaice you have set down for U r d Justice S t u r t Smith and these may also (pvc
          rise for revision o f the scrutiny programme.

           Yours sincerely,




           Trevor Hicks
           Chairman. - I IFSG
FAX SENT B¥                                     ANN ADLINGTON              A4->A4      10/11/97         11:48      PG:      2




                                                               e < -

    FAX FROM      : ______________                                                      0 9 /1 1 /9 7    19:48        PG:
  09-11-97 19:43 FROM:PHIL HAMMOND.H. F. S. 6 I                                  TOi               I                   PAGE




                                                                                                        *   t *♦

                           §
                Sj/ppOT*                                                                                    St/ppo*
                                     Hillsborough Family Support Group




                                                                                               9th November 1997

              Dear Mi* Straw,

              Firstly may I express my regret at having to write to you in the M ow ing vein. Unfortunately,
              since your announcement o f the setting up o f the Hillsborough Scrutiny on 30* June, this
              Groups efforts to present a comprehensive case have been thwarted by the same obstacles,
              attitudes and tactics which have prevailed in the eight and half years since the disaster Despite
              the Groups initial reservations upon your announcement o f the Scmtiny, probably the only
              source o f comfort was the expectation that the Scrutiny would be conducted in accordance
              with the principles o f 44 Openness “ so vigorously espoused by New Labour. Sadly this has
              proved not to be the c a se . Once again the group finds itself disadvantaged to an alarming
              UCUlCC.
           You will recall that at your meeting with families, concern was expressed relating to the
           disclosure o f information by various Authorities, the main concern being that all
           documentation is in the custody o f South Yorkshire Police, the very body whose role in the
           disaster is being examined as part o f the Scrutiny. They therefore, have absolute power to
           determine what information will be released and when it will be released. Therefore, there is
           great scope for them lo determine the outcome o f the Scrutiny simply by revising to disclose
           information 01 by delaying disclosure which I submit is exactly what they have done.

          The initial deadline for submissions was 1*' September, South Yorkshire Police did not start to
          comply with request for information until late August. Therefore the Group submitted
          preliminary submissions in mid - September. Further submissions were lodged on 25®
          September Those submissions make it perfectly clear that the Groups d ib its are hampered by
          the met that disclosure o f documents by South Yorkshire Police is a laboured and painfully
          slow process. It was submitted that it is unjust and unsatisfactory that the papers, formerly in
          possession o f West Midlands Police are now controlled by South Yorkshire Police. Lord
          Justice Stuait Smith was requested to take possession o f all the material in the case and to
          ensure that it was made available to all parties. Statements o f witnesses were not disclosed to
               Ies 8t the time o fth e inquests and disclosure has been refused since, This is probably the
          major reason why justice has deserted M i e s thus far




    CHAIRMAN
FAX SENT B¥   :                              ANN ADLINGTON               A4->A4     10/11/97    11:48        PG:   3
    -                                                                                                                   i




  FAX FROM                                                                          89/11/97    19:48        PC:   Z
09-11-37 13:50 FROM:PHIL HAMMOND. H. F. S. G                                 TO:i                            PAGE; 02




          One example o f delaying tactics is that o f 4 photographs requested from the South Yorkshire
          Police by the Groups solicitor over 3 months ago. Despite several reminders those
          photographs were only received on Thursday 6* November. These photos are extremely
          important and must now be copied and circulated to the rest o f our legal team and expens At
         least 2 o f those photos will form the basis o f a further submission. Also many requests for
         body files are still outstanding causing families anxiety that they will miss the boat with their
         evidence. In yuur media interviews on 30* June you stated that you were determined to ensure
         that no matter o f significance Is overlooked and that you did not reach a conclusion without a
         — ^ independent examination o f the evidence. In the circumstances I would urge you to
         intervene to ensure that South Yorkshire Police no longer control the release o f information.

          A further example o f obstruction is that access to hospital records is being refused. Our
          solicitor was reftised access to view records on 24* September despite having written
          authorities from families. These authorities were immediately sent to the Northern General
            ospital. In the absence o f response a further reminder was sent which culminated in a letter
                solicitors acting for the hospital. They asked for the specific statutory authority which
         entitled families to the hospital records relating to their loved ones. It was pointed out that
         whilst it was acknowledge that no such authority exists, the Northern General Hospital have
         previously supplied records to survivors and have now apparently disclosed some to Lord
         JusUce Stuart Smith, including those o f 14 year old Philip Hammond despite the fact that Mr
         & Mrs Hammond have always been told that no such records existed.
         Finally, fresh material has now emerged which the Group fed could well be outcome
         determinative and If available at the time o f Judicial Review proceedings in 1993 might well
         have influenced their outcome.


         In light o f the above the Group has no alternative but to request an extension o f the timetable
        to ensure all families relevant concerns can be addressed. Many see it as a last chance for
        justice 1 apologise for inconveniencing the pre - determined scheduled but since the disaster
        families have never been in a position to dictate timetables. It is said that time waits for no
        man Families however say that grief is timeless and time has stood still for them since IS*
        Apnl 1089 and that they can afford to wait for as long as it takes to ensure that justice is
        finally done.

        I shall also be writing to you under separate cover to notify you o f the Groups concerns
        relating to the Terms ofReference you have set down for Lord Justice Stuart Smith.

        Yours sincerely



        Trevor Hicks
        Chairman
                           Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                           Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                           Your Ref:
                           Our Ref: MFCDA/CM



                                            3rd February, 1998


R t . Hon Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
5 0 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT


Dear M r . Straw

HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

I write further to my letter dated 14th November, 1997 concerning
the above matter and your response of 4th December.

Our correspondence was reported to a meeting of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party of Liverpool City Council, held last week
at which various Members of the Hillsborough Family Support Group
were in attendance. Many of the people present expressed concern
about some of the content of your response and I was therefore
asked to write to you again to place this concern on record prior
to any announcement which may be made about the outcome of the
Scrutiny.
The overwhelming view which emerged from the meeting is that there
is continuing dissatisfaction with the terms of reference of the
investigation and indeed with the disparaging comments about
Liverpool supporters made previously by the judge. However even
more importantly there was also considerable disquiet expressed
about the inference taken from your letter to me, that the
decision not to extend the timetable of the Scrutiny was taken by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith with reference only to the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire Police. The Working Party support the
contention of the Families that while the Lord Chief Justice may
have been satisfied that the information received from the South
Yorkshire Force was adequate, nonetheless much potentially
valuable documentation which may have aided their submissions was
withheld from them by the Police .
In conclusion I would ask that as you reach your decision on this
matter you take the above comments into account. Would you also
please note that Liverpool City Council by way of its Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party has re-affirmed its earlier view
that even prior to the Stuart Smith scrutiny, sufficient evidence
had already been fulsomely demonstrated to cast overwhelming doubt
on previous judicial proceedings and to therefore justify the
establishment of a full new Inquiry into the Disaster.



Yours sincerely




Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
