                                                QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT



                                                             H   SEP

Colin Moneypenny Esq
Committee Clerk
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
Liverpool City Council
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool L69 2DH




Thank you for your recent letter about my decision to appoint Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith to conduct a scrutiny into the Hillsborough disaster.

I reached my decision after full consideration of the many representations which
have been received, and in view of the need to establish whether there was a
case for a further public inquiry into the disaster. It is important that we ensure
no matter of significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken.

I enclose for your information a copy of my statement to the House, which
includes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's terms of reference. You will see that I have
undertaken to make public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith gives me.

It is my earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to
the uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.



                           ^ \XX-v   < \a




                                  JACK STRAW
                                                                                As delivered


      HILLSBOROUGH : ORAL STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY
                                  MONDAY 30 JUNE 1997




 With permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
 Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


2.     Ninety six people lost their lives as a result of the Hillsborough disaster, which
happened on 15 April 1989. That was more than eight years ago but no one who saw the
news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have forgotten those terrible events. For those
who lost loved members of their family, the pain is ever-present. Following Hillsborough,
members of this House were united in their determination to do all in their power to
prevent anything like that ever happening again.




(i)   Public Inquiry



3.    Madam Speaker, after        the Hillsborough disaster, a number of inquiries and
investigations took place, looking at aspects of the tragedy. The most thorough and wide-
ranging was the Public Inquiry led by Lord Taylor. The terms of reference of that Inquiry
encompassed not only inquiring into the disaster itself but also into making
recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events.


4.    Lord Taylor’s inquiry took oral evidence from over 170 witnesses at public
hearings during May and June of 1989 and considered many hours of video evidence from
different sources. In his interim report in August 1989, Lord Taylor found that the
disaster had a number of causes. He did not attribute all blame to a single cause or person,
but in paragraph 278 he made clear that in his view:


       “The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”
5.       In his interim report Lord Taylor made 43 immediate recommendations. His       f in al

report in January 1990 made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which
have taken place since then in safety at football grounds and in the policing of football
matches have been based largely upon those recommendations. Football in this country
has been transformed since the Taylor Report. To a large extent that is due to Lord
Taylor’s wide-ranging and soundly based conclusions.


(ii)    Coroner’s Inquest


6.      The deaths which occurred on 15 April 1989 were also the subject of inquests
conducted by the Coroner of the western district of South Yorkshire.


7.      The jury at the Coroner’s inquest, after examining the evidence, found in March
1991 that the cause of death of those who died at Hillsborough was accidental death.


(iii)   jgest Midlands Police Investigation


8.      A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands Police, supervised by
the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for
criminal proceedings, and to consider whether any police officer should be subject to
disciplinary proceedings.


9.      That investigation involved the taking of over 5000 statements and the scrutiny of
all the material which had previously been examined by the Taylor Inquiry. After that
investigation the evidence was sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions, who concluded
that no person should be subject to criminal proceedings.


10.     The Police Complaints Authority did decide that the chief superintendent and
superintendent in charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty. In
the event, the chief superintendent retired due to ill health in advance of a ruling by a
disciplinary tribunal. Madam Speaker, under the police discipline rules, a disciplinary



                                              2
                                                                                               1




hearing cannot proceed when a police officer retires before the hearing takes place. The
Police Complaints Authority later decided that disciplinary proceedings against the
superintendent should be withdrawn because the retirement of the chief superintendent
meant that what, in effect, was a joint allegation of neglect of duty could not fairly be
heard in the absence of the more senior officer.


(iv)   Continued calls for further investigations


11.    Madam Speaker, Hon Members will be familiar with the unhappiness of the
families of those who died, about the outcome of the inquest.         They later applied for
judicial review of the coroner’s proceedings. In November 1993 the Divisional Court
ruled that none of the matters raised in the judicial review proceedings justified
intervention by that court in the verdict of the inquest jury.


12.    The events surrounding the disaster have therefore been subject to investigation on
several occasions.   But concerns have remained about whether the full facts have yet
emerged. I have met relatives of the Hillsborough victims whose suffering is exacerbated
by their belief that there are unresolved issues which should be investigated further.


13.    Representations were made to my predecessor and have been made to me, to the
Attorney General and to the Director of Public Prosecutions.          A Granada television
programme in December last year dramatised the disaster and raised a number of issues
which, in the view of the programme makers, represented new evidence. This prompted
an adjournment debate led by my Hon Friend, the Member for Liverpool Walton, to
which my predecessor, the Rt Hon and Learned Member for Folkestone and Hythe,
responded. I know how seriously my predecessor the Rt Hon and Learned Member for
Folkestone and Hythe took this matter. Since then further material has been submitted on
behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group. Those representations have related in
particular to video evidence of the disaster and medical evidence about the time of death of
the victims.




                                              3
Victims Support Group


14.    Madam Speaker, my Department, the office of the Attorney General and the
Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully all the evidence which has been
put forward in recent months.


15.     The Director of Public Prosecutions has taken the view that the material so far
presented to her would not justify fresh criminal proceedings. The then Attorney General
the Rt Hon and Learned Member for Bedfordshire North East also took the view, again on
the material presented to him, that any application to the High Court for a new inquest
would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding.


16.    Nonetheless, I am acutely conscious that the families of those who died at
Hillsborough and many others including Hon Members of this House are very concerned
that unresolved issues remain. I am determined to go as far as I can to ensure that no
matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a final conclusion without a
full and independent examination of the evidence.


17.    I can therefore tell the House today that the Attorney General, the Director of
Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that it is in the public interest that there should be
an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any new evidence relating to
the disaster which was not previously available. We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that purpose. His full terms of
reference are these:


       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
        Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


        (a)            To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or




                                              4
         (k)           To t^le Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for
                       the purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities;
                       or


        (c)            To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                       police disciplinary matters;


        And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of
        such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
        Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to
        their attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be
        relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
        which should be taken in the public interest.


I am today placing a copy of these terms of reference in the Library of the House.


 18.    We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other
evidence which has been submitted. He will also consider any further material which
interested parties wish to submit to him.


19.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s task will be twofold. First to advise me whether any
evidence not previously available is of such significance as to justify a further full public
inquiry. His advice to me will be made available to the House and will be made public.
Secondly, he will identify for the Attorney General and for the Director of Public
Prosecutions and for the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police any evidence which
might be relevant to their decisions which has not previously been considered.


20.    I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively whether or not
material evidence about the causes of the Hillsborough disaster has been overlooked. If it
has I can assure the House that I will take whatever action is needed. We owe it to
everyone touched by this tragedy, but above all to the families of those who died, to get to
the bottom of this matter once and for all.



                                              5
