              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                             of the

                Policy and Resources Committee

                      19th October, 1993



  PRESENT: Councillor J. Spriggs, Chair;
           Councillors C. Curry, F. Hegarty, P. Millea and
           K. Noon.



            Apologies for absence were received from
            Councillor S. Ellison.



1. Minutes of Last Meeting

  The proceedings of the last meeting of the Working Party
  held on 26th April, 1993 were submitted for the information
  of Members.


2. Hillsborough Project - Edge Hill College

  The Working Party considered the progress of the
  Hillsborough Project which is being undertaken at Edge Hill
  College, Ormskirk with Council funding in the light of:-

   (A) a letter received from Dr. P. Scraton, the Director of
       the Project, following the previous meeting of the
       Working Party dated 20th May, 1993 and detailing the
       progress at that stage of the Project;

   (B) a verbal Report of Dr. Scraton explaining that it is
       the intention to publish the 80,000 word second Report
       of the Project soon after the conclusion of the
       Judicial Review Hearing and also informing Members of
       the nature and contents of the second Report;

   (C) the comments of Ms. S. Coleman who is a co-author of
       the Project and a former employee of the College and
       who as a result of her involvement with the Project has
       been acting for a considerable time in an unpaid
       capacity on behalf of the Council in assisting the
       Liaison Officer on Hillsborough related matters and in
       particular in acting as joint co-ordinator of all work
       concerned with the successful application made by six
       families for a Judicial Review of the Inquest verdicts


al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Y191093
       and of the impending hearing of the Judicial Review in
       November.

   Resolved that -

   (1) the letter and Report of Professor Scraton be noted;

   (2) Edgehill College be requested to provide as soon as
       possible a financial statement which details how the
       finance which has been provided by the City Council as
       funding for the Project has been allocated; and

   (3) the Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons of
       the Policy and Resources Committee be requested to
       consider as a matter of urgency and if possible prior
       to the Hearing of the Judicial Review in November the
       question of recognition of the services which have been
       performed and expenses which have been incurred by Ms.
       Coleman in providing essential assistance to the
       Liaison Officer in Hillsborough matters.


3. Hillsborough Disaster Trust Fund

   The Working Party considered a verbal Report concerning the
   confirmation which is awaited from the Hillsborough
   Disaster Trust Fund Manager that financial assistance which
   has been requested from the Trust Fund with regard to
   travelling and subsistence expenses to be incurred by
   families attending the Judicial Review Hearing in London in
   November will be made available.

   Resolved that the Report be noted and the Liaison Officer
   inform the Chair of the outcome of the matter.


4. Judicial Review - Hearing

  The Working Party considered a verbal report of the Liaison
  Officer concerning the current situation with regard to the
  Hearing of the Judicial Review of the Inquest verdicts
  which is to take place in London on 1st, 2nd and 3rd
  November, 1993.

  Resolved that -

   (A) the Report be noted; and

   (B) the Committee Clerk to the Working Party request the
       Head of Legal Services, on behalf of the Working Party,
       that in order to ensure that the highest level of
       priority is attached to obtaining a favourable
       determination of the Judicial Review, he ensure that
       the Liaison Officer is provided with the appropriate


al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Y191093
      assistance to enable her to perform the role of co­
      ordinator in the period leading up to the Judicial
      Review Hearing.




al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Yl91093
