                               The City of Liverpool
                                P erso n n el & A d m in istra tio n D ir e c to r a te
                                        Committee & Member Services


                              PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                            „ Tel: 0151-225 2430 Fax:0151-225 2427




                                                Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                                Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                                ^our Ref:
                                                Our R e f : P&R/CM




To: All Members, of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party.



22th November 1996



Dear Sir

You are requested to attend a meeting of the HILLSBOROUGH

DISASTER WORKING PARTY of the Policy and Resources Committee to be

held at 10.00 A.M. on FRIDAY, 6TH DECEMBER 1996 in Committee Room

"A" in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street, Liverpool.



An agenda for the meeting is attached.




Yours faithfully



Principal Committee Clerk
                                        O -'A




                       Director o f Personnel & Administration: lan Jones
 Administration & Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resource Service:
                    Information Technology; Legal Services; Public Relations.
           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                          OF THE

             POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                    6TH DECEMBER 199 6

                          AGENDA


Minutes of last meeting

To consider the formal proceedings of the last meeting of
the Working Party held on 11th November, 1996, a note of tlie
matters discussed at that meeting and any action which
remains to be taken with particular regard to:-

i) the proposal to campaign for a change in the law following
the recent decision of the Court of Appeal which enabled
certain South Yorkshire Police Officers to claim compensation
for psychiatric illness caused by the Disaster;

ii) the Guatemalan Disaster,-

iii) a Report of the Director of Education concerning the
dispersal of the Hillsborough Bursaries; and

iv) matters related to the administration of the Trust Fund.



"Hillsborough11 Television Programme

To consider matters arising from the broadcasting by
Independent Television on 5th December, 1 9 9 6 'of the drama/
documentary "Hillsborough" and in particular the legal
implications of the unused evidence about the Disaster■which
the Programme makers have revealed.
           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                           of the

              Policy and Resources Committee

                    11th November,   1996



PRESENT:   Councillor Jack Spriggs, Chair;
           Councillors Peter Allen, Margaret Clarke,
           Eddie Clein, Eileen Devaney, George Knibb,
           Peter Millea, Len T yr e r .and Geraldine Wilson.



           Apologies for absence were submitted from
           Councillors Bill' Craig, Alan Dean and
           Steve Ellison.




Compensation Claims r Officers of
South Yorkshire Police - Court of Appeal

The Working Party considered the implications of
information relating to the announcement on 31st October,
1996 of the success of the appeal made to t h e ■Court of
Appeal by certain South Yorkshire Police Officers for
damages for psychological injuries suffered as a result of
their involvement in the Disaster.

Resolved that the Working Party -

(A) places on record its dissatisfaction with the judgement
    of the Court of Appeal in the light of the previous
    ruling by the House of Lords which prevented many
    bereaved families from receiving similar damages for
    psychiatric injury;

(B) notes and supports the terms of the early day Motion
    made .in the House of Commons by Liverpool Members of-
    Parliament for an appropriate change in the law which
    would ensure that all members of families who are
    bereaved in Disasters such as Hillsborough are accorded
    equal treatment with members of the emergency services
    and are therefore able to claim appropriate damages for
    psychiatric injury;

(G) notes and supports the intention expressed by Eddie
    Loyden M.P. at this meeting-, to make representations to
    the Speaker, on behalf of the Liverpool Members of
    Parliament and other supporters of the early day
    Motion, for an adjournment debate in the House of
    Commons on this matter and also his intention if
    possible to seek a ministerial meeting prior to such a
    debate;
 (D) requests the Committee Clerk on behalf of the Working
     Party, to write to the Prime Minister, the Leader of
     H.M. Opposition and the Leader of the Liberal Democrat
     Party to request their support for the proposal to
     change the law following the decision of the Court of
     Appeal;

 (E) requests that a note of the discussion at this   meeting
     be circulated to all Members of Parliament and   other
     interested parties co ensure that die concerns   of
     bereaved families and the City Council in this   matter
     are understood;

 (F) requests that the feasibility of the following courses
     of action be further examined, v i z :-

      (i) the seeking of the opinion of Counsel as to how
          the law may be amended in order to rectify the
          perceived injustice created by the judgement of
          the Court of Appeal; and

    (ii)   the creation of a petition under the auspices of
           the City Council and possibly with the support of
           Liverpool and Everton Football Clubs, which would
           enhance and publicise a potential campaign for the
           amendment of the law; and

(G) requests that a further meeting of the Working Party be
    held as soon as is appropriate to assess the progress
    being made on this issue and also, having particular
    regard to the profile of -Hillsborough matters which may
    arise following the screening of the Hillsborough TV
    Programme in December, to examine possible courses of
    action with regard to the other matters of concern
    which have been expressed at this meeting.


Guatemalan Disaster

The Working Party considered the response of the Council to
the recent football disaster at the World Cup Match between
Guatemala and Costa Rica, in the Mateo Flores Stadium in
Guatemala City, which claimed the lives of 82 supporters.

Resolved that -

(A) the action already taken by the Lord Mayor in
    expressing deepest sympathy to the bereaved families of
    Guatemala on behalf of the people of Liverpool be noted
    and supported;

(B) the placing on public record of the concern of the
    Working Party about the existence of the fencing which
    led to the Disaster be noted and supported;

(C) the Committee Clerk be requested to write to F.I.F.A.
    to ascertain their views with regard to the Disaster in
    Guatemala and their apparent failure to learn from the
    role played by fencing in creating the Hillsborough
      Disaster and also to request them to clarify their
      reported intention to seek in future to prohibit on a
      worldwide basis the playing of senior matches behind
      fencing; and

  (D) the Hillsborough Families ' Support Group be requested
      to provide the Working Party with any information which
      they may obtain from Guatemala which may enable the
      City Council to provide assistance to the families of
      the victims of the Disaster.

• "Hillsborough" Television Pr-ocrr-aTnmg

 The Working Party considered arrangements in respect of the
 television drama/documentary which has been made by Granada
 Television about the Disaster and which will be screened on
 Independent Television on Thursday, 5th December, 1996.
 Resolved that -

  (A) the arrangements which officers have made with Granada
      for: -

        (i) the programme to be previewed for bereaved
            families on Sunday, 1st December, 1996 at the
            Neptune Theatre;

       (ii) the provision of appropriate medical support for
            the above screening; and

      (iii) the provision of telephone helplines for those
            who may be distressed following the television
            screening of the programme,

     be approved;

 '(B) the officers of the Working Party be requested to
      investigate the possibility of survivors attending a
      preview of the programme; and

 (C) the possible need for the Council to be represented at
     the press launch of the programme to be held on 27th
     November, 1996 in London, be noted.


 Hillsborough Bursaries

The Working Party considered information concerning
progress made with- regard to the dispersal by the Council .
of the Hillsborough Bursaries -which have been funded by the
Disaster Appeal'Fund and other matters associated with the
Trust Fund.




1/cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/Y111196
   Resolved that -

    (A) the Director of Education be requested to report to the
        next meeting of the Working Party upon the detailed
        arrangements which have been made for the dispersal of
        the bursaries including the nature of the liaison with
        other District Councils, the profile of the bursaries,
        the arrangements made for considering the merits of
        applications, the number of applications received and
        details of the outcome of such applications and the
        amount of money therefore remaining in the bursary
        fund;

   (B) the comments of Professor .Scraton of Edgehill College
       with regard to the lack of accountability of the
       trustees of the Appeal Fund be noted and the
       feasibility of taking further action in pursuance of
       calling for full accountability of those charged with
       administering potential future appeal funds, be
       examined; and

   (C) the Committee Clerk be requested to write to Mr. Gerry
       Marsden to clarify the matter raised at this meeting
       with regard to his understanding of where the proceeds
       of the charity record, which he released following the
       Disaster, would be donated.




al/ cttee/hillsborou/draftmin/Y111196
NOTES OF A MEETING OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING? PARTY HELD
                      ON 11TH NOVEMBER 19 96

PRESENT:-

Councillor Jack Spriggs - Chair
Councillors Peter Allen, Margaret Clarke, Eddie Clein, Eileen
Devaney, George Knibb, Peter Millea, Len Tyrer and Geraldine
Wilson.

Eddie Loyden M.P., members of bereaved families, survivors, Dr.
Phil Scraton of Edgehill College, officers of the Working Party
and representatives of the Directors of Social Services anH
Education also attended.

Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors Bill Craig,
Alan Dean and Steve Ellison and also .from Peter Kilfoyle M.P.,
Jane Kennedy M.P. and Sheila Coleman.



Compensation Claims - South Yorkshire Police Officers

The meeting commenced with a discussion of the successful appeal
made to the Court of Appeal by four police officers employed by
South Yorkshire Police at the time of the Disaster for damages in
respect of post traumatic stress disorder caused Dy their
involvement as "rescuers" in the Disaster.

There was general concern about the unfairness of the present
state of the law.which had allowed claims for damages by
professional "rescuers" but which had disqualified many bereaved
families who had made similar claims. Many people had suffered
trauma but ironically it appeared, that those who were present only
because they were in paid employment - ambulance officers it was
noted had also received compensation from the Chief Constable -
were receiving favourable treatment when it could be questioned ■
why they should receive compensation at all for doing their job.
One. suggestion; was that if the claimants had been amongst the
officers who had pushed the fans back into the pens, their trauma
may have been caused by .their feelings of guilt. Whether or not
the police officers should be able to claim damages was generally,
considered to be a separate issue, although it highlighted the
unfair treatment of families. It was thought that there would be
wide support across the political spectrum for a change in the law
to rectify this injustice.

Eddie Loyden M.P. indicated that an early day motion about the
issue had been circulated in Parliament by the Liverpool Members
of Parliament. This would draw attention to the issue but it would
be: preferable if an adjournment debate was sought on the issue
with, -if possible a pre-meeting-with appropriate Ministers..The
support of members of the Shadow Cabinet could be sought.. Mr. ■
Loyden emphasised that it would be extremely useful to seek ■
Counsel's opinion upon precisely how the l a w could be changed..
A suggestion was made that another way to' raise the profile of the
issue amongst the public would be to organise a petition calling
for a change in the law which could be presented to the Prime
Minister, although the logistics of gathering such a petition were
questioned. Perhaps Liverpool and Everton would allow leaflets to
be placed in their programmes?

The possibility was discussed of utilising the successful actions
of these police officers, which had through a court of law
demonstrated the negligence of their senior officers, in now
making those senior officers and South Yorkshire Police
accountable for their negligence.

Guatemalan Disaster

 The action so far taken by the Council following the Guatemalan
 Disaster, including the message of condolence sent by the Lord
 Mayor, was discussed. The meeting shared astonishment that a
 Disaster so similar to Hillsborough, had occurred again at another
■football stadium showing that FIFA had not learned the lessons of
 1989 with regard to the dangers presented by fencing -
 particularly those as barbaric as effectively led to the Disaster
 in the Mateo Flores Stadium in Guatemala City. It was agreed that
 the Committee Clerk would write to FIFA to ascertain their views
 as to why they had not previously refused to sanction games played
 behind fences and the precise details of their reported intention
 to now belatedly institute such a practice.

The question of what practical assistance the City may be able to
offer the bereaved in Guatemala was discussed and it was agreed
that the officers of the Working Party should discuss this with
representatives of the Family Support Group, who have attempted to
make some initial contacts, with a view to establishing what is
feasible and reporting back to the next meeting.

"Hillsborough" Television Programme     .

The Working Party considered arrangements being made in
conjunction with Granada Television .and the families in respect of
the drama/documentary concerning the Disaster which is to be
screened by ITV on 5th December 1996.

            L representing the Director of Social Services
confirmed that a helpline service would be established following
the programme in Seel Street. It would operate on the night and
into the next.day. The Alder Centre it was anticipated would also
operate a helpline.

There was to be a screening of the programme for families in
advance of the television broadcast. This would be at the Neptune
Theatre on Sunday 1st November, 1996 with the theatre being
provided free of charge by the Council. Paramedics would be in
attendance in case the programme created any distress. The
question of whether other parties such as survivors and Members of
the Working Party would be able to attend was discussed and the
officers were asked to continue to investigate this possibility.
It was stressed that this may not be feasible due to potential
legal difficulties related to the confidentiality of the contents
of the programme which this may cause.

The Working Party were also informed of the Press Launch for the
programme to be held in London on 2 7th November and although this
was Council day a request was made to look at whether or not the
Working Party would be represented in some way.

The meeting, at the instigation of John Glover, had given some
consideration to new evidence, relating to missing video tapes of
the Disaster, which it was hoped would result from the
investigations made b y the programme makers. This could be
discussed at the next meeting.

Hillsborough Bursaries and Administration of Trust- F n n H

The Trust Fund had allocated to the five Merseyside District
Councils £75,000 over 10 years for educational bursaries to be
awarded- under strict criteria insisted upon by the Trust Fund
Manager. This was despite strong protests by the Working Party
that these particular criteria would effectively exclude many
members of bereaved families from making an application. The
Director of Education was asked to report back upon the detailed
arrangements which had been made for the dispersal of the
bursaries, as there was concern that the bursaries were not being
used at all at present.

Phil Scraton said that he and many of the families had become
increasingly angry with many aspects of the administration of the
Trust Fund and believed that lessons from the failings of previous
similar funds had not been learned. Substantial amounts had been,
donated to institutions which although no doubt worthy causes in
their own right, were clearly not-directly related to the Disaster
- and yet most people who had contributed to the Fund had done so
on the basis that it would help to meet the financial needs of
those most directly affected. A specific•question was raised about
the record made by Gerry Marsden for the Fund and Colin Moneypenny
was asked to investigate this by, if possible, writing to Mr.' ■.
Marsden.

There continued to be widespread concern, reflected again at this
meeting about the accountability of trustees of Disaster funds and
it was agreed to look at any further action which could be taken
to ensure th a t 'in future, if such funds need to be established,
those charged with, making the decisions for spending the
accumulated funds, are accountable in some way for such decisions.
It was suggested that these concerns could be explored with the
Charity Commission. It. was also agreed to supply as many people as
possible with a copy of the Final Accounts of. the Fund.
