           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                         of the

              Finance & Strategy Committee

                    11th August, 1989




PRESENT:       Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
               Councillors W. Edwards, A. Jennings,
               P. Millea and K. Noon.




               Chairman of the Council (Councillor
               Dorothy Gavin) and Councillor
               F. Vaudrey also attended.




The Hillsborough Disaster - Interim Report
Lord Justice Taylor

The Working Party considered a report of the City
Solicitor relating to recommendations 16 and 17 of
Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report of the inquiry
into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, which refers
to the arrangements for reviewing Safety Certificates
for football grounds in the light of the information
contained with the City Solicitor's Report.

Resolved that in order to comply with the recommendation
of Lord Justice Taylor an Advisory Group should be
established which would report to the Licensing Sub­
committee the composition of the Advisory Group should
consist of:-

     the Chair ^ f the Licensing Sub-Committee,
     the Chair of the Hillsborough Working Party,
     the Opposition Spokesperson of the Hillsborough
     Working Party,
     the City Building Surveyor,
     a representative of the Merseyside Police,
     a representative of the Merseyside Fire Service,
     a representative of the Merseyside Ambulance Service
     a representative of the Everton Football Club,
     a representative of the Liverpool Football Club,
     a representative of the Everton Supporters' Club,
     a representative of the Liverpool Supporters' Club,
     and
    2 representatives of the Football Supporters'
    Association.

Separate meetings of the Advisory Group should be held
to discuss each Football Club and that the first
meeting of the Advisory Group should be held before the
new Football League season commences on Saturday
19th August, 1989, when Liverpool play Manchester City
at Anfield.
