  STATEMENT TO BE FORWARDED TO THE ACTING HEAD OF SHEFFIELD
     CITY COUNCIL'S ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT


     With reference to your letter dated 23rd August, 1989,
regarding the Hillsborough disaster, this Hillsborough
Working Party has been requested, on behalf of Liverpool
City Council, to respond to the concerns, registered in your
letter, of Members of your Authority and those Members who
also serve on the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

     From our own enquiries into the Hillsborough tragedy,
and from a full reading of the transcripts from the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry, we fully agree with
Lord Justice Taylor's unequivocal contention (para 286 of
his Interim Report). "The poor performance by the City
Council of its duties in regard to the Safety Certificate
was inefficient and dilatory.  The failure to revise or
amend the Certificate over the period of three years
preceding this disaster, despite important changes in the
layout of the ground, was a serious breach of duty. There
was, as a result, no fixed capacities for the pens.  The
Certificate took no account of the 1981 and 1985 alterations
to the ground.11

     We contend that the comments of the Leader of this City
Council are fully vindicated in respect of the 'poor
performance' of your Authority in its duties and obligations
to the Hillsborough Safety Certificate.

     Further to the issue of resignations, this Working
Party, on behalf of the City Council, has continued, and
will continue to call for the resignation of those officials
within Sheffield City Council responsible for the
Hillsborough Safety Certificate and the Chairman of the
South Yorkshire Police Authority.

     Your Members concern at the comments of Mr. Norman Bush
(Liverpool City Council's Chief Building Surveyor) is
somewhat perplexing given the 'considerable offence' already
caused to the families, relatives and friends of the
bereaved and injured.

     Finally, your response to the Norman Bush article
has added insult to an enormous injury and which we hope you
will forgive us saying perhaps demonstrates a lack of
sensitivity to the feelings of Merseyside people.  The fact
is that your Authority's administration of the Safety
Certificate up to the 19th April 1989 showed a dereliction
of duty and responsibility which proved to be "a recipe for
disaster."

                                Hillsborough Working Party.



S02AAR
