                                         City Solicitor, Secretary to the Counci:
                                         P.O. Box No. 88
LIVERPOOL                                Municipal Buildings
                                         Dale Street
                                         LIV E R P O O L L69 2DH
                                         Telephone:                          225
                                         Fax: 236 2047



                                         Y our ref

 TO: All Members of the
                                        Our ref      F & S /C M /V J
     Hillsborough Working Party
                                        Date         23rd June 1989




 Dear Sir/Madam,

 You are requested to attend a meeting of the HILLSBORODGH DISASTER

 WORKING PARTY of the Finance and Strategy Committee to be held

 at 9-00 A.M. on WEDNESDAY, 28TH JUNE 1989 in Committee Room 'C1

 in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street, Liverpool.


 Members should note that the first item to be considered at the

 meeting will be the 1 hour 50 minute compilation video of the

 Disaster made by West Midlands Police for submission to the Taylor

 Inquiry and arrangements have been made for the Working Party to

 adjourn to view the video at 9.15 A.M. in the Public Relations

Media Room, Municipal Buildings.


The Meeting will re-commence at approximately 11.15 A.M. in the

Municipal Annexe for consideration of the attached agenda.

Yours faithfully,_______




c±erK to tne Autnori
                     HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY

                           28TH JUNE, 1989

                               AGENDA



1.   Hillsborough Video as compiled by West Midlands Police
     Inquiry Team.


2.   Minutes of the meeting of the Working Party held on
     7tii June, 19 89 are submitted for the information of
     Members.


3.   Application for Research Funding for a project entitled
     "After Hillsborough".

                        (see enclosed Report)


4.   Report on the feasibility of suggesting alternative
     routes to Hillsborough.


5.   Report of City Building Surveyor on visit to Hillsborough
     - 19th May, 1989.

                         (Report to follow)


6.   Report of City Building Surveyor on the licensing of
     Football Stadiums.

                        (see enclosed Report)


7.   Report on letters sent to Liverpool and Everton Football
     Clubs in relation to the Football Supporters' Legislation.
                                                HILLSBOROUGH


              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                          7th June, 1989



 PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
            Councillors W. Edwards, A. Jennings, Mary
            Johnston, S. Ledwich, Peter Millea, K. Noon,
            F. Roderick, Jacqueline Smith and I. Templeman.



            Mr. Peter Jackson attended as an observer
            representing the Football Supporters
            Association.



Minutes of Last Meeting

Resolved that the Minutes of the last meeting be approved.


Visit to Hillsborough
(CS/124/89)

The Working Party considered Reports of the City Solicitor
and Mr. Giles of the City Engineer's Department concerning
the visit of the Working Party to Hillsborough Football
Stadium on 19th May, 1989.

Resolved that -

(a)   the Reports be approved;

(b)   the City Building Surveyor be requested co prepare
       a Report on the visit to Hillsborough; and

(c)   arrangements be made for Members of the Working
       Party to view when available the video recording
       of the visit and the video of the Disaster prepared
       and made available by the Football Supporters
      Association.


Distribution of Leaflets

The Chair informed members that -

(a)   30,000 leaflets publicising the work of the Working
      Party and giving details of the Public Meeting had
      been distributed at the F.A. Clip Final on 20th May#
      1989 and at Anfield on 23rd May, 1989; and
      HILLSBOROUGH


      (b)     publicity had also been given to the Working Party
              on the 'Wembley scoreboard before the Cup Final and
              during the half-timr interval.


16.   Public Meeting
      (CS/123/89)

      The Working Party considered -

      (a)     Report CS/123/89 of the City Solicitor concerning
            - the Public Meeting held at St. George's Hall on
              25th May, 1989 to discuss the Disaster and the
              way forward for football; and

      (b)    the Statement of the Chair made at, and endorsed
             by the Meeting

      .Resolved that the statement be approved subject to the
      deletion in paragraph 7 of the words "those responsible
      for Hillsborough are exposed and brought to justice"
      and their replacement with the words "the lessons of
      the tragedy are learned and acted upon".


17.   Conference - Football Supporters Bill

      The Working Party considered a Report from Representatives
      who attended the Conference on the Football Supporters
      Bill held on 16th May, 1989 at Hammersmith Town Hall,
      London.



      Councillor Peter Millea informed the Working Party of
      the advice, printed on the renewal forms issued by
      Liverpool Football Club to its season ticket holders,
      that they will be required to comply fully with any
      legislation introduced by the Government or the
      Football Authorities regarding football membership
      schemes.



      Resolved that -

      (a)    the Research Officer, when appointed be requested
             to prepare a Report as a matter of urgency on the
             proposed Supporters I.D. Scheme; and

      (b)    Liverpool and Everton Football Clubs be contacted
             in order to determine their current position in
             regard to the Government legislation on football
             supporters, particularly in the light of the advice
             given by Liverpool to its season ticket holders.
                                                      HILLSBOROUGH


18.   Staffing and Administrative Support

      The Chair informed the Working Party that following
      advertisement in the Liverpool Echo short-listing
      will take place on 8th June, 1989 for the post of
      Research Officer.


19.   Licensing of Football Stadiums

      Resolved that the City Building Surveyor be requested to -

      (a)   prepare a Report on the present arrangements for
            the licensing of Football Stadiums particularly
            insofar as they apply to Anfield and Goodison
            Park;', and

      (b)   provide the Football Supporters Association, as
            requested with a copy of the Ground Safety
            Certificate for Anfield subject to the consent of
            Liverpool Football Club.
                    \


20.   Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry

      The Deputy City Solicitor reported upon the further
      request which has been submitted to the Lord Justice
      Taylor Inquiry upon the representation of the City
      Council at the Inquiry. A response to the request was
      expected imminently.
