   ’I



Lord Mayor ladies and gentlemen please
let me introduce myself I am Phil
Hammond secretary to The H.F.S.G.

Members of the H.F.S.G Would like to
convey their heartfelt thanks to
Liverpool City Council for calling this
extra ordinary council meeting. This
action is in line with the tremendous
support which the council has
constantly given to the families since
the day of the disaster.

This meeting was called as a result of
the public screening of Hillsborough.

 The publics response to the programme
has been overwhelming, people from all
walks of life right across Great
Britain have written to us expressing
outrage at the treatment of bereaved
families and offering us their
s u p p o r t f o r that we are eternally
grateful.

Before moving onto giving specific
thanks to Jimmy, Katy, and the rest of
the Granada team, we have to say that
there is one single criticism of the
programme_ That it did not go far
enough. This is not a criticism of
Jimmy and the team we are all realistic
and we Know of the constraints imposed
5pe€CH        P m. il .
        L-V                qrbCUiP   "7&     B k TIV

cfe_                      £C
                           T~Jf            a t *-   1   4
by lawyers, indeed Granada fully
explained to us the reasons why some
extremely powerful material had to be
left out. This is why, when people ask
us "was it really that bad for you-we
say _ " it was actually worse.

For example our childrens bodies were irwja-dUxL
          when, without our knowledge
or permission, the Coroner ordered blood
samples to be taken from all victims in
order to establish how much alcohol
they may have drunk_ yes ’thats right
they even took blood from a 10 year old
child.
Such degrading treatment did not end
there_ The victims names were inscribed
on their right lower limbs.

My own son Phil 14 years young died as
a result of a punctured lung, taken to
an ambulance by two police officers yet
when they tried to give him oxygen the^.
ambulance had none on board, he was ~
then taken to hospital yet no reports
were kept of him, it was not until
November 89 that we learnt that he went
to hospital, the West Midlands police
returned his trainers and we noticed it
had an hospital tag on when I asked the
officer why the hospital tag was on he
then informed me that phil went to the
hospital, when I asked why I was not
told this before he said M you did
ask"

In the case of 19 year old Paul
Carlisle _ Pauls family       told that
he was the first to b^^Kstken off the
terraces at Leppings C^ne. riiis was at
3.15_ He was left lying oj^ the cold
concrete ground at the rear of the
terraces. He was declared dead some one
hour and/20 minutes later at 4.35pm_
still in ythat same cold place. The
family still dont know what happened in
the intervening period. A mother has to
live with the horrific thoughts that
her child was left to die/ on his own
at the rear of the terrace. He was then
moved to the cold floor of the
gymnasium_ no mothers warm arms to
embrace him. Every family can tell you
an equally harrowing tale, you would
expect that people who had suffered the
loss of their child or children,brother
sister, fathers, husbands, wives, in
such appalling circumstances_ all died
simply because they chose to go to a
football match to support a team that
they loved _ would be treated with some
sensitivity. But n o ’ The authorities
had to continue to play out the script
which they had started to write even as
the tragedy was unfolding, you expect
the police to retire into their
 defensive shells_ what you dont expect
 and what is absolutely unforgivable, is
 when one of M your own M joins the
 other side and plays an active role
 alongside the coroner, the          U ro^
 officer from the West Midlands police
 force, and others, in setting down the
 parameters of the inquest. I am
 referring now to the families solicitor
 at the time. Before the inquest began
 he attended business meetings with the
 coroner and other interested
Parties(not the families) to lay down
the ground rules for the inquest. Can
you believe, that in discussing the
order in which inquests should be held,
he suggested that there was one
particular family whose inquest should
be held at 9 o'clock in the morning
otherwise they " would swell the    ~~
coffers of the local hostelry before
they arrived M_ Those were his words'. I
have the document here to prove it.
Such co-operation and suggestions set
the scene for the biggest farce in
legal history. This was exceptionally
well portrayed in the programme,
you have to appreciate that all this
was taking place when families were
drowned in immeasurable grief, surely
they should have been able to rely on
those paid representatives? Not a bit.
This was brought home in 1993 when six
 families challenged the inquest verdict
 of "accidental death " in the High
 Court. Fortunately at that stage the
 families had engaged the services of
top London lawyer* Ed Fitzgerald and
Alun Jones. However, those lawyers were
hamstrung by the decisions and non _
interventions of the families lawyers
at the inquests, how many times did we
hear the high court judges say " but
the families legal representatives
failed to take issue with that point at
the inquest ." In other words what the
High Court judges were saying was
 "Tough _ the families have to live with
their lawyers shortcomings ". They paid
scant regard to evidence which had come
to light after the conclusion of the
inquests. For example pathological
evidence to say that at least 4 of the
six victims in question were probably
alive after the cut_off time 3.15pm
which had been imposed by the coroner.
The final insult came when those High
Court judges, who had supposedly
listened to 3% days evidence came to
hand down their judgement, They couldnt
even get the names of the football
teams right. In passing judgement in a
case involving the biggest disaster in
British sporting history-they referred
to an F.A. cup semi final between
Liverpool and JSMffield Wednesday '
That was when it finally dawned upon us
that we would never get justice in a
British court. Since then we have
soldiered on, struggling to get
information as to why and how our loved
ones died _ not even being able to
begin the grieving process while so
many questions remain unanswered and
meanwhile, none of those persons
responsible have been brought to
account. Until the "Hillsborough "
programme, we had resigned ourselves to
banging on closed doors, imploring deaf
ears, people telling us it was time- to
get on with our lives. Then every now
and again the evil lies would surface
spoken with venom by despicable
creatures like Clough and Ingham _
characters who used their public
positions to spread evil lies about our
children, the survivors, and the people
of this city. We have constantly had to
defend the reputation of our loved ones
who simply went to a football match and
did notreturn. We have    always said we
will never go away until the truth is
known and justice is done. Now Jimmy
McGovern in a 2 hour programme, has
started   that process of truth, Yes' it
was all   true. To him we will always be
grateful, we do not expect him to carry
our Campaign for justice banner
everywhere he goes. This is the
  families fight, he has to move on to
 other projects but of this we can be
 sure _ against all the odds he has
 opened up doors of possibility^ fe^ow
 remarkable-here we have a rare
 exception-a man with exceptional talent
 who used his high profile to highlight
 the injustices inflicted upon families
 in pain and anguish who are simply
 searching for the truth and crying out
 for justice. Not only has he dispelled
many of the lies surrounding the deaths
 of our loved ones, he has enhanced the
 reputation of this city to a startling
degree. He has awakened the conscience
of the nation.
How do we say thanks? thank yous and
cards seem so inadequate. Liverpool
needs a constant reminder that amongst
us there are those who are prepared to
go to the wall in order to right an
injustice. For this reason, and others
outlined earlier^ The H.F.S.G request-
that the City Council consider granting
Jimmy McGovern the freedom of this
great city.

Jimmy we thank you from the bottom of
our hearts.

Katy Jones the factual producer and
Granada T.V_ thank you for a brilliant
job.
To people across the nation who have
supported us in their thousands _ we
also thank you.

To those parts of the media in
particular Brian Reade and the Daily
Mirror who have pledge their support
we thank you.

Finally Lord Mayor and Liverpool City
Council we will always appreciate that
you have stuck with us when others have
fallen by the wayside

                     ^            <I       ___        g
^ .A C A 4                   ~    "    C         ~        c   C

             dC>^l       ,

Ks> ^                    L^ ,(?                      hJ
