             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                           of the

               Policy and Resources Committee

                     23rd September 1998



 PRESENT:   Councillors Chris Curry, Alan Dean, Peter Millea,
            Chris Newby, Bill Roberts, Jack Spriggs, Len Tyrex and
            Peter Tyrrell.



 Appointment of Chair

 Resolved that Councillor Peter Millea be appointed as Chair of
 the Working Party during this municipal year.


 Minutes of Previous Meeting

 Resolved that the proceedings of the previous meeting of the
 Working Party held on 27th February, 1998, be noted.


 Private Prosecutions

 The Working Party considered a verbal report of the Solicitor to
 the Working Party and the Family Support Group concerning
 matters related to the private prosecutions which have now ieen
 initiated by the Group against two of the Senior Police Officers
 on duty at Hillsborough Stadium on the day of the Disaster.

 Resolved that -
  (A)   the verbal report and the serious issues addressed therein
        be noted and the Solicitor be thanked for a thorough
        presentation; and
  (B)   the Working Party re-affirm its initial terms of reference,
        its unanimous all-party support for the often expressed
        pledge of the City Council to assist the Hillsborough
        Family Support Group in whatever way possible and therefore
        its support for the continued secondment of the Working
        Party Solicitor to the Support Group.




al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Y23 09 98
 Justice Charter

 The Working Party considered an initiative taken by the previous
 Lord Mayor and continued by the present Lord Mayor to create a
 Justice Charter signed by 96 prominent public figures.
 Resolves that -

 (A)   the Charter initiative be endorsed and the Committee Clerk
       be requested to liaise with the Secretary to the Lord Mayor
       to see how further progress can be made on completing the
       Charter; and

 (B)   when completed the Family Support Group be consulted to
       determine the most advantageous way to utilise the Charter
       given the continuing legal proceedings related to the
       Disaster.

 Memorial Mosaic

 The Working Party considered a request received to assist with
 the financing of a memorial mosaic, which is how in place in the
 Visitor Centre at Liverpool Football Club, dedicated to the fans
 who died in the Disaster.

 Resolved that the Committee Clerk be requested to ascertain from
 Liverpool Football Club whether or not the mosaic has now been
 fully financed with a view to reporting back to the Working
 Party in due course.


 Safety Issues at Lens Football Stadium, France

 The Working Party considered an article written by the
 broadcaster Melvyn Bragg which had appeared in the 'Daily
 Telegraph' on 21st September, 1998 which described a severe
 crowd safety problem, similar in various aspects to
 Hillsborough, which occurred at the Stadium used by the French
 League Champions Racing Club Lens, during a European Champions
 League match between Lens and Arsenal F.C. on'16th September,
 1998.

 Resolved that the Committee Clerk be requested to write to the
 'Daily Telegraph' expressing the alarm of the Working Party at
 the incident described by Mr. Bragg and particularly indicating
 how it continues to appear that the lessons of Hillsborough have
 still not been adequately learned outside of this country.




1/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/Y23 0 998
