                                               T he City o f Liverpool
                                                Personnel & Administration Directorate
                                                Peter Rhodes, Head o f Law & Committee Services
                                                Solicitor to the Council
                                                PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                                Tel: 0151-225 2404 Fax: 0151-225 2427




                                                                 Enquiries to: Colin Moneypenny
                                                                 Direct Line: 0151 225 2431
                                                                 Your Ref:
                                                                 Our R e f : P&R/CM

To: All Members of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party


16th January 1998


Dear Sir

Further to my letter requesting you to attend a meeting of the

H IL L SB O R O U G H D I S A S T E R WORKING PARTY                                 of the Policy and Resources

Committee to be held at 1 2 . 0 0 P . M .                                           on THURSDAY,                     22N D   J A N U A R Y ,__

1998 in Committee Room B in the Municipal Annexe,                                                                     Dale Street,

Liverpool,        I now enclose for your attention a copy of a further

letter which should be considered in conjunction with icem 3 .



Yours faithfully



Principal Committee Clerk                                         ^




                              Director o f Personnel & Administration: Ion Jones
                         A ih u i n i s i t a t io n   C o n m w u inl Scr vit u’s; IJiinum AV\o///r<'.Vn /<v:
            Ittji Hi ndi um Ta'hnt>l(>x\’ S c r v i c r s; I s t w A- ( tmimiUiW S cr vu t' s; /.<•»;«// .V/v/<v.v
(\w d> _   V^'CV'V.
                                                                Date as Postmark




Dear Home Secretary,

I sincerely hope that you take the time to read and digest the contents o f this letter, as I
do not write it easily. My brother, Andrew Sefton, was killed at the Hillsborough
football disaster in 1989 and I am proud to say that I am a member o f the Hillsborough
Family Support Group and continue to fully participate in our group’s campaign.

On a personal level however, I have reached a point where I feel the need not only to
direct a series o f observations and questions towards you, but furthermore, demand
that discussion around these areas takes place, by those that are elected and paid to
serve us.

I will not dwell on the reservations that I have with regards to your choice o f judge in
the present unprecedented scrutiny, for Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s crassness,
insensitivity, lack o f personal contact with real people, his lack o f understanding about
the case, and the inevitable questions that they raise both about his capacity to conduct
the scrutiny, and the reasons for your choice of him, are self-evident to the nation as a
whole - rather I will simply direct my concerns, thoughts and questions to you Mr.
 Straw, for you are the new Home Secretary with all the power, responsibility, high
 profile and accountability that that position entails.

My concerns fall into two categories. The first are specific to Hillsborough and its
victims and the second are areas o f concern highlighted by the disaster, but with wider
relevance to every member o f the public. Furthermore I would urge you to remember
that your response to this letter, these issues and most notably Lord Justice Stuart
Smith' s recommendations will send not only a message to the country about your
willingness to deal effectively with what I believe to be criminal acts specific to
Hillsborough, but also with the laws, procedures and attitudes currently in operation
that allowed these acts to remain unchecked, and in some cases, seemingly rewarded.

 Firstly then, having met personally with Lord Justice Stuart Smith and heard and
 experienced his interpretation o f the terms o f reference for the scrutiny - 1 feel
 confident in saying that the terms o f reference are on the one hand so tight as to be
 practically unworkable, demanding o f us as they do, the production o f new evidence
 that has never been available to the police and/or the coroner, and yet completely
 ignoring the fact that after 8V2 years there is still evidence that no one outside these
 two agencies has ever been given access to. Yet ironically, on the other hand, the
 terms o f reference and Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s interpretation of them are, I feel
 exceedingly vague, claiming to want ‘to be advised of anything that is deemed to be in
the public interest’, and yet when personally questioned on his understanding and
interpretations o f this, Lord Justice Stuart Smith was unable to give my family a
response, and indeed I would go so far as assuming based on my experience o f the man
that in his final recommendation, his interpretation o f the term “in the public interest”,
will bear no resemblance to my families informed interpretation o f the term!
Furthermore, it is becoming increasingly obvious that these terms o f reference
completely side-step the real complaints and concerns - they cannot effectively
highlight the issues for which I have campaigned, and I would bet that they are not
what the public believe the Hillsborough victims are getting, for they will neither bring
out the truth about the events before, during and after the disaster, or fully recognise
the urgent need for a full, honest, credible, public enquiry; for it would appear that the
 lies, the corruption, the falsification o f evidence, the collusion, the convenient
 promotions and retirements, the sickening police compensations, the failures o f the
inquest system and the High Court, the fact that the police have never formally
 accepted any responsibility for their actions and the reality that most o f the victims died
 after 3.15 p.m. and yet none o f the evidence after this time has ever been openly dealt
 with, just happens to fall outside the terms o f reference for this scrutiny, - so what
 exactly is it that is being scrutinised?

Having brought to your attention my concerns, specifically regarding the scrutiny, I
will now turn my attention to the questions that I feel are highlighted by Hillsborough -
concerns that need attention, discussion and reform, “in the public interest”.

 1.     Why, when in cases like ours, families are deliberately prevented from having
        access to vital evidence, evidence is falsified, hidden or destroyed. As
        vulnerable lay people we are badly advised, misled and pathetically represented,
        bullied, ill informed and legally ground down, and the sheer time scale o f this
        deception means that we are prevented from gaining access to the European
        Judicial system - is there no cause for redress? If you do not examine these
        fundamental injustices, then the message you will be sending is that the Police,
        and the judicial system exist as entities beyond examination, reproach or
        change, think carefully Mr Straw, if this is indeed the message o f the New
        Labour and New Britain then having lived with it as a reality for the last 8'A
        years, I am sure I can continue to do so, but having voted for massive change -
        can the public?

 2.      Why, in a democratic system as sophisticated as ours, are the police still
         allowed to investigate themselves? The internal networks are too incestuous
         and binding to ever allow proper scrutiny - we all know this, it is insulting and
         outrageous, so when will it be addressed?

 3.      Why, when in cases where the police have some alleged level o f involvement in
         a crime or in an act o f criminal negligence, are they allowed to monopolise and
         control the crime scene and indeed the access, quality and quantity o f the
         evidence given to the victims who ironically need to build any case against the
         police?
       set o f ‘disaster’ victims. Be assured Mr Straw, until the issues that I have
       outlined in this letter are addressed, regardless o f the findings o f Lord Justice
       Stuart Smith’s scrutiny and regardless o f your response to these findings my
       family and I will continue to fight for our right to justice and police
       accountability and foil public disclosure on this matter by whatever means
       remain possible.

Yours sincerely




Julie Fallon

cc     Lord Justice Stuart Smith
       Prime Minister
       MP’s for the Liverpool Wards
       David Mellor
       The Minister for Sport
       The Editor o f The Guardian
       The Editor o f The Times
       The Editor o f The Daily Mirror
       The Editor o f The Independent
       The Editor o f The Liverpool Echo
4.   Why are the police officers who have been negligent, incompetent or, as we
     believe in our case, criminal and corrupt, allowed to walk away with their
     professional and personal lives unscathed? I believe Hillsborough was the
     inevitable culmination o f all the powers and attitude bestowed upon our police
     force by the Thatcher government, their actions leading up to Hillsborough,
     during the disaster and since, all clearly show that they believe themselves to be
     invincible, beyond prosecution and even beyond criticism. For 8l/2 years they
     have publicly and privately laughed at my family and now they are laughing at
     you and your office, - so what as Home Secretary are you going to do about it?

5.   Why do we have a coroners system in this country that allows coroners to
     select biased evidence, bury relevant statements, fail to disclose interests, insult,
     bully and blame victims, mislead juries and still remain both employed and
     respected. As a nation we are becoming increasingly aware o f the inadequacies
     o f the coroners system, so how much longer are we going to have to live with
     them before you act on our behalf?

6.   Why do we have a state o f affairs in Britain that means that the more negligent,
     inept and even criminal, individuals are in a situation the better it is for those
     individuals and organisations involved - for the wider the responsibility net can
     be spread the less chance there is o f internal disciplinary charges being brought,
     never mind criminal prosecution. Thus it appears that the message from the
     legal system in this country to all organisations and their employees is one o f
     encouragement to negate their humanity and professionalism and if the worst
     happens, the advice is keep denying responsibility and continually blame other
     agencies and individuals, do this for long enough and the victims will simply go
     away. Well, Mr Straw, my family and I will not go away - 1 believe that just
     because the police, Sheffield City Council, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
     the engineers who installed the barriers and the Football Association are
     allowed to blame each other for their contribution to the disaster and it’s
     aftermath and walk away unscathed and with an air of smug untouchability
      does not mean that I am unable to point the finger at the people that I feel to be
     responsible - surely a judicial system as highly developed as ours can adapt to
      counteract this appalling loophole, or is the foundation o f a criminal charge o f
      ‘neglect o f duty’ totally beyond us?

7.   Finally, I would draw your attention to the issue o f ‘Sleaze’; a huge impetus in
     your recent general election success. The nation voted resoundingly in your
     favour because they were sick o f the deception, corruption and the rewards
     that apparently went with this - please remember that the Hillsborough
     campaign presently has a large measure o f public support, simply because
     people can smell the sleaze around Hillsborough, the lies and the injustice stink
     and the majority o f people have realised that people like myself continue
     against unbelievable hurdles specifically because no-one has ever been held
     responsible for their actions, but more broadly because the inept procedures
     and systems that failed our family 8V2 ago are still in place ready to fail the next
