 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 11 AM 29 JANUARY 1990

PRIME MINISTER'S DRY

The Prime Minister will be working at No 10 for most of the day.

At 3 pm she will meet President Salinas of Mexico (photocall) and
this evening will host a dinner in his honour at No 10 (photocall
at 7.45 pm)

PRESS NOTICES

St Peter, March and St Mary, March

PUBLICATIONS

HO Taylor Report - published at 3.30 pm, cfrs to the Lobby about
   11.30 am with press notice. Linked to Statement below.
Briefing for Lobby and Home Affairs correspondents at the Home
Office at 12 o 'clock with the Secretary to the Taylor Inquiry.

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

David Waddington - Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, linked to
publication of Taylor Report above

Answers of Interest

No 227 written at 3.30 pm: Mr Malcolm Moss to ask the Secretary
of State for Health whether he intends to issue further guidance
in connection with the adoption and fostering of children from
minority ethnic groups (answer will say that the Chief Inspector
of the Social Services Inspectorate will be writing to all
Directors of Social Services setting out the principles which
should inform family placement work in relation to issues of race
and colour) - copy to be placed in Library. Press notice + copy
of letter at 3.30 pm.

No 229 written at 3.30 pm: Mr Malcolm Moss to ask the Secretary
of State for Health if he has completed his consideration of
issues highlighted by an Appeal Court decision on the placement
for adoption of a child of mixed ethnic origin and if he will make
a statement (answer will say SSI have investigated the case and
DOH are satisfied that the Authority concerned gave first
consideration to the welfare of the child). Press notice at 3.30
pm.
OTHER DEPARTMENTAL BUSINESS

DOE Estate Action       - spending programmes for 1990/91, press notice
    at 1 2 . 0 0 noon

TAYLOR REPORT

We guided the Lobby on the structure of the Taylor Report pointing
out particular paragraphs of interest as follows:

Chapter One.     Essential reading.

        Paragraph 19 deals with the sombre lessons of Hillsborough
        - previous reports unheeded, it couldn't happen here,
        blight on football, old grounds, poor facilities,
        hooliganism, segregation, alcohol and poor leadership
        of the sport.

        Paragraph 22. Suggests why previous recommendations were
        not followed and taken to heart.

        Paragraph 24.     Deals with complacency - it couldn't
        happen here.

        Paragraph 25. Hi11sborough should not be regarded as a
        freak incident.

        Paragraph 26.     General malaise in football.

        Paragraph 27.     Old grounds.

        Paragraph 29.     Lamentable facilities.   Degrading conduct.

        Paragraphs 30 - 32. Quality of provision for spectators.
        Stark contrast between standing facilities and boardrooms
        and executive boxes.

        Paragraphs 34 - 36.     Segregation.

        Paragraphs 39 - 40. The price of police measures to
        prevent violent outbursts.

       Paragraph 42. No other sport where it is necessary to
       prevent people from attacking one another.

       Paragraph 43.      Cost of policing football.

       Paragraph 45.      Hooliganism and achievements of
       segregation.

       Paragraphs 46 - 47.      Who are the hooligans?
       Paragraphs 49 - 50. Alcohol and the singular habit of
       drinking to excess in the United Kingdom.

       Paragraphs 51 - 54, especially 53.     Poor leadership in the
       sport.

       Paragraph 55.     Behaviour on the pitch.

       Paragraph 57. Media and the lesson was surely the fullest
       reassessment needed for the policies of the game.

Chapter Two.     Improvements.   A better future for football.

Chapter Three.     The framework.

Chapter Four.     Substantive provisions.

Chapter Five.     Police planning and control.

Chapter Six.     Alcohol.

Chapter Two.

       Paras 91 - 94 - Phasing in of all seating stadia.

       Paras 99 - 118 - Financing of changes - whole variety of
       ideas for consideration.

       Para 138 at the end of Chapter Two. Conclusion hopes
       it is clear that patching up and muddling through
       disasters at football matches are over.

Chapter Eighteen and Part Five. Gives strategy and detailed
conclusions. In particular paras 351 - 427 deal with membership
scheme. 424 crucial paragraph - gives his reasons for not
supporting national membership scheme.

In response to a question, we guided the Lobby that the Home
Secretary was likely to demonstrate his determination to see the
recommendations in the Taylor Report implemented in his statement
this afternoon.

REVIEW BODY REPORTS

In response to a question we said the position remained the same.
The reports were due at the end of the month. We would not be
discussing individual reports. We could not rule out that they
might be discussed at Cabinet on Thursday.
PRESIDENT SALINAS

We said we thought the Prime Minister and President Salinas were
likely to discuss bilateral issues including economic and trade
relations and developments in Latin America. We guided the Lobby
that a couple of drugs agreements would be signed during the
visit, including one on the confiscation of assets. We would hope
to have a line after this morning's talks and again after dinner
this evening.

US DEFENCE CUTS

Asked whether we had any reaction to proposed US defence cuts we
said we were not going to be saying anything in advance.

DEFENCE IMPLICATIONS OF EASTERN EUROPE

In response to a question we said people were obviously looking at
these matters all the time but the Foreign Secretary had made our
position clear yesterday. There seemed to be a very large amount
of counting chickens going on. It was a time of great instability
in Eastern Europe and at such times it was necessary to ensure
stability. Talks were going on in CFE in Vienna with the aim of
reaching agreement later this year on a reduction in conventional
arms.

We guided the Lobby that the US would presumably be bringing
forward relatively small budget cuts such as Cheyney had talked of
in the past and taking into account their worldwide role. Asked
whether a successful conclusion to CFE would lead the Prime
Minister to take a more positive line on a third zero, we
responded that the Prime Minister had made it abundantly clear
that we were not in the business of a non-nuclear world. Nuclear
weapons could not be disinvented. We must live in the real world
and not rely on fanciful nonsense.




SC
 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 4 PM 29 JANUARY 1990

We repeated this morning1s Lobby.

FOOTBALL

Asked whether it was true as the Home Secretary in his statement
had indicated, that the Government were not cowered by Lord
Justice Taylor's conclusions but frustrated at the lack of support
for an ID scheme, we said the Government were determined to see
improvements made. They would not give way to hooliganism or on
ground safety and would be maintaining pressure on the clubs to
implement Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations. A lot of people
had been killed as a result of football hooliganism. We pointed
out that Section One would remain on the statute book so that it
could be brought forward at a future date. This would depend on
how effective other recommendations were.

It was not possible to quantify exactly how much a membership
scheme would have cost to implement but there was a good case for
claiming that it could well have cost the football clubs less in
the long run than it was going to cost them to implement all Lord
Justice Taylor's other recommendations.

In response to a question as to how the recommendations would
work, we pointed out that if someone was convicted for an offence
of hooliganism he could be made to report to an attendance centre.
At present this provision was only available for dealing with
juveniles. Asked about the timetable for bringing forward
legislation to create the new offences proposed by Lord Justice
Taylor, we guided the Lobby that it was unlikely to be this
session but reminded them that much would be done under existing
legislation.

Asked to sum up the most important factor arising from the
publication of the Taylor Report and the Government's response to
it, we said the most important message was that improvements had
been made in Scotland and had been a success. What was needed
here was the will to accomplish the changes recommended. We
reminded the Lobby that in his report Lord Justice Taylor said the
time for operating on a wing and a prayer was over.

Pressed as to who was to pay for the improvements, we reminded the
Lobby that the sport was currently receiving millions of pounds
from TV, from football pools, from the turnstiles and from
transfer fees.

In response to a question about the football licensing authority,
and whether its remit was likely to be extended to other sports,
we drew the Lobby's attention to the relevant paragraph in the
Home Secretary's statement this afternoon in which he said that
Lord Justice Taylor had welcomed the establishment of the football
licensing authority but had indicated that he would like the
government to go further and extend its remit to cover other
than football grounds. The Home Secretary pointed out that this
would require primary legislation and the government would have to
consider whether it was justified.

Asked how a new offence of shouting obscene abuse could be made to
work, we retorted that the Lobby should not be so purist. The
point was that football hooliganism was a disease which damaged
the sport and Britain's reputation abroad. The Government were
determined to see the sport cleaned up, both by dealing with the
hooligans who caused the problems and by improving the safety of
sports groundds. The Scots had done it, so could we.

Asked whether there shouldn't be some way of dealing with players
who misbehaved, we pointed out that if players were involved in
disturbances there was no reason why they should not be taken to
court as in fact had happened recently. We said the sport
authorities could also be expected to impose stronger discipline
through punishments such as fines and by referees sending off
players who misbehaved.

PRESIDENT S&LIN&S

Asked whether the Prime Minister would accept if, as anticipated,
President Salinas invited her to visit Mexico we guided the Lobby
that she would probably accept with appreciation and would seek to
take up the invitation when a suitable opportunity arose. There
were no plans at present for her to visit South America. We
confirmed that various agreements would be signed during the
President's visit to Britain, the most important of which was on
the confiscation of drug traffickers' assets.

ftRMENia

In response to a question about whether the Prime Minister was
likely to visit Armenia during her forthcoming trip to the Soviet
Union, we reminded the Lobby that Britain had provided a school
for Armenia in the area devastated by the earthquake. It was a
possibility that this could be included in her visit.

US DEFENCE COTS

We guided the Lobby that we would probably have a few words to say
when Mr Cheyney made his long anticipated announcement. It was
reasonable to suppose that his announcement would follow the
proposals he had previously put forward for small scale reductions
in line with the US worldwide role. These were budget driven and
not at all related to the CFE negotiations currently under way in
Vienna. Any reductions arising from the CFE negotiations were the
important ones and whatever happened in the United Kingdom as a
result of the anticipated cuts expected at present were unlikely
to amount to a great deal.
CHURCH OF ENGLAND REPORT

Asked about the Church of England report entitled "Faith in the
Cities", we said we had read about it but could not confirm
whether we had received it yet.




SC
