 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 11 AM 26 JANUARY 1990

PRIME MINISTER’S DAY

The Prime Minister will be in the North West for most of the day.
She will open the Tidy Britain Group's Headquarters in Wigan and
will then visit Granada Studios in Manchester. She will go vo
Chequers for the weekend.

PRESS NOTICES

None

PUBLICATIONS

CSO: Balance of payments current account and overseas trade
figures (Dec)

CSO: Engineering sales and orders at current and constant prices
(Nov)

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

PNQ to ask SOS Environment to make a statement on the storm
damage. David Hunt will answer at 11 am.

answers of interest

No 283 Written at noon: Mr Ian Bruce to ask the Secretary of
State for Education and Science when letters will be sent to
grant-maintained schools setting out their capital allocations for
the financial year 1990-91 (answer will announce capital
allocations for grant maintained schools). Press notice at noon.

PUBLICATION OF TAYLOR REPORT

We confirmed that the report would be published on Monday and that
the Home Secretary would be making a statement to the House. We
advised the Lobby to contact DOE to find out what arrangements had
been made for issuing copies of the report and any press
conference. As it was a very detailed report we assured the Lobby
that efforts would be made to let them have it in good time.

PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO NORTH WEST

We said that the Prime Minister was visiting the headquarters of
the Tidy Britain Group to show her support for their campaigns.
It was also an opportunity for her to visit the North West area.
PRIME MINISTER’S VISIT TO PARIS

We confirmed that the Prime Minister and President Mitterrand,
during the bilateral meeting last Saturday, discussed events in
Eastern Europe. Their discussion inevitably included German
reunification. This was a matter of interest to a number of
European countries including the UK and France who had expressed
their concern at EC and NATO meetings.

STORM

In response to a specific question about how the emergency
services had handled the aftermath of the storm, we said that they
had performed very well. We added that as far as we were aware
the Prime Minister would not be making any comments on this
matter, though we could not rule out her speaking in the NW in
response to questions.




AN
