Title: LOBBY BRIEFING, 11.00 20.4.89




PRIME MINISTER *S DRY

The Prime Minister is working at No 10 this morning.

At 10.00am she chaired a meeting of Cabinet ( All present except
Defence, Wales and Agriculture.)

At 3.15 pm she will be in the House for Questions.

PRESS NOTICES

None.

PUBLICATIONS

Human Organs Transplant Bill. Published at 4.30pm. Press
conference at DoH at 4.30 with Roger Freeman. PN at 4.30.

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

Business.

Answers of Interest

No 255 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Graham Riddick to ask the
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster what further progress has
been made in finding a suitable buyer for Girobank. (Answer: will
be substantive.) Press Notice at 3.30 pm.

No 256 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr William Hague to ask the
Secretary of State for the Environment what progress has been
made on the preparation of unitary development plans for Tyne
and Wear.  (Answer: will be substantive.) Press Notice at 3.30
pm.

No 262 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Richard Page to ask the Secretary
of State for the Environment what proposals he has to charge
operators under his proposed system of integrated pollution
control. (Answer: will indicate what charges are likely to
be and will endorse the principle that the polluter should pay for
cleaning up and monitoring pollution.) Press Notice at 3.30 pm.

In the Lords: Lord Ezra to ask HMG what will be the future status
of the Warren Spring Laboratory.  (Answer: will announce that it
is to become a Next Steps agency.) Press Notice at 3.30 pm.
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

We confirmed that the Prime Minister held a short meeting to
discuss football before Cabinet. It had started just after 9.30
am and those present had included the Home Secretary, Environment
Ministers, the Leader of the House and business managers.

Cabinet had started just after 10 am and was still continuing. We
would have thought that the Bill would have been discussed under
the Parliamentary heading on the agenda.

We knew of no change to the Government's plans, other than the
pause announced by the Home Secretary on Monday. Nor were we
aware of any likely change in the Government's position. The aim
was still to get Parliamentary approval for the Bill this session.
It was the only legislative vehicle to enable the introduction of
seated stadia and the control of movement of convicted hooligans
next season.

We were not aware of any consideration being given to delaying the
Bill beyond this Parliamentary session. Nor were we aware of any
proposal to delay its Parliamentary timetable for Royal Assent
from July to October. We did not know when the last opportunity
would be for a Second Reading in order to gain approval for the
Bill this session. What was clear, however, was that the
Government was responsible for its legislation and would want to
make its case during the pause before the Bill's Third Reading in
the Lords. No decision had been taken on when the Lords Third
Reading would be. The argument for the Bill would be put to MPs
in the normal ways; and we knew of no plans for the Prime
Minister to see backbenchers.

We repeated that the Bill was designed to deal with the problem of
football hooliganism. Its objectives had not changed and the
arguments in favour of a national membership scheme had not been
altered by the events of last Saturday. The Bill was an enabling
measure as far as the scheme was concerned. It would provide the
Government with power to introduce an approved national football
membership scheme. Under the Bill's provisions a football
membership authority would be appointed which would then draw up a
scheme for the approval of the Secretary of State for the
Environment. That scheme, in its formulation, could take account
of any recommendations or interim recommendations that Lord
Justice Taylor might make. This legislation did not deprive
but actually provided an opportunity to take account of any
recommendations from Lord Justice Taylor.
                               3.



We stressed that the Government was responsible for dealing with
the problem of hooliganism in football. Any delay would involve
standing aside from that responsibility for another year, after
all the deaths, injuries and arrests that had taken place over the
last 20 years. The Government was convinced that this legislation
was required. Furthermore, the Bill provided the only legislative
vehicle at present to allow grounds to become all-seated stadia.
Those opposed to the Bill would have to ask themselves whether
they wished to lose this opportunity for improving safety.

No other meetings on the subject were planned after Cabinet,
though the Prime Minister might brief herself before Questions.

GEC/SIEMENS BID FOR PLESSEY

Asked whether this had been discussed at Cabinet, we pointed out
that Cabinet was still continuing but would be extremely
surprised if it had been as it was not a matter for the Cabinet.

SD
 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 4 PM 20/4/89


We repeated this morning's Lobby.

FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

We confirmed that Cabinet had lasted about one and a half hours,
of which just about half had been spent discussing the Bill and
the events of last Saturday afternoon at Hillsborough. The Chief
Whip had been present at Cabinet, as usual. There had also been
a meeting before Cabinet, chaired by the Prime Minister, and
including the Chief Whip, the Leader of the House, the Home
Secretary, the Environment Secretary and the Sports Minister.
The same group had met after Cabinet when the Prime Minister
wished to brief herself on the way in which she would answer
Questions this afternoon.

Asked whether the Bill would become law by the end of the session,
we said that the Government remained determined to get the Bill on
the Statute Book this Par1iamentary session. The Prime Minister
had explained why at Questions this afternoon. The timetable was
a matter for the business managers.

In answer to questions about the possibility of including any
recommendations made by Lord Justice Taylor, we reminded the Lobby
that this was an enabling Bill and any suggestions from a Taylor
interim report could be taken into account by the schemes
introduced under the terms of the Bill. Even with extra
provisions for all-seater stadia, we stressed that the Bill was
still enabling legislation: each ground would have to be licenced
and schemes would have to be recognised under its terms.

We denied that the anticipated delay of several months indicated
concern about the Bill. We had no idea whether the Prime Minister
had overruled the advice of the Government1s business managers.

We pointed out again that almost 300 people had been killed
(though not all as a result of hooliganism) at football grounds
since the war, that there had been thousands of arrests, 1990 was
a World Cup year and English clubs would be trying to get back
into European competitions. Delaying the Bill would leave no
controls over hooligans travelling abroad.

Asked who had appointed Lord Justice Taylor, we replied that it
had been the Home Secretary. The Prime Minister had not met him.
The timing and possibility of an interim report was a matter for
Lord Justice Taylor. We reminded the Lobby, however, that Mr
Justice Popplewell had taken about 8 or 9 weeks to produce an
interim report. He had been appointed on 13 May 1985, submitted
his interim report on 24 July and produced his final report in
January 1986. One of Popplewell's recommendations had been for
                              2.




the introduction of a football membership scheme. We denied that
the Government was putting any pressure on Lord Justice Taylor:
it simply wanted a thorough the full investigation.

RIGHT OF REPLY BILL   ■

Asked whether the Government would pour cold water on tomorrow's
Private Member's Bill, we said that the Government had made
known its reservations about the Bill at all stages, both on the
principle of the Bill and on its practicality.

When asked if the possibility of an independent inquiry into media
conduct had gone off the boil, we said that we believed the
subject was still simmering away.

SD
