Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 11.00 AM 17/4/89


PRIME MINISTER'S DRY

The Prime Minister is working at No 10 for most of the day.

She will probably be in the House this afternoon for the
Statement.

PRESS NOTICES

Chairman of the Forestry Commission.

Privy Council Appointment.

Vicarage of Foulridge.

Vicarage of All Souls, Harlesden.

Rectory of Bunwell with Carleton Rode and Tibenham.

Vicarage of Braddan.

PUBLICATIONS

DES: HMI Reports on Information Technology Curriculum Matters.
Published at 10.30 with Press Notice.

DSS: Treasury minute on quality of service to the public in DSS
offices.

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

Douglas Hurd on the Hillsborough disaster.

Answers of Interest

None.




OTHER NEWS

Queen's Awards: Background briefing at 12.00 in No 12 Downing
Street where embargoed copies will be available.

DOE: Press Notice at 3.30pm on the Cash Incentive Scheme to
enable tenants to buy their own homes.
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

We said that the Prime Minister would probably have a
pre-Statement meeting at No 10 this morning with Messrs Hurd and
Ridley. We did not know if Mr Moynihan would also attend. The
statement was expected to announce a public inquiry, covering all
aspects of the matter. As for the terms of reference, the lobby
would have to wait and see. We said that the Identity Card Bill
was likely to go ahead. It dealt with the question of
hooliganism.  It was another matter as to whether further
provisions needed to be incorporated into it. We pointed out that
one argument in favour of the ID card scheme was that it
discouraged supporters without cards from travelling to away
matches. We also pointed out that legislation on ground safety
was already in place. It was fruitless to speculate on what new
legislation might follow.

We confirmed that the intention was to get preliminary findings
from the inquiry as quickly as possible. We had no idea of the
details. We would not comment on implementation of the Popplewell
proposals except to point out that he had recommended a membership
scheme. Asked to comment further on the need for new legislation,
we said we refused to pass judgment in the face of an inquiry
which would establish the facts.

We said that the Prime Minister had no plans to meet backbenchers
to discuss the matter. Normal channels existed for this. Neither
did she have any plans to meet the police though she met the Chief
Constable and others yesterday.

COUNCIL HOMES INCENTIVE SCHEME

Asked about the DOE press notice, we said that the scheme was
permitted by legislation but that this would be the first instance
of it.

KIDNEY BILL

We said that it was quite possible that the Kidney Bill would be
published this week.
 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 4 PM 17/4/89




We repeated this morning's Lobby.

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

We said that, as already indicated by Mr Hurd, there were no plans
to shelve the Football Membership Scheme Bill. There could,
however, be amendments to it. The Government took the view that
all seated accommodation at major designated football grounds
was necessary. Asked how clubs could afford such expenditure, we
pointed out that there was no shortage of money for football
transfer fees. Football was a business. The question of
Government financial assistance had not been raised. Asked how
long the conversion to all-seated accommodation might take, we
said that we did not know, a programme of conversion was
envisaged. Asked if the Government felt that the move might be
unpopular with spectators, we replied that that remained the
Government's view.   Asked which clubs would be affected, we
assumed they would be those with the most substantial gates.
Asked if they might also include 4th division clubs, we said that
we could not jump to conclusions.

Asked if Mr Hurd was giving an invitation to Lord Justice Taylor
to re-think the terms of the Football Spectators' Bill, we
pointed out that his terms of reference were very wide-ranging.
We agreed that his proposals might indeed strengthen the Bill.
Asked if he might recommend against a membership scheme, we
pointed out that the scheme was one of the Popplewell
recommendations. One of its benefits was that anyone without a
card had no chance of admission and would probably not therefore
travel to away matches.

We confirmed that the contents of Mr Hurd's Statement were
discussed by the Prime Minister at No 10 this morning with Messrs
Hurd, Ridley and Moynihan, together with the Lord President and
the Chief Whip. The meeting lasted about 40 minutes.

We confirmed that Lord Justice Taylor's intention was to produce
interim proposals as quickly as possible. The aim was to
strengthen the Bill presently going through Parliament. We agreed
that it might eventually lead to a situation whereby clubs would
not be granted licences without a membership scheme and full
seated accommodation. We confirmed that this enabling legislation
would be in place in time for implementation by the 1990/91
season.
                               2.



DELORS REPORT

Asked to comment on the report, we pointed to the Chancellor's
press conference which he would give after the ECOFIN meeting. We
agreed that the report showed that fundamental changes were
required which would necessitate amendments to the Treaty of Rome.
Our view was that the community needed to get on and complete the
single market. The Prime Minister had set out in Bruge ways in
which we could improve monetary co-operation.

MB
