Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 11.00am 18.5.89




PRIME MINISTER'S DAY

The Prime Minister is working at No 10 this morning.

At 11.00 am she chaired a meeting of Cabinet (all present except
Home Secretary who is opening the Pompidou Group meeting on drug
co-operation at the QEII Conference Centre, and the Secretary of
State for Trade and Industry who is visiting Japan.)

At 12.30 pm she will meet Mr Enrique Inglesias, President of the
Inter-American Development Bank (photocall).

At 3.15 pm she will be in the House for Questions.

At 3.45 pm she will meet Mr Vargas Llosa, President of the
Libertad Movement of Peru (photocall).

PRESS NOTICES

None.

PUBLICATIONS

DTp: 'Roads for Prosperity' White Paper. CFRs at 11.00 am,
     embargoed to 4.00 pm. Statement by Paul Channon. Press
     conference at about 4.30 pm at DTp with Paul Channon and
     Peter Bottomley.

HO:     Report of Charity Commissioners for England and Wales for
        1988, published at 3.30 pm with a Press Notice.

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

Business.
Paul Channon on Roads White Paper.

Answers of Interest

No 204 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Nicholas Bennett to ask the
Secretary of State for Transport if he will make a statement on
the test discount rate for road schemes. (Answer: will say that
discount rates are to be increased to 8%.) Press Notice at 3.30
pm.
No 221 Written at 3.30 pm: Sir Hector Monro to ask the Secretary
of State for Scotland whether he will increase resources for the
trunk road programme in Scotland; and what proposals he has to
alter his current policies and plans.  (Answer: will announce 25%
increase in roads expenditure in Scotland, including upgrading of
M74 Carlisle to Glasgow road.) Press Notice at 3.30 pm.

OTHER DEPARTMENTAL NEWS

HO:   Pompidou Group meeting opened at 10.00 am at the QEII. Home
      Secretary delivered opening address. Press Notice from HO.
      Press conference by Home Secretary at 12.45 pm at QEII.
      Further press conference at 1.00 pm tomorrow.

EMS

We said that we did not recognise today's "Times" story suggesting
that Britain's membership of the exchange rate mechanism might
be linked to the alignment of UK and EC rates of inflation. Our
position remained unchanged: that we would join the full EMS when
the time was right. The Prime Minister had said that "we never
say no" but she had not indicated when the time might be right.
She had explained the difficulties, as set out again in her
interview with the Daily Mail.

EC DEBATE

We indicated that Linda Chalker and Francis Maude would speak in
tonight's debate. This was one of the regular 6 monthly debates
to take stock of European matters and was usually dealt with at
this Ministerial level.
 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 4.15 PM 18/5/89

We repeated this morning's Lobby.

EUROPE

We confirmed that this morning's Cabinet had discussed European
issues. It had taken the form of a run-through of developments
this week with reports from the Foreign Secretary and the Health
Secretary.  In answer to a question, we denied that the Education
Secretary had raised the Lingua programme in advance of his taking
part in a meeting on Monday. The Prime Minister's views were
well known on this subject and she had mentioned the issue at
Question Time. We indicated that the Prime Minister
probably offered a general comment on European matters at the end
of the discussion.

Asked about the Prime Minister's remarks at Question Time on
studying the fine print concerning EC tax harmonisation proposals,
we said that we did not know which areas she had in mind although
we thought that it was likely to be excise rather than VAT duties.
We pointed out that the Prime Minister had already indicated that
we had to scrutinise EC proposals very carefully. She had made
the point that each sovereign state should be able to determine
its own taxation system. We denied that excise duty went to the
EC: it was collected for the Treasury.

As to the countries the Prime Minister had in mind when she said
that Britain might be supported in resisting both the Delors
Report and the "Social Charter", we suggested that a number had
shared our caution in such matters. There had been no contact
between the Prime Minister and President Mitterrand to discuss
these issues, although we could not rule out contact at other
levels in order to discover the views of France or, indeed, of any
other European partners.

We confirmed that it was not Britain's intention to go to the
European Court over the issue of health warnings on tobacco. At
present, we reminded the Lobby, such warnings were carried on a
voluntary basis with the industry in this country. We would have
to see whether the new EC Directive could also be introduced
voluntarily or whether domestic legislation would be required.

We denied that it was unusual for an Education Secretary to go to
Brussels. We expected that Mr Baker to oppose the Lingua
programme when he went there on Monday.

FA CUP FINAL

We said that the Prime Minister was not expected to go to the
match. She had not been invited, nor had she been last year.
She had attended the Scottish Cup Final last year, however.
SD
                           RESTRICTED


LORD PRESIDENT

LORD PRIVY SEAL




The Lobby could raise with you this afternoon the following
issues:


                       Ted Heath/Prime Minister and EC

                       Football Spectators' Bill

                       Televising of the Commons


Ted Heath has been critical of the Prime Minister's attitude
towards the EC this week accusing her, among other things, of
being anti-European.   You can say the Prime Minister has made her
views known on many occasions about Europe including a two page
interview in the Daily Mail this morning.   Far from being
anti-European she is very pro-European. She made this perfectly
clear in her Bruges speech and in her speech to the Scottish
Conservative Party last Friday.   She said in the House on Tuesday
"Our vision of Europe is a vision of sovereign states cooperating
freely in those things that we can do better together than we do
ourselves."   You can remind the Lobby that Britain has done more
to shape Europe in practical terms than any other country, adding
that the British press should be praising the Government for what
it has done to make the EC more efficient.   It was this
Government that insisted on tackling the financing of the Common
Market; that negotiated a common fisheries policy and a common
agricultural policy.

The Times ran a story this morning saying that the Prime Minister
had now decided to join the EMS when Britain's exchange rate falls
into line with the E C 's average. This is absolute nonsense. The
Prime Minister has decided no such thing. She has always said
that she would join when she thought the time was right.

The Lobby might say to you that it shows what we think of the EC
when only Lynda Chalker and Francis Maude speak in today's debate
on the EC.   You can say there is nothing unusual about junior
Ministers speaking on behalf of the Government in such a debate as
it is a six monthly up-dating.

                           RESTRICTED
                           RESTRICTED

If asked about the proposed EC Social Charter you can remind them
that Norman Fowler said yesterday that the proposed Charter would
take us in the wrong direction.  It would create unemployment not
more jobs. It was clearly unacceptable.    You can also point out
that unemployment in the UK is well below the average for the EC
and lower than in France, Italy, Belgium, The Netherlands, Spain
and Ireland.   Jobs are created by bringing down the barriers to
employment not by creating new barriers.

If asked about the Football Spectators1 Bill you can say that
there is no timetable yet for this but there is even more reason
now why the Government should proceed with it after the
disgraceful behaviour of so called football fans both at and away
from grounds last weekend, a matter of weeks following the
dreadful disaster at Hillsborough.

Some of the papers report this morning that television is
extremely unhappy about the select committee's report on the
televising of the Commons saying it is far too restrictive and
that they hope the rules will be changed after the experiment.
You made the point yesterday about compromise but you might want
to add that the televising of the Commons is to report what is
being said not some new soap-opera entertainment.




                                              Terry J Perks
                                               18 May 1989




                          RESTRICTED
