    Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 4 PM 25/4/89




We repeated this morning's Lobby.

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER FOOT

Asked to comment on the Prime Minister's answer to Frank Field, we
said that if a fund was registered as a charity dispersements
could only be made on grounds of need and tended to take some
time. What was not clear was whether Hillsborough was a
registered charity. The impression was that it was not, so as to
provide greater flexibility. The Prime Minister had agreed to
look at this. We said that if VAT was to be paid it would have to
come out of the fund. We were not sure of the rules on benefits.
It depended on the degree of need. The Lobby should speak to the
DSS about the detail.

NATO

Asked if we were trying to play down pressure on West Germany, we
pointed out that NATO was not one country but an organisation of
16 nations. It was NATO which decided policy. We acknowledged
there was considerable concern at the state of Western defence and
that NATO's position was being called into question. We believed
that NATO needed to reaffirm:

-        its commitment to credible short-range nuclear forces which
         would remain an essential part of NATO's strategy of
         flexible response in the 1990s;

         that we needed to up-date SNF and to support the work being
         done by the US to develop a follow-on to LANCE. Precise
         deployment details were not for now;

         that the Alliance could not accept calls for a third zero.

We needed to reaffirm this policy in order to be in a position to
welcome what Mr Gorbachev was trying to do in the Soviet Union.
Asked if we thought that NATO should negotiate reductions in SNF,
we said that it would be a mistake at the moment. It could only
end up in the third zero. A credible SNF deterrent was a
fundamental part of NATO's flexible response strategy.

Asked if we had had contacts with other NATO partners, we said
that, apart from the Prime Minster's telephone conversation with
President Bush, all contact had been through NATO. We reminded
the Lobby that the Prime Minister would see Mr de Mita and Mr
Lubbers at the end of the week though these meetings had been
arranged long before the present situation arose.
                              2.



We confirmed that the Prime Minister had not seen Sir Geoffrey
Howe today. Asked what further pressure could be put on the
Germans, we said that we could only deploy the force of our
argument. We hoped that wiser counsel might eventually prevail.
We repeated that we merely wanted NATO to reaffirm its position
and maintain its commitment to a credible defence strategy to
enable the US to go ahead with LANCE development. We reminded the
Lobby that the Soviet Union held a huge preponderance of
conventional weapons. Neither did we believe the whole truth
about their CW capability.

We did not know what Mr Kohl would tell the German Parliament on
Thursday. Clearly we would prefer he said nothing irrevocable
until the Prime Minister saw him at the weekend. The Prime
Minister had had no further contact with President Bush although
we were given a run down on the American talks with Genscher and
Stoltenberg. The Prime Minister would, if necessary, make her
views on NATO known to the German public. She would be talking to
the press after her meeting with Mr Kohl. We agreed that she
might make the point that 66,000 British service personnel, as
well as 330,000 Americans, were based in Germany and must be
properly defended.

MB
