 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 11 AM 30 JANUARY 1990

PRIME MINISTER *S DRY

The Prime Minister will be working at No 10 for most of the day.
At 10.15 she saw Graf von Lamsdorff. She will be in the House for
Questions at 3.15pm.

PRESS NOTICES

None

PUBLICATIONS

HMT- 1990 Public Expenditure White Paper

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

Mr Gummer - Hill Farming

Answers of Interest

No 122 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Ivan Lawrence to ask the Secretary
of State for the Home Department whether he has yet reached any
conclusions on the recommendations in the magistrates1 courts
scrutiny relating to services provided by the police for these
courts and if he will make a statement (answer will say there
should be fewer policemen in Magistates Courts).

No 123 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Michael Marshall to ask the
Secretary of State for Defence whether he will make a statement
about the allegations of Mr Colin Wallace concerning the
activities of the Army and of the security service in Northern
Ireland during the 1970s and about Mr Wallace's appeal against his
dismissal from the Civil Service for disclosing a classified
document to an unauthorised person on 4 February 1975 (answer will
describe new evidence that has come to light regarding Mr Wallace
and say that an investigation is to be carried out).

No 124 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Michael Marshall to ask the
Secretary of State for the Home Department whether he has
completed his consideration of the book entitled "Who Framed Colin
Wallace" by Paul Foot and if he will make a statement (answer will
say satisfied that there is no new evidence)

No 128 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr David Evans to ask the Secretary of
State for the Environment what responses he has received to his
consultation document on cost recovery charging for Her Majesty's
Inspectorate of Pollution's implementation of integrated pollution
control and if he will make a statement (answer will be
substantive following completion of consultation exercise). Press
notice at 3.30 pm.
WALLACE

We said that we thought the answers on Mr Wallace's case would be
substantive. We refused to be drawn on whether a further inquiry
was to take place, simply saying the Lobby would haveto wait and
see but that they should not get too excited.

PUBLIC EXPENDITURE WHITE PAPER

We said it was broadly in line with the Autumn Statement, putting
flesh on the bones outlined at that time.

FOOTBALL

We told the Lobby that we believed that the Taylor Report had
fixed responsibility where it belonged. We reminded the Lobby of
the Government's position on funding for the industry and said
that we knew of no plans for more money to be made available. We
also reminded the Lobby that the industry received substantial
income from the pools, TV and gate receipts. In response to
questions, we said that the industry now had aclear idea of what
was needed: the sport had accepted the report and it was now a
question of getting on with implementing it. We had no idea on
timing as far as the proposals surrounding new offences were
concerned. We suggested that the Prime Minister was saying that
the industry should put more interest into the conditions for the
spectators rather than on huge transfer fees, this might lead to
more safety in the grounds. It was a question of priorities and
proportions.

WAR CRIMINALS

We said that the Home Secretary would announce the next steps on
this issue very soon, although we doubted it would be this week.

PAY REVIEW BODIES

We said that we thought one report was still outstanding, although
we declined to say which one. It was still not possible to rule
out consideration of the review bodies reports at the next Cabinet
meeting, and thus not possible to rule out the possibility of
publication of the reports this week. We outlined procedure that
had been followed on previous occasions, i.e. Cabinet considered
the reports and endorsed the Government line in the morning with
publication in the afternoon. We would propose briefing on this
issue on whatever day it was decided to publish. In making any
announcements the overall responsibility for five of the reports
lay with the Prime Minister. The recommendations on teachers
would be a matter for DES. We also confirmed that even if the
Defence Secretary were not at Cabinet, it would be possible to
agree the reports, providing of course that he had been consulted.
The Government would seek to publish the reports as quickly as
possible.
 DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

 We said that our understanding was this was normally published in
 the Spring. We had yet to see any sign of this year's paper.

 MINISTERIAL MEETINGS

 We confirmed there was a meeting of ministers this morning but
 said that they were discussing longer term issues, not Hong Kong.
 We said we expected Mr Hurd back from the US in time for Cabinet
 on Thursday at which stage we assumed he would brief his
 colleagues on his visit.

VIETNAMESE BOAT PEOPLE

We told the Lobby that our understanding of the latest position on
this was that the UN High Commissioner for Refugees was holding
discussions with the participants of SC3(2). The idea was to get
final agreement on the proposals put forward at the last meeting
which would lead to international agreement to the involuntary
repatriation of Vietnamese boat people with effect from 1 July
1990. In the meantime, of course, there would continue to be
voluntary repatriation to Vietnam.




PB
