 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 11 AM 19 APRIL

PRIME MINISTER'S DAY

The Prime Minister will be working at No 10 for much of the day.

At 2.30 pm, accompanied by ten children from St Martin of Porres
School, London Nil, she will hear a presentation by the Life
Education Centre in an exhibition van in Downing Street. The
programme aims to prevent children from taking drugs by showing
them how their bodies worked and how they are affected by
different substances (Photocall)

PRESS NOTICES

None.

PUBLICATIONS

None.

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

None.

Answers of Interest

No 171 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Ken Hargreaves to ask the Secretary
of State for Education and Science when he proposes to reply to
the report of the Select Committee on Education, Science and Arts
entitled Educational Provision for the Under Fives. (Answer:
will outline Government's commitment to nursery education and
progress being made in improving it.) Press Notice at 3.30 pm.

No 172 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr John Bowie to ask the Secretary of
State for Transport what measures he proposes to take to reduce
the number of pedestrian accidents. (Answer: will confirm
publication of pedestrian safety package today.) Press Notice at
3.30 pm.

No 173 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr John Bowis to ask the Secretary of
State for Transport if he will give details of General Accident's
support for the Government's efforts to reduce road accidents and
road casualties. (Answer: will outline support for pre-school
road safety campaign by General Accident.) Press Notice at 3.30
pm.
                                  2.

OTHER DEPARTMENTAL NEWS

DTp        Pedestrian Safety Package launched by Paul Channon.
           Press Conference, press notice at 10.30 am (includes
           measures aimed at pre-school children, new traffic
           schemes and an awareness campaign for drivers).

FOOTBALL

Asked about the timetable for the Football Spectators' Bill, we
said that the objective was still to get it on the Statute Book
this session, with Royal Assent in July. We offered no guidance
on the date for the resumption of the passage of the Bill through
Parliament. We explained that the Bill had two parts. Part I
prevented hooligans travelling to matches abroad, while Part II
introduced the national membership scheme. Part II was enabling
Bill legislation which when enacted would enable the establishment
of the Football Membership Authority. They would prepare a
membership scheme under the authority of the Secretary of State.
The preparation of such a scheme could take into account the
observations of Lord Justice Taylor.

Asked whether concern had been voiced by three PPSs in meetings
with the Home Secretary and others, we said that we were not aware
of any such meetings, or of a delegation going to see Colin
Moynihan. We said that Cabinet tomorrow would be likely to hear
reports on various issues concerned with the Bill, and that it was
possible that the Home Secretary and the Environment Secretary
would discuss these issues in advance.

We denied that the Government had made any move towards its
critics on the Bill. We said that Mr Wakeham had conceded nothing
at yesterday's PMQs and was simply attempting to clarify the
position. Asked about the inclusion of measures to ensure seated
stadiums, we said that we needed time to examine the implications
for the Football Spectators1 Bill. Any such measures would be
coped with under the Bill's existing timetable.

We stressed the importance of Part I of the Football Spectators'
Bill being in place before next year's World Cup, to prevent
hooligans travelling. We said we had heard no Government
suggestions about splitting the two parts of the Bill. We refused
to comment on claims of drunken and violent supporters at
Saturday's match.

GOVERNMENT INFORMATION SERVICES

We said we had no response to make to suggestions and allegations
contained in a letter sent by the IPCS union to the GIS Head of
Profession.
PA
 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 4 PM 19 APRIL 1989




We repeated this morning's Lobby.

FOOTBALL

Asked abouttiming on the Football Spectators' Bill, we said that
the aim was   still to getRoyal Assent in July. We said that any
interim results of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry would not be
taken into account in the Bill itself. Part II of the Bill was
enabling legislation which would set up the football membership
authority to work up the membership scheme under the authority of
the Secretary of State. It was at that point that any interim
conclusions of Taylor could be taken into account.

Asked why the Government could not delay the Bill so that it would
receive Royal Assent in the overspill period, we said that that
would cut down the time available for the football clubs to
implement the scheme. Asked whether there was a political risk in
pushing for Royal Assentin July, we said thatthe Prime Minister
was, of course, aware of what MPs were saying. But she was still
absolutely determined to get Royal Assent before the recess.

Asked why the Lord President had not mentioned the July Assent
objective at yesterday's PMQs, we said that that date was already
well known. Asked whether tomorrow's Cabinet would discuss the
Bill's timetable, we said that there would doubtless be reports
from various Ministers but we could not say whether there would be
any debate on the timing. We offered no guidance on the likely
date of the Third Reading of the Bill in the Lords.

We said that there was nothing new in remarks made by the Home
Secretary at lunchtime about the Bill being delayed to take
account of the need for all-seater stadiums. We said that there
could be a separate Bill if Lord Justice Taylor's report made
recommendations that could not be incorporated within the
provisions of the Football Spectators' Bill. We said that we had
given Lord Justice Taylor no time limit to produce his report, but
pointed out that he was fully aware of the urgency that was
required. The Government's main concern was to see that there was
a proper, thorough investigation into Hillsborough. Asked about
the timing of any interim conclusions from Taylor, we reminded the
Lobby that Popp1ewe11 had produced some interim conclusions within
8 or 9 weeks. We emphasised that the two situations were somewhat
different and that Lord Justice Taylor was not bound by that.

Asked about time constraints on implementation of the membership
scheme, we said that the FA and the League had had over two years
- since the publication of the Popp1ewe11 Report - to get used to
the idea of such schemes. The Government had tried to persaude
                               2.



football to introduce voluntary membership schemes but they had
refused to do so. The Bill should have come as no surprise to the
clubs. Asked whether it would be difficult to implement the
scheme by spring 1990, we said that the football authorities
themselves had said that it would be best to implement the scheme
when fans were still going to games, when grounds were staffed,
and when there would be time to remove problems from the system in
good time for the beginning of the 1990/91 season.

Asked what the Government would do if Taylor concluded that the
card scheme was not practical, we said that any such speculation
was purely hypothetical. We advised the Lobby to wait and see the
report itself.

ROLLS ROYCE

We were unable to offer any help on the visit of Dr Bangemann, the
EC Commissioner, to Lord Young today, about foreign shareholdings
in the Rolls Royce company.

GLOBAL WARMING

We said that there had been two meetings of Cabinet Ministers,
including one today, in preparation for next week's Prime
Ministerial seminar on global warming.

MITTERRAND ON BEIRUT

We said that there had been no further developments today on
President Mitterrand's ideas for peace-making in Beirut. The
Prime Minister had not been in touch with the President today.

SWAPO LEADER

We said that there were no plans for the Prime Minister to see
SWAPO leader Sam Njoma.

PA
