 Title: LP BRIEFING 4.25 PM 27/4/89



EC FRONTIER CONTROLS

The Leader said that Thursday's motion on intra-community
frontiers would deal with issues concerning reduction of barriers
in connection with the Single European Act. It would include
safeguards for drug trafficking etc. It was unlikely to be the
final story on the matter.

HONG KONG

Asked if the Prime Minister's words during Questions indicated a
softening of the Government's line on British passports for Hong
Kong citizens, the Leader said that no change of policy was
envisaged. The Foreign Affairs Select Committee was currently in
Hong Kong or had been there very recently and had taken evidence
from Sir Geoffrey Howe before they left. He had made the
Government's position clear. The Prime Minister was saying to Mr
Sillars that if he was so keen to change the situation he would
need to seek to amend the Nationality Act which he could attempt
through a Private Member's Bill. The Lobby was trying to read too
much into the Prime Minister's words. Nevertheless the Government
would read the Select Committee's report carefully once it was
submitted.

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

Asked about apparent confusion over the payment of benefits to
recipients of the Hillsborough Fund, the Leader said that a clear
distinction needed to be made between now and when the Social
Security Bill would be introduced in 1990. At present no payments
had been made and it was still not known on what basis they would
be made. However, we expected that recipients of income-related
payments would have their position reassessed. Their entitlement
to other benefits such as disability and retirement pensions and
child benefit would not be affected.

NHS

Asked about the Government's dispute with the doctors, the Leader
stressed that there was a clear difference between the question of
doctors' contracts and general reform of the Health Service. On
the question of contracts, the Government was seeking talks to
negotiate but this did not mean that concessions were envisaged.
As for NHS reform, no one could pretend that we could continue to
absorb funds as at present. The question was whether additional
resources were to be allocated by bureaucrats or by the doctors
themselves. The Government was not committed to every dot and
comma in its proposals. Asked if the Government feared rejection
of its NHS proposals by the doctors, the Leader said he was not
pessimistic about the Government getting its message across. He
had personally had little difficulty in doing so in his own
constituency.

EC

The Leader confirmed that no discussions were currently underway
about British membership of the EMS.

INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES

Asked if the Government was concerned about a possible summer of
discontent, the Leader said that no one liked to see industrial
disputes. And there was no justification for the present ones.
The Government would like to see the tube dispute negotiated and,
in other disputes, the threat of action lifted. There was not
undue concern but the Government had to take an interest as it had
certain responsibilities to carry out. There was no feeling that
the inflation rate should be the going rate for pay settlements.

FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP BILL

The Leader said that no decisions had been taken on how to proceed
and he could give no guidance on the timing of the next steps. At
present there were no plans to introduce changes during the
Committee Stage: it was basically an enabling Bill. There had
been no discussions on how to introduce requirements for
all-seating stadia. In any case it was not necessary for this to
be explicit in the Bill.




BRIEFING BY DEPUTY PRESS SECRETARY              4.45 PM


We repeated this morning's Lobby.

SULTAN OF BRUNEI

We said we doubted that Harrods had been discussed at the meeting
which the Prime Minister had with the Sultan of Brunei today. It
was not that sort of meeting.

GPS' CONTRACTS

We confirmed that Mr Clarke had reported on the matter to Cabinet
                               3.



this morning though there had been no discussion. There was no
suggestion that Mr Clarke would be seeing the Prime Minister about
it.

WALES

We denied that Mr Walker had given Cabinet an up-date on the Vale
of Glamorgan by-election this morning, though we confirmed he had
spoken on another subjct.

SNF

We had no reaction to Mr Kohl's speech to the German Parliament.
The Prime Minister had not changed her views. Asked if her task
on Sunday would be more difficult, we said that if one read the
speech it seemed that Mr Kohl had not closed all doors. The Prime
Minister would explain to Mr Kohl her point of view and the reaons
she beieved it was necessary to keep up-to-date SNF based in
Germany, as agreed at the last NATO Summit. There was no question
of NATO opening negotiations on SNF with the Warsaw Pact. We
pointed out that by having SNF based in Germany, NATO had a
deterrent to the Warsaw Pact. It was not the first time that the
Prime Minister had been a loan voice though we refused to comment
on which position other Alliance partners took.

We recognised that Mr Kohl had an internal political problem but
we pointed out that NATO had an agreed position and we were
concerned that the West should be properly defended. The Soviet
Union had modernised 95% of its SNF over the last 5 years and
contined to do so. On the other hand LANCE went back to 1972.

Asked if we would settle a line on Mr Lubbers on Saturday, we said
that we would have to wait and see. There were other subjects,
such as EC matters, on the agenda. We denied that the Attorney
General or the Home Secretary would be present at Chequers.

BABY FOOD

We confirmed that Cabinet had received a report on contamination
of baby food. There was not much debate. Asked if we thought the
public had been kept in the dark, we pointed out that the police
had given as much information as was available. Material had been
issued at the time by both companies and the police in the local
press in each area where cases were discovered. It had only just
developed into a national problem. Meanwhile police were carrying
out a full scale investigation.

MB
