                                                                                                       10   Great Goorge Street
                                                                                                            London SW 1P 3AE

PO L IC E COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY                                                                         Telephone 071-273 6410



BRIGADIER J. L. POWNALL, ODE
D e p u ty Chairman



     Mr T Hicks?^

                                                                                                 Our Ref:    COM 91/131/39

                                                                                                        .September,         1991


W WscUo is                             4 ^
 •        ft_«*s<L   & ^ tv ^ 0 x v V ilM r^ ilO '   Vl04Sr\5'''   Cn j S "   (te   " A s .il,




      ^ GLar At\. J^y.<-^Ccs/
     You will recall that we wrote to you on 15 August 1990 and again on
     11 July 1991 after receiving the report of the investigation into your
     complaints about the conduct of officers of the South Yorkshire Police
     at Hillsborough in April 1989.      As you know, the -Authority have
     considered the disciplinary aspects of the case and I enclose a
     further copy of the note which explains the independent role of the
     Authority in the complaints procedure and some of the factors which
     are taken into account before a decision is reached.

     The aim of this letter is to explain to you the outcome of your
     specific complaints and which of those are the subject of disciplinary
     charges against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent
     Murray and which are not the subject of disciplinary charges.

     May I first of all express my sincere sympathy at the tragic loss of
     Sarah and Victoria, not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of
     the Authority.

     You complained that Superintendent Greenwood failed to prevent the
     build up of supporters outside the gates but the investigation has
     established that his command responsibilities did not include the area
     of Leppings Lane outside the stadium.      You also complain that he
     failed to control the movement of supporters after Gate ’C ’ had been
     opened and that he was slow to respond to the situation and effect a
     rescue.    The investigation established that he had no knowledge of
     Gate 1C ’ being opened and, therefore, was unable to take any remedial
     action.   He was, in fact, the first senior officer to react to the
     situation in Pens 3 and 4.    Having failed to gain any response from
     the Control Box, Superintendent Greenwood acted on his own initiative
     to approach the referee and stop the match.     He then organised and
     directed groups of police officers in the rescue efforts.     You will
     appreciate that with the number of spectators involved and the limited
     exits available through which the police could relieve the pressure


                                                                                                                     \ *O
the rescue operation was unavoidably laborious.        Superintendent
Greenwood sent officers into Pens 3 and 4 to direct people back
through the tunnel as soon as it was possible to do so.     His early
arrival at the scene is confirmed by another officer and by the video
recordings.

I turn now to your complaints against Superintendent Marshall
regarding his control of supporters in Leppings Lane and his failure
to control the movement of these supporters subsequent to the opening
of Gate 'C1. Superintendent Marshall says that he requested traffic
to be stopped from entering Leppings Lane at 14.17 hours, and again
at 14.22 hours, before traffic was finally stopped shortly after 14.30
hours.   He took this decision for the safety of the many fans in
Leppings Lane. Because there were so many fans outside the ground he
thought the stands and terraces must still have ample capacity and
that if he could keep people moving they would all be in position by
the start of the match.     Superintendent Marshall pointed out that
unless a breach of public order .was threatened he has no legal power
to prevent anyone from using a public thoroughfare.     The Authority
considered that from his perspective it was not unreasonable for
Superintendent Marshall to request Gate 'C' to be opened.    It is the
Authority's view that before granting permission to open that gate the
implications of doing so should have been considered and steps taken
to deal with the rush of fans that would ensue.

Once authority had been given for the opening of Gate 'C' and the
supporters had moved     into the stadium they had gone out of
Superintendent Marshall's sight and his area of command.   Due to the
large number of people still outside Superintendent Marshall remained
in Leppings Lane but despatched some 30 of his officers into the
stadium.  He describes how when injured people began to be brought
from the West Stand he realised that a serious incident had occurred
and he then commenced to deal with casualties and fatalities.      He
remained in that area directing operations until he was summoned to
the police control box between 16.00 hours and 16.15 hours when he
briefed Assistant Chief Constable Jackson.

The Authority have carefully studied all the available evidence
concerning the tragic events at Hillsborough and have concluded that
no disciplinary action should be taken against Superintendent
Greenwood and Superintendent Marshall.

You have made several complaints against Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray who were in overall charge of
the police arrangements at the ground.   As I have already told you,
the Authority have directed that disciplinary charges should be
preferred against these two officers.    As far as the disciplinary
tribunal is concerned, it is the responsibility of the Force to
arrange the hearing and they have informed me that the situation at
present is that one of the two officers has been certified medically
unfit. So the South Yorkshire Police have not yet made the necessary
arrangements for the hearing.




                                                               U
I have spoken to the Assistant Chief Constable and asked him to fix
a date and make all possible progress in the meantime.

A copy of this letter has been sent to the Assistant Chief Constable
of South Yorkshire.




J L POWNALL
