 HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL TRAGEDY

 Hillsborough tragedy was on 15. April

 18-4-89
 LINE (Chairman's comments on BBC Radio's "Today")

The fundamental purpose of the PCA is to be a public presence
at investigations by the police of matters in which they are
themselves involved.     But since our understanding is that
WestMid Chf Const Geoffrey Dear is to report direct to Lord
Justice Taylor, the need for the South Yorks Chf Cons Peter
Wright to refer the matter to us under Sec 88 is much less or
non-existent because Lord Justice Taylor and his colleagues
will provide the necessary civilian oversight.

"However, complaints by the public could arrrive in the next
week or so and if they allege death or serious injury arising
from police conduct then the PCA would be obliged by law to
supervise the investigation.      If that happens,     then the
sensible course would be for me, as Chairman, to liaise with
Lord Justice Taylor and in so doing provide reassurance to the
public about the thoroughness and integrity of the enquiry."

10-10-89
LINE (ex Noel Taylor for BBC Leeds 0532 441188 Newsroom): PCA
is supervising investigation of some complaints arising from
the Hillsborough tragedy.  Noel Taylor is supervising, Geoffrey
Dear WMid Chf Const is investigating officer.


11-10-89
Plus W'hampton ExStar Mohammed Ilyas, W-at-0 Christopher Burns
927 4345, Radio City, Liverpool, Tim Needham 051 967 5216,
B'ham Daily News Wendy Woolfson, Granada TV Joanne Hartley 051
709 9393 X 221 re stories in today's national press that SYorks
officers have been served with discipline notices in connection
with "being too slow too act".

Also WMid Police Bureau Mark Stokes 021 233 2619.

At 12.00 hours, Noel Taylor said we would be         issuing press
notice today which he would fax across.

Now 15.00 - still no fax.

2-4-90

LINE   (ex   N  Taylor)  New   investigating  officer   has   been
appointed.   He is Les Sharp, Chf Const of Cumbria.

NOT FOR GENERAL CIRCULATION YET IS THE FOLLOWING;    New CC to
replace Geoffrey Dear is Mr Hadfield.   He is not investigating
officer for Hillsborough because he was present on the day and
is a witness.  Contact Mr Taylor if anybody asks us about this.
--JH


                                                                IS
 26-4-90

 Yorkshire Post Mike Woodcock 0742 700270 asked for confirmation
 that the PCA report is now complete, can the findings be
 divulged or any steer offered?

 LINE (from Noel Taylor)      The    report   is   complete   we    cannot
 comment on its findings.

 27-4-90

Siobhan O'Connor, Radio Sheffield 0742 686185 x272. Will the
PCA report be presented at today's meeting of S. Yorks Police
at 12.30?

LINE (from Noel Taylor) Having completed our investigation it
is now out of our hands. ( Apparently the report has been
leaked, the South Yorks Post declares that Peter Wright has
been cleared and suggests that the PCA's report was hurried
through  in view of his       retirement!)  The conplaint   was
registered by the S.Yorks Police March 22, Noel Taylor received
the report on April 25 and issued an interim statement the same
day. (Copy faxed to us and placed on file)

30.4.90   Matthew Flintoff Radio Hallam and Sheffield 0742 766
766; has the overall investigation into complaint against the
police at Hillsborough been completed?

LINE (FROM   B.PILLING)   o   the   overall   investigation    is   still
ongoing.

1-5-90
UPDATE: It is hoped that the reports on individual complaints
will be completed by July.

6-7-90
Bob Westerdale Sheffield Star 0742 767676 asked for information
about whether the officers involved were interviewed under
caution and whether their solicitors were present.

LINE:   (ex Noel Taylor)It is not the Authority's policy to
discuss details of ongoing investigations and we certainly
could   not answer such questions as were the officers under
caution and were their solicitors present.

BW also asked:
What stage is the investigation?
LINE: (ex Noel Taylor) Following Lord Justice Taylor's report
the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police consulted with
the Director of Public Prosecutions and as a result the West
Midlands Police were requested to do a criminal investigation.
This investigation came at the same time that certain members
of the public made specific allegations against named police
officers. The Authority is supervising the investigation of
those specific complaints and anticipates the Investigating
Officer's report will be presented to the Authority in a matter
of weeks.
What happens next?

LINE: (ex Noel Taylor) the amswer to this question is set down
in Section 90 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
which briefly says that having studied the report and being
satisfied that the investigation has been thoroughly carried
out the Authority will issue a statement to that effect. At the
same time the report comes to the Authority a copy will be
given to the South Yorkshire Police . It is for the South
Yorkshire Police to consider whether a criminal offence has
been committed and to send a copy of the report to the Director
of Public Prosecutions. If there is no criminal charge the
Chief Officer will tell the Authority whether or not he
proposes to bring a formal discipline charge against any
officer. If he does not propose to do so and the Authority
disagree with him we can recommend or if necessary direct
disciplinary charges.

These lines phoned to BW by FC on 10-7-90

15 August 1990
PN issued saying that investigation by PCA "has been completed
to its satisfaction"   (PN timed to coincide with CPS decision
not to bring criminal charges).


So far Press Office does not know date of completion.   Press
Office also needs to be able to respond to media enquiries as
to what happens now?


Derek/Fiona:
15 August 1990
                 re Hillsborough PN issued today

RM/NT briefed CP today as follows:-

No details of nature of complaints available - in view of the
fact that DPP has yet to make an announcement regarding
possible criminal charges, that the matter of disciplinary
considerations has yet to be dealt with, that the Coroner's
inquest has not been completed and civil litigation is current,
we do not consider it appropriate to give detailed information
regarding nature of complaints.

ISs into complaints dated today.

Letters to complainants posted today.

1 0 's report into criminal investigation was passed to the DPP
at the same time as PCA received it - and that was "as
investigation developed" (NOT FOR RELEASE: received 2 August)

When Lord Justice Taylor issued his interim report (4 Aug 89)
the then Ch Const Peter Wright asked WMid to undertake an
investigation into possible criminal matters associated with
that report.  It was about that time that the first complaints
were recorded.

Disciplinary considerations are a matter for the PCA and the
police force concerned, with PCA having "the final say".



30-8-90
PN issued by Crown Prosecution Service.
THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER

Following a lengthy, and detailed investigation by the West
Midlands Police    and close consideration of Lord Justice
Taylor's report, the Director of Public Prosecutions, Allan
Green QC, has concluded that there is insufficient evidence
upon which a prosecution for manslaughter or any other criminal
offence may be bought against the South Yorkshire Police,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Messrs Eastwood and Partners
of Sheffield City Council in connection with the disaster at
Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, on 15 April 1989.

The Director has also concluded that there is insufficient
evidence to justify the institiution of proceedings against any
officer in the South Yorkshire Police force or any other person
for any offence.

PCA NOTE FOR PRESS OFFICERS (ex Brig Pownall,4pm 30 Aug 1990)
Journalists will be asking if there are to be any disciplinary
charges (following the DPP's decision, above, that there is
insufficient evidence to bring criminal proceedings).

The PCA says:"the Authority will be following the procedures
laid down (in PACE) and will await a memorandum from the Chief
Officer responsible for complaints and discipline,       South
Yorkshire Police,   with his proposals as to disciplinary
action."

IF PRESSED:    If the Chief Officer were to recommend       no
disciplinary charges, the Authy could recommend them and,   if
necessary, direct that they be preferred,
updated by FC

3-9-90
Call from David Holmes of BBC TV Leeds asking for update on
DPP's decision aginst Criminal proceedings. Checked with Brig.
- no change from previous line.

4-9-90
Further questions from D Holmes BBC TV Leeds.
1.How many complaints were made to SouthYorksPol
Refer to SYP.
2.How many complaints have been referred to PCA?
8 cases consisting of a number of complaints some of which
refer to the same incident.
 (NOT FOR PRESS USE:23 referrals, resulting in 17 files with
groups of cases.)
3.How many cases still active?
All cases still active as we arewaiting for memo  from Chief


                                                                  n
Officer of SYP with his proposals as to discp. action.
 (Some cases involving Senior Officers ACC and above are not a
matter for PCA - but the Police Authority)
4. If Chief Officer decides on discp. action would PCA accept
his judgement?
YES
5.If he doesn't decide on discp. action?
Then PCA could use powers to recommend and if necessary to
direct that charges are preferred.
6. If Chief Officer decides against discp. action will PCA
decision on cases as a group have to await completion of all
investigations of all cases.
PCA decision on all cases will come at more or less the same
time.
7.How long would it take PCA to reach a decision about the
cases.
As long as it takes.



19-03-91
DT: Chf Inspr John Bennett, Press Officer, S Yorks Police,
calls to make contact and to say inquest jury is expected to
retire next Monday. After discuss with Bennett, I faxed the
following note to Brigadier Pownall:



F A X   C O M M U N I C A T I O N


To:     Brigadier John Pownall

From:   Derek Todd



HILLSBOROUGH

You might like to know that Chf Inspr John Bennett, press
officer of South Yorks Police, called me today to let us know
that the inquest jury is expected to retire next Monday.

He wanted to liaise with us, since he was under the impression
that the Authority would be putting out a press notice. I said
he should not assume that it would be putting out any press
notice, since it had already certified that the W Mids/Cunibria
investigation had been completed to its satisfaction and the
complainants had been written to.

The DPP had concluded that there was insufficient evidence to
bring criminal charges, I reminded Bennett, and the situation
was that the Authority was awaiting a memorandum from South
Yorks Police with proposals on police disciplinary action; that
was the Authority's sole remaining involvement. Bennett agreed
and said he thought this memorandum had been held up pending
the end of the inquest.
He concluded by saying that when the inquest is over S Yorks
Police will put out a short statement: its contents will
obviously be determined by the nature of the verdict. He
promised to fax me a copy - and I shall onfax it to you.

If there is anything we   ned to discuss in this, perhaps   you
would give me a call.

19 March 1991



LATER. ..
DT: Brigadier calls and endorses above - he cannot think that
the Authority will wish to put out any PN. We agree to wait and
see what the verdict is. He confirms his interest in seeing the
S Yks PN following the inquest. He promises to let us know when
he receives S Yks1 memo on disciplinary measures they propose.

28-3-91
Inquest in Sheffield returned majority verdict of accidental
death.
PN by SYks Police expressing" sense of relief" and concluding
with the paragraph...
"The question of disciplinary proceedings is still open and is
a matter for the Police Complaints Authority to decide.     The
files will be prepared and will incorporate the details of
today's jury verdict for them to consider.     I hope that the
Police Complaints Authority decision will be reached within the
week."

2-4-91
Various calls from journalists to confirm information in press
today that PCA had rec'ved SYks Memorandum and would be ready
with its discp. reccs at the end of this week.
FC checks with Brig Pownall who advised that that it was
unlikely that the PCA would have reached a decision upon this
by the end of the week.

Various dates
Many calls from national and regional news media asking when
stmt will be made by PCA...

03-05-91
Brigadier Pownall raises with DT the matter of a statement on
this case. Brigadier says PCA is going through "a little
procedure" which must be completed before any stmt can be made.
Agreed that press office will stick firmly to line that PCA is
still considering the matter and not get drawn on questions of
detail.

FOR PRESS OFFICERS ONLY: Brigadier says press office could well
get pressing calls from journalists, since S Yorks force is
"very leaky". Journalists already know that PCA is considering
a "memorandum" from S Yorks on disciplinary proposals, if any.
What we should not get into is any discussion on what stage the
procedure has reached. For our information only, the position
is that the PCA could accept whatever is in the memorandum or,
if it were not satisfied, could "recommend" displinary charges
and that would lead to discussion between the two parties.
Ultimately,  PCA could "require" that disciplinary charges
should be brought against officer(s). Journalists would no
doubt like to say that there is disagreement between the PCA
and S Yks
police on disciplinary matters. We must not get drawn into that
area at all.

07-05-91
DT: Brig Pownall calls again to bring us up to date - FOR OUR
EARS ONLY - on where we are now. He tells us the following,
since he suspects there will be a leak from S Yks Police with
the result that we shall get calls.

NOT FOR USE: Brigadier says he is today sending a letter to S
Yks Police making formal recommendations on discipline. If
those are accepted by police, that's it. If they are declined,
there will be further procedure to be gone through. As noted
above, we must not get drawn on exactly where we are on that
procedure. Nor must we get drawn on perceived "differences"
between PCA and police -a sensational story about conflict
between the two wouldn't help anybody.

WHAT WE CAN TELL THE PRESS: All we can say is that the PCA is
going through the proper procedure and will have nothing to say
until it has been gone through.

13 - 06-91
DT: Bob Westerdale, Sheffield Star, who has been following this
case closely, calls and says he has been told that the DCC
South Yorks Police has "rung one of the officers concerned as
the result of a request from the PCA for further inquiries to
be carried out".

After a conversation with Brigadier Pownall, I called back
Westerdale and told him the PCA had not asked anyone to carry
out further inquiries. In response to W's further questions, I
said that, as he knew, what was under consideration was whether
any police officer(s)    should be charged with disciplinary
offences or not - and and it should surprise nobody that there
were contacts between the PCA and S Yorks Police - but I
repeated that the PCA had not asked for "further inquiries".

Westerdale then went on to say he had heard local suggestions
that "the PCA is dragging it feet with harmful consequences". I
told him ""The PCA emphatically rejects any suggestion that it
is dragging its feet. The procedure laid down in PACE is being
gone through as speedily as possible".

Westerdale also told, in answer to supplementaries, that when
Leslie Sharp of Cumbria Constabulary took over as 10 he
continued to use the existing investigating team composed of W
Mids officers; also that PCA covers England and Wales only, not
Scotland or N Ireland.

NOT FOR USE: If there is any foot dragging, it could be laid at
the door of S Yorks Police, because the PCA has been waiting
for a month to hear from them. The PCA sent a recommendation on
discipline to that Force a month ago (ex Brig. Pownall today)
and is still awaiting a response. We must not get drawn on
questions of procedure or who's to blame for delay but stick to
the answer above. Brig. P says the latest is that S Yks Police
have said it will be at least a fortnight before they reply to
PCA. Brigadier also confirms, for press officers' internal
information,      that   he continues  to   be responsible   for
disciplinaryaspects of this case,     although he has now become
head of Investigatory Division.

13 Jan 1992
PCA agrees that disciplinary charges should be dropped against
Supt (Murray). See press notice on file.

13 Nov 1995 Prof Scraton, Edge Hill College publishes Liverpool
City Council report into Hillsborough.

June 2000 Private prosecution begins of Chief Supt Duckenfield
and Supt Bernard Murray for alleged manslaughter,
see "old files - Hillsborough.
20 7 2000




                                                                   31
