D.   p l in a r y r e s p o n s ib i l it ie s


                                                                          9C |/\     ooMVUJiQ •


                                                 impeccable behaviour. This will not be achieved without first class
                                                 management, supervision and leadership as well as regular training.
                                                 We believe it is a goal worth striving for.

              Early retirement                   2 .1 8 T h ere is another aspect of police discipline which causes us
                                                 some concern. Each year th ere are a few cases in which charges are
                                                 preferred against police officers as a result of complaints or through
                                                 referrals to th e Authority under Section 88 of the Act but before the
                                                 cases come to a hearing the police officer involved may resign, if he
                                                 is not suspended, or be retired on medical grounds. It may well be
                                                 that it is in the best in terests of the Force that the officer concerned
                                                 leaves the police service but the fact is that the case remains
                                                 unresolved and the disciplinary outcome is pre-em pted. As an
                                                 Authority dedicated to trying to get at the truth on behalf of the
                                                 complainant or in the public interest it is unsatisfactory not to b e able
                                                 to hold a disciplinary hearing which would finally decide the m atter.

                        Conclusion               2 . 1 9 As ordinary m em bers of the public, with unique access to the
                                                 fullest information, Authority m em bers are able to reach an objective
                                                 judgment on the thousands of cases we deal with each year. T his
                                                 should provide Forces with a guide to the public perception of th eir
                                                 performance and an aid to improving management. However,
                                                 attitudes to complaints vary considerably from Force to Force. Som e
                                                 seem to regard them as an unavoidable irritant whilst at the o th e r
                                                 end of the spectrum the stated purpose of the Complaints and
                                                 Discipline D epartm ent in one Force is “to assist the chief officers in
                                                 guiding and directing the F o rc e ” . If the police service at every level
                                                 adopted the latter concept, then something worthwhile should
                                                 em erge in the form of g re a te r understanding betw een the police and
                                                 the public, which m ust be of benefit to us all.




                                                                                                                           15
