                                                                <533/^1(0

MANAGEMENT IN CONFIDENCE

                           SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY

                 H I L L S B O R O U G H    E M E R G E N C Y

        BRIEF FACTUAL REPORT RELATING TO THE HOSPITALS RESPONSE TO THE
         HILLSBOROUGH EMERGENCY OF SATURDAY AFTERNOON. 15 APRIL 1989

 1   Activation of Mai or Disaster Plan

     1.1 From approximately 15.15 hours on Saturday, 15 April, information
         regarding some form of incident began to reach the Hospitals in
         Sheffield through staff making enquiries following media reports.

     1.2 Northern General Hospital

         At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone message was received at the
         Northern General Hospital switchboard from police asking the hospital
         to ‘stand b y ’ as there was an incident with casualties at
         Hillsborough.     A further message was received at approximately 15.25
         hours that a paediatric cardiac arrest was on route to the
         Northern General Hospital.     At approximately 15.27 hours the
         paediatric cardiac arrest arrived and proved to be the first casualty
         from Hillsborough.     The ambulance driver stated that there had been
         a major accident at the Football Ground.

     1.3 Charge Nurse       it the Northern General Accident and Emergency
         Department arranged for the Accident and Emergency Department to be
         prepared for receipt of a large number of casualties, having
         instructed his staff nurse to commence the Accident and Emergency
         call-out cascade for a major disaster.

     1.4 The Accident and Emergency Department contacted the switchboard at
         approximately 15.35 hours and asked for all available medical staff
         to be called to attend the Department.   This was done.

     1.5 Meanwhile, Mrs              Assistant Matron, went to the switchboard
         and, at approximately 15.43 hours, she and the telephonist
         implemented the call out of staff for a major disaster.    The
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital confirmed that it, too, had been asked to
         ‘stand b y ’ by the police.

     1.6 At approximately 16.00 hours, the Consultant in Accident and
         Emergency arranged with SYMAS for further cases to be taken to the
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital (which was, in fact, already receiving
         casualties.

     1.7 The Roval Hallamshire Hospital

        At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone call was received from a
        Police Inspector by the nurse in charge of the Accident and Emergency
        Department asking the Hospital to stand by and to expect casualties
        from an incident at Hillsborough.   The switchboard, which had been
        monitoring the call, immediately advised key members of staff of the
        receipt of this message.   The key members of staff included the duty
        Administrator, Accident and Emergency staff and duty Assistant
        Matron.   Preparation of the Accident and Emergency Department, in
        anticipation of a possible major accident alert, commenced.    At


                                     1
            approximately 15.30 hours, police arrived to set up a control room
            and, in response to a hospital staff enquiry, confirmed that a major
            alert was in being and the hospital duty Nursing officer notified
            switchboard which commenced cascade call out for staff in accordance
            with major disaster procedure.

    2   Accident and Emergency Department

        2.1 The first casualties arrived in the Northern General Hospital
            Accident and Emergency Department at approximately 15.27 hours and
            the last at approximately 16.45 hours.   The Department was cleared
            by approximately 17.30 hours.

        2.2 The first casualty arrived in the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Accident
            and Emergency Department at approximately 15.40 hours and the last at
            approximately 17.01 hours.   The Department was cleared by
            approximately 18.15 hours.

3       Site Medical Teams

        3.1 SYMAS called the Northern General Hospital for an emergency medical
            team to attend the site at approximately 15.45 hours.    The team,
            comprising two doctors, was collected by ambulance from the
            Northern General Hospital at approximately 15.55 hours (earlier
            response was not possible because of the volume of casualties in the
            Accident and Emergency Department).   The team was sent back on
            arrival at the Ground but the equipment (resuscitation box etc) was
            retained for use at the Ground.

        3.2 There is no record of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital having received
            a request although it had put a team on stand by, ready to respond to
            any request to attend the site of the incident.   No ambulance
            reported to collect the team.

4       Patients Statistics

        4.1 Brief statistics, concerning casualties received at the Sheffield
            Hospitals from the incident are as follows

                                             NGH           RHH              TOTAL

        Casualties brought
        to Accident & Emergency               88            71                  159

        Dead on arrival or died in
        the Accident & Emergency              11             1                   12

        Treated and discharged                21            45                  66

        Admitted                             56            25                   81

        Admitted to ITUs (included
        in total admissions above)            19             7                  26

        Subsequent transfers from ITU
        (for scans and neurological care)      7 to RHH      7 from NGH           7

        Subsequent deaths                     2             —
                                                                                 2



                                        2
    4.2 The total number of casualties remaining in hospital at 09.00 hours
        on Wednesday, 26 April was 1 (in Intensive Care) at the
        Northern General Hospital and 4 (all in Intensive Care) at the
        Royal
        Hallamshire Hospital.

    4.3 It is understood that 3 minor casualties were also taken to Barnsley
        District General Hospital.

5   Hospital Responses

    5.1 Debriefing of personnel involved in the hospital response is
        proceeding, primarily aimed at identifying whether improvements in
        the procedures, either in the individual hospitals, across the
        District or in the inter-face with the other emergency services can
        be made for future planning.

    5.2 IT IS, HOWEVER, CLEAR THAT THE NORTHERN GENERAL AND ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE
        HOSPITALS RESPONSES WERE TIMELY, EFFICIENT AND EFFECTIVE, AND STAFF
        HAVE EVERY REASON TO BE SATISFIED AT THEIR RESPONSE AND OF THE
        QUALITY OF SERVICES PROVIDED AT THE HOSPITALS.

    5.3 Psychological support services have been provided to the hospital
        staff at the hospitals involved in the emergency, as well as to many
        others involved in the disaster.

    5.4 Other hospitals involved in support roles weres-

        5.4.1 King Edward VII Hospital to which transfers were made (19
              orthopaedic) early in the emergency to clear beds at
              Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

        5.4.2 Lodge Moor Hospital, which prepared (1 ward) ready to receive
              transfers to clear beds at the district general hospitals; no
              transfers were made, but see also note (5.4.6) below.

        5.4.3 Beds were cleared at the Jessop Hospital for Women, again ready
              for transfers to clear beds at the two district general
              hospitals and to release staff for the district general
              hospitals.   No transfers of patients were subsequently made.

        5.4.4 Children’s Hospital brought its state up to full alert ready to
              receive casualties if required.

        5.4.5 Staff from several hospitals and from District and Regional
              Headquarters departments went to and undertook duties at the
              two district general hospitals.

        5.4.6 The Bed Bureau, on hearing of the major emergency, arranged
              with Chesterfield and Rotherham Hospitals to take general
              practitioner emergency admissions if required and Lodge Moor
              Hospital to take medical emergencies.

        5.4.7 Barnsley District General Hospital received 3 casualties.
              Subsequently, at the request of the Sheffield Hospitals
              Control, Rotherham District General Hospital took on the
              ‘initial receiving centre’ for casualties for any further major
              emergency which might occur, and for which the Sheffield
              hospitals would normally have been selected for response, until


                                    3
              9.00 am on Sunday, 16 April.   The Sheffield Hospitals Control
              confirmed with Barnsley that the Barnsley District General
              Hospital could stand down at 18.45 hours.

6   Communications

    6.1 Communications within and between the two district general hospitals
        were very effective.   The rapport between the emergency service
        representatives on the hospital sites was good. Many calls from the
        public came to the hospitals because of apparent difficulties in
        contacting the police emergency number.

7   Volunteers and Other Agencies

    7.1 Volunteers from organisations and individuals reported to hospitals
        to give assistance and made effective contributions, as did the
       .social work staff of the Sheffield City Council.   Numerous offers of
        help, particularly to provide accommodation and transport, were
        received from Sheffield residents.

8   Conclusion

    8.1 Finally, the hospitals would wish to formally recognise the many
        offers of help, condolence and support which were received during and
        after the initial emergency, and the many visits (official and
        unofficial) which contributed significantly to the morale of
        patients, relatives and staff.

    8.2 Pre-arranged visits were made to the Northern General and
        Royal Hallamshire Hospitals by the followings-

        Sundav. 16 April :

        Mr D Blunkett MP (to Northern General Hospital)

        Archbishop of Liverpool, the
        Bishop of Warrington (representing the Bishop of Liverpool)
        and the Free Church Moderator of Liverpool

        Mrs M Thatcher, Prime Minister and Mr D Hurd, Home Secretary
        (accompanied by Mr I Patnick MP at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

        Chair of Liverpool Council          )
        Lord Mayor of Sheffield accompanied) Sunday Royal Hallamshire  Hospital
        by Councillor Clive Betts           )Monday Northern General Hospital
        Lord Mayor of Nottingham           )


        Monday. 17 April:

        Liverpool Football Team

        TRHs Prince and Princess of Wales




                                    4
«
    1

                  Tuesday. 18 April:

                  HRH Duke of Kent (Northern General Hospital)

                  The Archbishop of York (Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

                  Mr N Kinnock, Leader of the Labour Party
                  accompanied by Councillor Clive Betts


                  Wednesday. 19 April:

                  The Bishop of Hallam

                  Nottingham Forrest Football Team


                  Thursday. 20 April:

                  Lord Justice Taylor

                  Chief Constable Dear, West Midlands Police


                  Tuesday. 25 April

                  Mr T Clay, General Secretary, RCN




        KT/LS
        27 4 89




                                              5
                                                                                                             h)CA'


4   ^                                                                               ^                                          ^           /   A   s    ^             -



        Q                                       ^               tU - M                      jtiU u ^»                                  M . od^ . P^-x -                                     W(
                                                                                                                                                                                        A   i   /C-C a V   x   S'


                                                                                                                                                                                   —   i’
                                                                                                                                                                                        MJfZtA.<
                                                                                                                                                                                       j2,-n -^Xas^jL s

                                                                                                                                                                                  —    t^ te/7 ..4 rt/? ,c.              I? ^ s ^   ^H-QjSriS


        @                                                                                   A       2 o - Kc/ti« 4 *s u l o c - f o *                                                       'f°                c/^-pU t               ■^2 O


                    J ? ■\aA '
                        ^               ^Apot                           <K       <rWac> ^ ' " " J3^                       Vo=>(-                   ^        K


            ( g )       £           L       v       -           ®       *    @          ^   i   w        V   U        o    A           -           <2   f t ? .                                                      ^




        ^           (   v       b   .   M       ^                   t        ^




            g           &     „ - a                                               < a       ^       ;~ t a
                        jQlu ew<i>^'                                                                                                                         / i              (\

                )                                       (-_ <L*u- J - ^ ^                                                                                   '^*"Xl}
                                                                                   A                 I           f             « u / ( e ' . t              ■” [ -   ‘J   W   -    ^     l o * - * " -          l~       ^

        ( f )               b       J   ^               -   V                     « » •                          f'                '   “   ' I *
