                                                  -VS33 f e lt


                                                                         4  .
                                                                             .V




                            ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL


                            MEDICAL RECORDS DEPARTMENT

           REPORT OH HILLSBOROUGH MAJAX - Saturday 15th April. 1989




Casualties -    3.40 pm. - 5.01 pm.


           ADMISSIONS           25
           DEATHS                1
           DISCHARGES           45

                                71

           TRANSFERRED
           FROM N.G.H.           7
                                78

Call Out

Because of the nature and   publicity of the incident some staff were already making
their way into Hospital     before the MAJAX was declared.     The advantage of this,'
however, was that staff     were at the Hospital and prepared to accept casualties
before they arrived.        Switchboard did not notify A & E Reception of MAJAX
declaration.

Docuaentation

All patients were documented and wrist bands attached.  One patient was documented
twice, 2 majax numbers were unused and 6 majax numbers allocated to the
Resuscitation area but were unused. Some system of producing alphabetical casualty
lists needs to be devised.

Some 'major' cases were being admitted via A & E which is outside the Procedure.
However staff were also based in A & E and these patients were documented.

The pre-numbered patients property bags and lab.      request forms were not used by
Medical and Nursing staff.

Patient Movement

Patients sent for x-ray - there was no indication on their x-ray card as to which
area they should return following x-ray.

Some 'minor' cases were being misdirected to Physiotherapy to await transport home.
This probably resulted from volunteer medical staff unfamiliar with the MAJAX
procedure.

Ward discharges did not seem to be sent via Physiotherapy.
    *

f
                                             -   2   -




        Admissions


        At least 13 patients were taken to the Wards by-passing Admissions.       Although a
        member of the Medical Records Department was based in Transit, as she was a
        volunteer she was not aware of the need to ensure details were passed to Admissions.
        This specific ’Action Card’ needs expanding to include these specific instructions.

        Telephone calls from Relatives

        Contrary to the Procedurettelephone calls from relatives and friends were constantly
        being received by A & E Reception and Admissions.      In order to deal with these
        enquiries the staff in these two areas needed updated casualty lists.

        If the staff could not help relatives/friends searching for casualties, the police
        emergency telephone number was given, but this was constantly engaged.

        Main Reception Desk, B Floor, was not manned throughout the night, so the Admissions
        staff undertook this task in addition to their normal duties.

        Suggestions from Staff

        Casualties, relatives and friends need improved telephone facilities in Orthopaedics
        or A & E. Many ’minor' cases wandered off to make urgent telephone calls.

        Future Action

        1.   Revise, amend and increase number of 'Action Cards' to include
             additional staff to document large numbers of patients,
             formulate casualty lists into alphabetical order and ensure
             admissions do not bypass Admissions Office.

        2.   Include in the MAJAX box some form of identification badge or
             armband for Medical Records Staff.

        3.   Discuss with nursing staff contents of MAJAX box with particular
             reference to pre-numbered patient property bags and laboratory
             request forms.

        4.   Ensure likely 'volunteers' not necessarily part of Medical
             Records MAJAX team understand the need to enter the Hospital
             via ’C' Road and sign the Register in the Admissions Office.




                                                   [Mrs)
                                    Patients Services Officer




        24.04.89
            Medical and Nursing Debriefing relating to the Hillsborough Disaster

                                 of 15th April 1989

                  Date of Debriefing - Wednesday 19th April 1989

                  Chairman               A C Crosby
                                         Mrs


Procedure

A medical debriefing was carried out at the Wednesday lunchtime meeting. A
subsequent meeting with senior nurses in the Department was carried out in Mrs
Okogba's office at 1400.

Major Problems Identified

1. There was little or no communication fran the Police or Ambulance Service.
2. The area for intermediate injuries became overcrowded and manoeuvring of
trollies was difficult.
3. When the patients arrived, they arrived all in what seemed to be a single
wave. This appears to result fran the decision of the Ambulance menat the
ground to take the first wave of patients to a near by hospital and then
transferred the next wave to us.

Minor Problems

1. The large number of volunteer staff.
2. Attempts by the Police and Clerking staff to do full documentation on a
patient who had just arrived instead of giving him a number. This had the effect
of slowing up the reception of patients at the triage point.
3. Insufficient Doctors at the triage point.
4. Failure of medical students to attach themselves to a named Doctor, rather
than attempting to act as Doctors themselves.
5. Overflow B.I.d S being brough to the A&E Department for certification because
Watery Street was full.
6. The normal hand over procedures for patients being referred to aspecialist
team do not seen to work.
7. There appeared to be no co-ordination of relative helpers, although this did
not directly concern the A&E Department at the time of reception of patients.


Reocxnnendation

1. There should be an Ambulance liason officer at the control point in the A&E
Department and he should be in close contact with his colleague fran the Police.
2. The current minors area of the A&E Department should be redeveloped, removing
the existing cubicles and opening out the available space.
3. There should be additional oxygen and suction points put into the area that
will became "intermediate injuries" during a major incident.
4. A further five trollies should be purchased and placed on minors in lieu of
the existing examination couches which are not mobile and which were dispensed
with on the day of the disaster.
5. Consideration should be given for the development of a public address system
within the Department. The Consultant in Charge would have overall control of
this system. An alternative means of cannunicating with the Sub-Directors of the
various regions would be by named runner.
6. Large stick-on labels bearing the title Doctor, Nurse and Clerical Staff
should be available at the control point and should be handed to those staff who
attached to the Department and to those useful volunteers who present themselves
to the Consultant and Nurse in Charge. Unless a person has such a designated
                                 -2 -




label he or she could be asked to leave the Department.

7. The following equipment needs to be purchased
   Twelve portable sphygmomanometers
   Six drip stands
   Twenty arm boards
   Supply of pens for writing and marking on patients skin.

   These would be stored in the Major Accident Cupboard.

8. The spare furniture currently blocking the Transit area should be removed
immediately. The additional resources that this area represented could not be
easily mobilized on the day of the disaster.



The overall impression was that the Major Accident Plan had worked very well and
comparatively view fine tuning exercises were required. It was felt that one A&E
Department alone in this City could not have dealt with the Hillsborough
Disaster.



A C CROSBY
                          REPORT FROM SWITCHBOARD DEPARTMENT
                 RE:    MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE - 15TH APRIL 1989



Notification of Major Accident to Royal Hallamshire Hospital

The Switchboard received a call from "South Yorkshire Police atHillsborough"
requesting that they be put through to Casualty. The operator receiving the
call was concerned that the call originated from Hillsborough and not from one
of the police stations and listened into it, fearing that some problem had
arisen at the football match. From the content of the conversation between the
Police and Casualty, it was clear that the Royal Hallamshire Hospital was on
standby to receive patients from Hillsborough following a possible Major Accident,
The Switchboard were not aware of the identity of the Police Officer initiating
the call which was received at 15.20 hrs.

The Switchboard were not informed officially of the standby for Majax by either
the Police or the Accident and Emergency Department.

At 15-33 hrs M i s s [ o n t a c t e d the bleep board to ask if the Switchboard were
aware that the hospital was on a Majax.


Notification of Staff

Although the Switchboard had not officially be informed of the Majax, again at
15.20 hrs they received a call from one of the operator's husbands, telling
them to put the television on immediately as "something bad has happened at
Hillsborough". Upon seeing the scenes at Hillsborough, and also following the
call from South Yorkshire Police, the Senior Telephonist used his own initiative
to telephone three members of the Switchboard staff at home, who live close to
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and requested that they report for duty
immediately.

The rest of the Switchboard staff, during the next half hour either reported for
duty without being called, or telephoned first to see if they were needed.

Because of the immediate media coverage of the disaster, there was insufficient
time to implement the cascade call out for the Switchboard staff, as the
majority had either seen or heard of the disaster via the news media, and had
reported for duty of their own accord.

Following the notification to the first three telephonists, the Senior
Telephonist again used his own initiative by notifying key members of the
hospital staff, that the R.H.H. was on standby for a Majax.

By this time, Accident and Emergency had requested that all of their Doctors be
contacted via their long range pagers, and staff from various departments had
started to telephone the hospital to see if they shouldreport for duty ornot.
The Switchboard had also received several enquries from thepress for
information regarding the "catastrophe at Hillsborough".

At this time the Switchboard had not been informed officially about the Majax,
but following the call from Miss       the operators immediately followed their
instructions for Majax (enclosed).

It was apparent very quickly that it might not be possible to use the cascade
system for calling staff, as so many had already either contacted the hospital,
or started making their own way in, without waiting to be informed.


                                                                                   contd.
All staff were contacted in the order given on the instructions, although, when
bleping staff, the operators could not wait for one person to answer before
bleeping the next.


Enquiries

Before the Majax had been officially declared, the Switchboard started to
receive many calls in connection with the disaster. These calls can be
separated into four categories:

      Relatives and Friends - enquiring about patients. To start with we had no
      information regarding admissions from Hillsborough, so we advised the
      callers to contact the emergency number - Sheffield 570800.

      Press enquiries - these calls were put through to Administration.

      Staff - enquiring whether they could be of help, and whether they should
      report to the hospital or not. - We could only put these calls through to
      their respective departments.

      Public - Offers of help for accommodation for relatives/friends, blood donors,
      voluntary work councilling bereaved relatives, clerical work, switchboard
      work, General Practitioners and other Consultants offering medical help,
      nurses, and many retired N.H.S. workers offering their help.


Recommendations for Switchboard procedure

       It is imperative that the Switchboard receives instructions that the Majax
       plan is in operation. Perhaps it could be written into the A & E Majax
       cards that as soon as they receive information concerning a Majax they
       should inform Switchboard immediately utilising one of the emergency
       numbers e . g . I b r

 2.   A check list should be kept by the operators of all personnel they have
       informed regarding the Majax. This should stop the possibility of anyone
      being overlooked, as many have happened in this instance, due to bleeps not
      being answered for whatever reasons.

 3.    It should be stressed that staff should not contact the Switchboard except
       in cases of extreme urgency. All lines into the hospital were engaged
       very quickly, mainly due to R.H.H. staff asking whether they were required
       or not. This not only created extra work, but also contributed to the
       outgoing lines being blocked.

 4.    There were insufficient lines to get press enquiries through to
       Administration, and whilst the calls that were put through were answered
       immediately, it would have helped to ease the congestion on the Switchboard
       were more lines to have been utilised for this purpose.

 5.    There were no instructions given to the Switchboard about what should be
       done with offers of help from the public. All that we could do was to
       take names and telephone numbers, together with details of the service
       being offered, and take these notes round to the Social Workers. The
       only exception to this was in the case of people offering to donate blood.
       These callers were given the telephone number of the Blood Transfusion Service.
It would have been beneficial had each department informed the Switchboard
when they had sufficient staff in their respective departments, so that
any callers could be advised accordingly. This would have helped to keep
many calls to a minimum duration, again helping to ease the congestion on
the board.

There were insufficient lines through to both the Police Incident room and
also the Social Work Department. In one case the Police Incident phone
was engaged for £ hour on the same call. It is understood that the Police
were talking to a police station for the duration of the call and perhaps
may have been able to use their two-way radios instead of the telephone.
For the first few hours we had only one extension to put relatives' calls
through to the Social Workers. These callers were extremely distressed,
and due to the lack of any information on admissions at Switchboard for
several hours, the callers had to wait for the one extension.

We are not aware of how many lines actually went to the emergency number
Sheffield 570800, but it is apparent that there were insufficient to deal
with the amount of callers trying unsuccessfully to get through.

Several S.T.D. telephones should be made available for relatives trying to
call home. Again at times the Switchboard was blocked with level ’O ’ calls
from people trying to call Liverpool. Unfortunately, most of our outgoing
lines were blocked, and so we were unable to deal with these calls
efficiently. Also whilst dealing with these calls the operators were
unable to deal with incoming calls which again would have helped to
alleviate the congestion.

It would have been preferable to have had several more telephone operators
in the department in order to relieve the tension and stress suffered by
the operators on duty that day. No-one should work for more than one
hour under these conditions without having at least some time away from
the board. It must be noted that whilst ten telephonists reported for
duty, the rest of the staff had either called in offering their services,
or remained at home waiting to be contacted. The ones who had called in
were told not to report as the board was fully manned. No contact was
made to the others.
