                            ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL                           \ 'y


                            MEDICAL RECORDS DEPARTMENT

           REPORT ON HILLSBOROUGH MAJAX - Saturday 15th April, 1989




Casualties -    3.40 pm. - 5 .01 pm.


           ADMISSIONS           25
           DEATHS                1
           DISCHARGES           45

                                71

           TRANSFERRED
           FROM N.G.H.           7

                                78

Call Out

Because of the nature and   publicity of the incident some staff were already making
their way into Hospital     before the MAJAX was declared.     The advantage of this,
however, was that staff     were at the Hospital and prepared to accept casualties
before they arrived.        Switchboard did not notify A & E Reception of MAJAX
declaration.

Documentation

All patients were documented and wrist bands attached.  One patient was documented
twice, 2 majax numbers were unused and 6 majax numbers allocated to the
Resuscitation area but were unused. Some system of producing alphabetical casualty
lists needs to be devised.

Some 'major' cases were being admitted via A & E which is outside the Procedure.
However staff were also based in A & E and these patients were documented.

The pre-numbered patients property bags and lab.         request forms were not used by
Medical and Nursing staff.

Patient Movement

Patients sent for x-ray - there was no indication on their x-ray card as to which
area they should return following x-ray.

Some 'minor' cases were being misdirected to Physiotherapy to await transport home.
This probably resulted from volunteer medical staff unfamiliar with the MAJAX
procedure.

Ward discharges did not seem to be sent via Physiotherapy.
                                               -   2   -




  Admissions



                               ,Wene tak6n t0 the Wards by P a^ i n g Admissions. Although a
      ember   of   the   Medical Records Department was based in Transit, as she        was a
                     T . n0t         °f the need t0 enSUre details were Passed to Admissions.
 This specific        Action Card    needs expanding to include these specific instructions.

 Telephone calls from Relatives

          ^ t H6 £ ro^edur®,telePhone calls from relatives and friends were constantly
 being received by A & E Reception and Admissions.       In order to deal with these
 enquiries the staff in these two areas needed updated casualty lists.

 “ _ th6 Sta5 f, °?Uld n0t help re^-atives/friends searching for casualties, the police
 emergency telephone number was given, but this was constantly engaged.

 s S f f RunderJookDthk ’    f             ^
                                        manned throughout the night, so the Admissions
 staff undertook this task in addition to their normal duties.

 Suggestions from Staff

 Casualties, relatives and friends need improved telephone facilities in Orthopaedics
 or A & E. Many minor cases wandered off to make urgent telephone calls.

 Future Action

 1.      Revise, amend and increase number of 'Action Cards' to include
         additional staff to document large numbers of patients,
         formulate casualty lists into alphabetical order and ensure
         admissions do not bypass Admissions Office.

2.      Include in the MAJAX box some form of identification badge or
        armband for Medical Records Staff.

3.      Discuss with nursing staff contents of MAJAX box with particular
        reference to pre-numbered patient property bags and laboratory
        request forms.

4.      Ensure likely 'volunteers' not necessarily part of Medical
        Records MAJAX team understand the need to enter the Hospital
        via 'C' Road and sign the Register in the Admissions Office.




                                                  (Mrs)
                                    Patients Services Officer




  .
2 4 04.89
