                    THE DEAD


81 AT GROUND

12 B.I.D. OR RESUS FAILED

 2 AFTER ADMISSION


84 CRUSH ASPHYXIA SOLE CAUSE
 8 INJURIES TO HEAD,NECK,CHEST
 1 RUPTURE AORTA

18 CASES BROKEN BONES           (13 CASES RIB £)




             ALCOHOL

15 OVER 80        MILLIGRAM%
 6 OVER 120       MILLIGRAM%

FE W OF THOSE A D M I T T E D   HAD A P P R E C I A B L E LEVELS.
1 4.40       Large build up outside turnstiles

1 4.45       Estimated 5,000 crowd at turnstiles
             "conditions became intolerable"
             "fainting in distress"

14.47        Request to open gate C

1 4.48       Gate C opened to eject fan -150 entered.
             Gate C closed

1 4.50       Pens 3 and 4 " clearly in excess of
                            maximum density"
             "Serious discomfort"




1 4.52       Further request to open gate C
             Gate C opened
             2,000 fans entered in 5 minutes

1 4.54       Teams came onto pitch
             Surge on terraces
             "acutely uncomfortable some in distress"

             Pen gate 3 sprung open.
             Closed by police.
             Opened by police.

1 4.57       Gate C closed.

1 4.59       Gate C reopened.
             Ambulance personnel to terraces




15.00       Match began

1 5.04      Liverpool hit crossbar
            Surge in crowd
            Probable barrier breaks.

1 5.05 30    Match stopped

1 5.06      Call for police Operational Support
            (Police reinforcements)




                          1
15.06    Call for fleet of ambulances
         "caused messages to be sent converting
          Operation Support into the Major Disaster
          Plan."
15.13    Ambulances arrive Leppings Lane

15.15    Two routine ambulances arrive A/E NGH
         Rumours of an "incident at Hillsborough
         ? RTA".

15.20    Police message to NGH and RHH A/E
         "ON CASUALTY STANDBY"
         ( this has NO meaning in Sheffield's
           Major Incident Plans)




1 5.20   A/E department advised.
         A/E consultant bleeped.

1 5.22   A/E consultant advised by charge nurse
         "standby to receive casualties from
         H i llsborough.... some crush injuries"

1 5.23   A/E Consultant leaves home




1 5.25    Message SYMAS
          "expect child cardiac arrest"
          no mention Hillsborough

1 5.27   Three patients in cardiac arrest arrive
         Ambulanceman confirms major incident to
         A/E staff.
         A/E implements the Major Disaster Plan.

1 5.33   A/E Consultant arrives
         Confirms that plan implemented




                       2
                                         NGH        RHH            TOTAL


Patients brought to A/E                  88           71             159

Dead on arrival or                       11            1              12
failed resuscitation

Treated and discharged                   21           45              66

Admitted                                 56           25              81

Ventilated initially                     17            1              18

Transfers                                 7 (to RHH)                   7

Late deaths                               2                            2

Dead at scene                                                         81


 Numbers    of     patients   injured          or   killed    in     the        major

incident      at     Hillsborough        football          stadium         on    15th

April 1989. Three patients with minor injuries were taken

to Barnsley District General Hospital.

(A/E Accident and Emergency Department, NGH Northern

General Hospital, RHH Royal Hallamshire Hospital).




                                    23



                                                                                        i
                        ield H e a lth A u th o rity                 W estbrook H ouse
                                                                     Sharrow Vale Road
   GENERAL M A N A G E R                                             Sheffield S11 8EU
  A. P. Mapp/ebeck, M.A., D.S.A., A.H.S.M.                           Telephone (0742) 670333


  P i e a s e a s k fo r :
  Ou i ref:                                  Yo u r r ef :


        A4/1/1/KT/LS


         10 July 1989


        Management In Confidence


        Mr D H Baldwin, Unit General Manager, RHH
        Mr A Hopkins, Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer, SYMAS
        Mr N S McKay, Unit General Manager, NGH


        Dear Colleague

         Hi 11shornngh Football Ground Disaster

         Here are some notes I made of the discussion we had on 12 May.   Perhaps you
         could confirm that they are a correct record of the issues and the action we
         need to take.   If there are any aspects that concern you, please give me a
         ring.

         It would seem, now that the collection of evidence has been completed by
         Lord Justice Taylor, that it would be appropriate to have a meeting with the
         police representatives on issues such as communications.

         In the meantime, no doubt the issues that were raised as individual matters
         are being or have been considered as part of the individual unit’s debriefing
         arrangements.

         Yours sincerely




         k     momton
             Assistant General Manager


             Enc


             cc Mr A P Mapplebeck




G 1 cj S 0
                      HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBAI.I. GROUND DISASTER


          Note of issues discussed at debriefing meeting held at the
   Northern General Hospital on Friday. 12 Mav 1989 with representatives of
        District, the Roval Hallamshire and Northern General Hospitals
                  and the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service


Issue 1       Initiation of Procedure

              It was noted that forewarning could be received from a variety of

              sources, although the police was the most likely.       It was also

              recognized that initiation could be undertaken by any of the

              emergency services but it was considered to be preferable that the

              ambulance service undertook that responsibility.       The question of

              confirmation by the hospital to ensure that the reported incident

              was not a malicious false alarm, was recognised.       However, it was

              also generally agreed that it was better to initiate the

              procedure and then stand down rather than have delay and

              vacillation in the early minutes of notification of an incident.



Is sue    2   Communication

              Consideration was given to the question of communications between

              the hospitals, police and ambulance authorities, and the use of

              ‘red* ex-directory lines between SYMAS and the Accident and

              Emergency Departments.    Having discussed various possibilities,

              the preferred solution, on balance, was the use of the ‘red* ex­

              directory lines between SYMAS and A and E.        Links with the police

              would continue to be established in accordance with current

              practice.




Issue    3 Who decides within the hospital     that the   maior disaster    procedure
              is to be put in hand

              It was noted that the Royal Hallamshire Hospital had an internal

              procedure with a medical check, whereas the Northern General


                                         1
              Hospital did not, before activating the procedure through the

              telephonist.      After discussion, it was agreed that the Accident

              and Emergency Department was the central pivot, and switchboard

              operator should set the call out procedure in motion after a check

              by a senior member of the Accident and Emergency Department on

              duty.      It was noted that if the police initiated the procedure,

              including using such terms as ‘standby’, an immediate check would

              be made with the Ambulance Service.




              It was also agreed that if casualties started arriving without

              prior notification, the senior professional member of staff in the

              A and E Department would put the disaster procedure in motion

              immediately.




Issue   A   Distribution    Procedures   for   Injured   Patients

              4.1 the first receiving hospital would be selected by the

                  Ambulance Service and would be dependent on both which

                  department was open and ease of access, bearing in mind the

                  location of the disaster.




              4.2 The method of diversion of casualties from the first receiving

                  hospital was discussed.        It was agreed that the senior doctor

                      in the Accident and Emergency Department at the first

                      receiving hospital would notify SYMAS when he/she decided that

                      further casualties needed to be diverted to another hospital.

                      If possible, the second receiving hospital would be notified

                      by the first receiving hospital in advance.    Any diversions

                      beyond the immediate city hospitals would again be initiated

                      through the Ambulance Service.




                                           2
Issue 5     Children’s Casualties

            After consideration, it was decided it would not be appropriate to

            change the existing procedures, and children’s casualties,

            eminating from a major disaster, would be taken to the district

            general hospitals.         At the same time, assistance would be sought

            from the Children’s Hospital for any specialist medical and

            nursing help and, at an appropriate time, casualties would be

            transferred to the Children’s Hospital following initial care in

            the district general hospitals.



I ssue    Public    Radio   Messages

            It was agreed that a check needed to be made of the pre-recorded

            messages to be broadcast by local radio in the event of a major

            disaster, informing staff of action which they should take if off

            duty.



Issue     Site Medical      Officer   and   Site   Medical   Teams

            Consideration was given to the possibility of changing the

            existing procedure.         It was agreed that the existing procedure

            should stand whereby the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service site

            officer would call both for a site medical officer and/or site

            medical teams as he -felt necessary-             In the event of such call,

            it was agreed that a senior anaesthetist and senior surgeon

             (consultant or senior registrar) would need to be despatched to

             the scene.       It was noted that the Ambulance Service would

             continue to send a vehicle to transport the site medical officer

             and/or site medical teams to the scene of the incident.




             It was noted that the inquiry being undertaken by Lord Justice


                                             3
            Taylor might well advise on attendance at major sporting events of

            professional emergency teams rather than relying, as at present,

            on sporting organizers making their own arrangements with the Red

            Cars, St John’s Ambulance Service, etc.




Issue— 8 What is to be carried by Site Medical Teams bv wav of Equipment.

            Drugs. Etc?

            Consideration was given to the different arrangements in the

            Northern General and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals.             The Northern

            General Hospital had assumed that it could well be the second

            receiving hospital and would, therefore, be the most likely

            hospital to be asked to send an emergency team.              Accordingly, it

            planned to carry equipment, drugs, etc, on the basis of treating

            20 casualties, whereas the Royal Hallamshire Hospital worked on

            the basis of sending a mobile team to a single incident as opposed

            to a major disaster.       Mr Hopkins referred to the major disaster

            vehicle standing by at SYMAS which carried substantial equipment

            and supplies which would provide a back-up to any mobile team

            despatched by the hospitals.




            After some discussion, it was agreed that the Accident and

            Emergency consultants would have further discussions between

             themselves and SYMAS as to what equipment would be carried by whom
                                                              ‘   . v'        >   ’’

             to the scene of any major incident.




Issue   9 Action   bv   District   and Unit   Controls

             Consideration was given to the various arrangements Which had been

             made at the time of the Hillsborough disaster relating to the




                                         4
function of the Bed Bureau, clearance of beds within hospitals and

links with the press.




The role of the Bed Bureau, in diverting other emergency wox'kloads

away from the hospitals receiving the casualties from a major

disaster, was confirmed.




With regard to clearance of beds, and particularly transfers to

other hospitals to create space in the main receiving hospitals,

the procedure had worked well and any minor re-arrangements would

be considered between the units concerned.




With regard to the press, the importance of gathering information

in one central control, which, it was understood, was the Police

Authority’s responsibility to establish, would be further

considered with the Police, and the possibility of gathering the

information on a computer base at the individual hospitals capable

of transferring information between the hospitals and the Police

Authority, would be considered as a means of expediting a

comprehensive casualty list and condition state for all

appropriate spokesmen to draw upon.




It was decided that, for clarification of the various local

controls in the hospitals and also the Police, Ambulance and Fire

Authorities, the District control role should be reviewed and put

in writing.
Issue   10   Who   does   what

              Arising from the discussion on the District control role, further

              consideration was given to the role of the police concerning

              enquiries on casualties and the method of providing information to

              the Police.        Secondly, hospital condition checks;        this again

              raised the question of hospital information to be linked and

              transmission of information to relatives’ holding areas.             The

              ease of supply of hospital information, establishing comprehensive

              alphabetical index at individual hospitals and between hospitals,

              was given a further airing.




              It was agreed that clarification would be required on these issues

              and a scheme prepared.



Issue   11 Radio    availability     and   use       for   Communi cations

              There was a general feeling that radio communications were not the

              most appropriate or efficient way of proceeding and, whilst

              recognizing that facilities were available at the Royal

              Hallamshire and Northern General Hospitals, it was agreed that

              this matter be given further consideration as part of general

              communications between the hospitals, the Health Authority central

              control, the Ambulance and Police Authorities.




              It was noted that, for certain communication functions within the

              hospitals, runners were more effective than telephone

              communications.




                                                 6
Issue    12   Relatives

              Discussion took place on the arrangements which had been made for

              both accommodating and informing relatives, and of the

              arrangements for support staff for counselling, arranging

              accommodation and transport, supplying information, etc.    It was

              agreed that had the incident not occurred on a Saturday, then some

              of the arrangements would not have worked as well in terms of

              accommodation being readily available and, in any case, it was

              noted that more private offices and separate interview rooms were

              needed.




Issue   13 Standard Format of Frontispiece of    Maior Disaster   Plans

              It was agreed that the two hospitals frontispiece should be a

              common format with common information which would also be

              available to the Ambulance, Police and Fire Authorities, and

              arrangements would be made for such standard format to be

              prepared.



Issue   14 Reception and Control of Volunteers, including Non-Base Hospital
             Staff, (ie staff arriving at a hospital which was not their usual
             place of work)

              It was agreed that whilst volunteers and non ‘base’ hospital staff

              fulfilled a valuable role, a procedure was required to enable the

              most effective use to be made of such persons, including reception

              and direction to appropriate areas of work through the central

              hospital controls.




Issue    15   What   if ?

              It was recognized that the experience learned from the

              Hillsborough disaster might be considered a typical in view of the




                                        7
               similarity of the casualties and the non-surgical nature of the

               incident, and it was agreed that consideration should be given

               within the hospitals and on a District-wide basis, on the issues

               which would arise from various other scenarios, eg large numbers

               of surgical casualties, incident happening during the working

               week, etc.



Issue     16   Other

               Various general issues were raised at this time, including the

               need for scanning facilities at the Northern General Hospital, the

               roles of other hospitals in their supporting functions, the number

               of official visitors and timing, and the diverse nature of press

               enquiries, including foreign press.



KT/LS
10 7 89
        R371 9                                       Sch 9 1 6 0
#                                    CITY OF SHEFFIELD -           MEMORANDUM

From  Ms Maggie Read                                        j0       Far John Adams
     "Group Principal Social Worker                                  Hospital Administration
      Northern General Hospital                                      Northern General Hospital
Date 23rd'August 1989
R ef.       m /vii
Tel. Ext.        5027                                       Ref.



            MAJOR DISASTER PROCEDURE

            I understand, that you are rewriting parts of the Major Disaster Procedure
            following the experiences of the Hillsborough Tragedy. I would like to
            bring to your attention the following points raised by social workers
            following the tragedy and the suggestions made for rewriting the part
            relating to the Social Work Department procedure:

            1.     There was some apparent confusion early on as to what 'maintain contact
                  with the Police Liaison Officer*(p 29) meant in practice. This could
                  havevbeen due, in part, to the confusion regarding information coming to
                  the Police Liaison Officer and the fact that the senior Social Work
                  Manager on site was not normally hospital based and did not know our
                  procedure.

                   Suggestions to improve this in future are:

                   1.1    I will ensure F & CS senior managers are made aware of the
                         .Hospital’s- Major Disaster Plaii and, in future, it is proposed
                          that the senior social work manager at NGH (if there is a future
                          Disaster) will be a hospital based manager.

                   1.2    However, it is essential that early on in any future disaster the
                          Group Principal Social Worker or Deputy and Police Liaison Officer
                          make themselves known to each other and keep in regular contact.
                          Is there any way, either of you or me discussing this with a senior
                          Police Officer or making it any clearer in the procedure?

            2.     The setting up of the relatives’ base with the Chaplain was more of a
                   problem because o       f        [s absence and his deputy being new. I
                   will discuss this further with                 as the co-ordination between
                   clergy and ourselves in a Disaster (.and clearer definition of roles)
                   could be improved.

            3.     The list of information regarding relatives and          friends looking for people
                   from the Football Ground was, it seems, largely         co-ordinated by nursing
                   officers in the Staff Snack Bar. What'are your          viewsregarding this in the
                   future? There was a general difficulty, as you          will be aware, in getting
                   clear information quickly about the whereabouts         of some people; some of
                   this was unavoidable.

            4.     Since.the last Major Disaster Procedure was written, the new unit for
                   the elderly has been opened. Given our experiences, I would recommend
                   that the administrative offices in the new elderly unit are also the
                   social work base. It would be particularly helpful if one office
                   (with known telephone extension) is allocated to the Group Principal
                   Social Worker or deputy-so that the Police Liaison Officer, Administrative
                   Base, Chaplains and other Family & Community Services bases (outside of
                   NGH)        -a&~apprdpriate. Another designated office should be for the
                   social work administrative back-up and the others can be used for inter­
                   view rooms for distressed relatives and team handover/debriefing sessions.
                   This would need to be included in p.35 (section 3)« I understand Dr.
                   Williams opened up these offices on the Saturday; is there any way of
                   ensuring direct access to the GPSW or deputy in a future Disaster?
     It would also be helpful if temporary signs could be made for social
     workers t o put up to direct relatives etc. to the Staff Cafeteria and
     Elderly Unit Administrative Block. Can we order these via you or
     Kedical Photography for us to keep for future use?

5.   The rota of a   minimum of three social workers and a clerical officer
     to be held by   the GPSW or deputy was insufficient. It was not, in fact
     used, because   of the general call for social workers put out over the
     radio and the   media coverage of the Disaster.

     ’
     .,'e propose that switchboard hold the names and telephone numbers of four
     or five hospital social work managers and three or four clerical staff
     from the social work department. I will change the list held by switchboard
     in the next four weeks; the current list to stand until amended (ref* p 35)»

     Under (2 ) on page 35, I suggest this is rewritten and should read:

     'The Group Principal Social Worker or designated social work manager will
     contact the number of social workers and clerical staff required at the
     time from the list of staff held by them to provide a social work service
     in the hospital. Staff will also be required to standby, on a rota
     decided by the GPSW or designated manager, in order that no one person
     works more than eight hours at one time'.

     As a general point, it is essential that the GPSW or designated social work
     manager is recognised as being in charge of the social work department's
     role as clear leadership is essential in such a crisis. This is generally
     agreed in the social work department.

6.   The co-ordination of volunteers (p 28) is a difficult area and I think
     it was recognised that the reporting point for non-nursing staff may need
     to be resited.

     6.1    In the event, our administrative staff kept records of offers of
            help from people for transport and accommodation; is this something
            we should do and, if so, should it be written into procedures?

     6.2    There appear to be two main types of volunteer who came to the hospital
            to help - members of voluntary organisations (e.g. St John’s Ambulance,
            Cruse) and willing' individuals who may or may not have particular skills
            that are needed. Who vets people and decides where they are best
            deployed is a problem. Who also has responsibility for making sure
            volunteers go home after an eight hour shift is even more of a problem
            that I had some direct experience oft Is it possible to co-ordinate
            this?

     6.3    Apart from voluntary help for transport and accommodation, initially
            I would prefer not to have volunteers who are not social workers directed
            to our base. However, it may be necessary to call on specific forms of
            voluntary help as the need arises so a clear contact point for the
            person directing volunteers would be essential. Could a telephone
            extension be put in the procedure as the contact point?

     6 .4   Erom our Experience and experience of colleagues in Queens Medical
            Centre, following the Kegworth. Disaster, it seems a major managerial
            role in the first 24 hours of a Disaster is managing the offers of
            voluntary help appropriately. The ability to say ’no thank you’
            politely and firmly, until needs are clearly identified is important
            so that offers of voluntary help can be matched to need in a
            sensitive manner.
-3   -




                                                                      O C'q
I hope these points are of seme use; I would be interested in seein
draft of the revised procedure (especially those parts pertaining t
social work department’s role) before it is finalised if possible*

Please contact me if anything is not clear.




Maggie Read
                                     CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM                         S c h 9/160


From   Maggie Read                                    To    John Adams
       Group P r i n c i p a l S o c i a l Worker           Hospital Administration
       N orthern G eneral H o sp ita l                      Northern General Hospital
Date     25 August 1989                                     cc Janet/Caroline/Val — for info
Ref.     m/m
Tel. Ext 5027                                                                                             N137m




       MAJOR DISASTER PROCEDURE

       FHirther to my memo of 23rd August, I am writing with some amendments
       following further discussions in the department and would be grateful
       if you could change my original memo accordingly:

       Para 1     :There were two senior hospital based social work managers here on
                   the Saturday of the disaster and liaison with the police was as
                   good as it could be, given the difficulty everyone had in getting
                    clear information initially.

       Para 2     :The main problem was of too many clergy arriving initially,
                   without their having a clear remit. I will talk to
                             about any possible ways of co-ordinating their
                    efforts and ours.

       Para 5    • The     current procedures (page 35* number 2) to be rewritten to
                    read

                   •The Group Principal Social Worker or designated hospital social
                   work manager will contact the next manager on their list and the
                   Group Principal Social Worker (or deputy) will then come to NGH.
                   The second manager will contact the number of social workers and
                   clerical staff required at the time from the list of staff held
                   by them to provide a social work service in the hospital. Staff
                   will also be required to standby, on a rota decided by the GPSW
                   or designated manager, in order that no one person works more
                   than eight hours at one time1.

                   The last paragraph of (5 ) of my original memo should read

                    * ... the GPSW or designated hospital social work manager •••’




       Maggie.

                                                            | .NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL,
                                                            f      SIIEFfiELO, S5 7AU.
                                                                      j.


                                                                HOSPITAL A0MWI5TRAT0R.
CONFIDENTIAL                                                          DRAFT




 DE-BRIEFING OF MEDICAL STAFF      FRIDAY 28th APRIL 1989 AT 2.00p.m.
 IN THE ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY/ORTHOPAEDIC LIBRARY




 Present:               Dr. F. Ryan, Consultant Physician
                        Dr. G. Clark, Consultant Anaesthetist
                        Dr. T. Shaw,   Consultant Anaesthetist
                        Dr. G.       Davies,Consultant Anaesthetist
                        Mr. J.       Duncan,Senior Registrar, General Surgery
                        Mr. I.       Winson,Lecturer, Orthopaedics
                        Dr. S.       Yates, Registrar in X-Ray
                        Mr. J.       .Vardrope, Consultant in Accidentand
                                                         Emergency Medicie

 1.         Staff Call Out

            This did not work for medical staff.   A combination of ad hoc
            calls from switchboard and media coverage combined to bring
            largenumbers of medical staff into the hospital.

            At least two key members of medical staff were not called,
            namely the Anaesthetic first on call and the Orthopaedic first on
            call.   This resulted in delay in these two arms of the cascade
            system.

            Review Recommendations

            The whole system of the call out will require detailed re-planning
            specifically -

            a)   ^he junior medical staff may well require deployment urgently
                 to Resuscitation and cannot' take time in telephoning their
                 immediate superiors.   The junior medical staff of the
                 hospital should probably be alerted by a cardiac arrest type
                 call on the implementation of the Major Disaster Plan.

            b)   Added thought should be given to electronic means of calling .
                 in other key members of medical staff, but this will probably
                 be a rather complex task and will require careful consideration.

 2.              Accident and Emergency Department

                 Problems arose in the Accident and Emergency Department due
                 to the large numbers of severely ill people arriving without
                 prior warning and these being summarised as follows -

                 1.   Initial shortage of Doctors.
                 2.   Shortage of nursing staff experienced in resuscitation
                      technique.
                 3.   Initial lack of documentation since many of the patients
                      arriving early required immediate direction to the
                      Resuscitation Room-and this occurred before the documentatii
                      triage point was set up.
                 -U   For the first thirty minutes of the plan the Accident and
                      Emergency Triage Point virtually became the hospital
                      control.     The Senior Doctor in.Accident and Emergency was
                      called upon to treat and triage patients, to direct medical
                      staff coining into the hospital and to make management
                      decisions concerning the routeing of casualties to the
                      Hallamshire, sending out the mobile team etc.
Trent Regional Health Authority

Notes of a meeting held on Tuesday, 2nd May 1989 at the Regional
Conference Centre to discuss action taken by the hospitals and Ambulance
Service involved with the Hillsborough Disaster on 15th April 1989______

PRESENT:

Trent Regional Health Authority

Dr R Alderslade (Chairman)   Director of Public Health Medicine/Regional
                               Medical Officer
Mr        A Costley          Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
Mr        J Kenny            Assistant Regional General Manager (Admin)
Mr        Hull               Regional Public Relations Officer
Mr        D Evans            Regional Solicitor
Mr        J Callaghan        Solicitor to the RHA
Mr        G Chappell         Solicitor to the RHA
Mrs                          Assistant Secretary (General Administration)
Mrs                          Secretary to RHEPO

Sheffield Health Authority

Mr A Mapplebeck              District General Manager
Mr K Thornton                Deputy District General Manager
Miss I         I             Solicitor to Sheffield HA

South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service

Mr    A   Page               Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer
Mr    A   Hopkins            Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer
Mr    D   Jones              Assistant CAO (Operations)
Mr    A   Smith              Assistant CAO (Control and Communications)

Northern General Hospital

Mr N      S McKay            Unit General Manager
Miss      R A Dando          Director of Nursing Services
Mr J      Wardrope           Consultant in Accident and Emergency
Mr C      L Welch            Consultant Vascular Surgeon

Royal Hallamshire Hospital

Mr D      H Baldwin          Unit General Manager
Miss      C Boyd             Assistant Matron
Dr D      L Edbrooke         Consultant Anaesthetist
Mr D      G Ferguson         Consultant in Accident and Emergency
Mr D      Hockey             Senior Registrar in Accident and Emergency

Barnsley Health Authority

Mr R Akroyd                  District General Manager
Mr P Eaglesfield             Unit General Manager, Barnsley District General
                               Hospital
                                    -   2   -




1.   Dr Alderslade opened the meeting by welcoming those present and thanking
      them for attending.   He wished to make it clear at the outset that the
      purpose of the meeting was not to find fault and apportion blame but to
      establish a common understanding of the main structure of events on the
      day and to identify issues and details, which could be learned from and
      fed back into future planning and management.

2.   Despite the fact that he had been in post for only a short time, this was
      unfortunately the second occasion he had been involved with the aftermath
      of a major disaster, the first one being, of course, the Kegworth air
      crash.   A similar debriefing meeting had followed this and proved to be
      extremely useful to all concerned.    There were differences, however, in
      that on the previous occasion there were more participants from three
     Health Authorities involved.     For this reason, it had taken some time to
      put together a report but this was now in final draft form and would be
     presented to the RHA in June.     The meeting was being minuted and a
      similar report would be prepared following Hillsborough.     There would
      be an opportunity for the agencies involved to comment on the draft
      report.   One major difference, of course, was that a formal Judicial
      Inquiry was to be held into events at Hillsborough.

3.   Mr Evans was invited to explain the involvement of the legal
     representatives who were present.   He explained that firstly, because of
     the Judicial Inquiry, it was necessary for the parties to be legally
     represented so that any criticism could be properly answered.    There was
     also, of course, the possibility of future claims from those involved or
     their relatives.   The main purpose of the presence of the lawyers was to
     listen and learn and those present should not feel inhibited to speak
     freely.

4.   Dr Alderslade outlined the responsibility of the Regional Health
     Authority.   Firstly, there was its strategic role in determining that
     all DHAs had satisfactory plans for dealing with emergency situations.
     Secondly, it was the managing authority for the SYMAS and BTS, although
     in this case there was little involvement of the latter because of the
     nature of the injuries.   He also referred to the duty imposed by
     Circular HC(77)1 to conduct a debriefing and prepare a comprehensive
     report for the Regional Health Authority and the Department of Health.
     Before seeking reports from the parties concerned, Dr Alderslade paid
     tribute to all those involved at an operational level, who had responded
     so magnificently and to whom a great deal of credit was due.   Despite
     this, however, he stressed there would inevitably be issues from which
     Authorities could learn and in so doing improve their plans.

5.   Mr Mapplebeck expressed his reservations about the timing of the meeting,
     for he felt that as it was only two weeks after the event, the various
     parties were not ready to participate fully.   There had been anxieties
     about the legal advice they had received about the implications on
     debriefing discussions of the forthcoming Judicial Inquiry.   He was very
     concerned that the two hospitals and SYMAS had not had the opportunity to
     discuss the events of the day.   It was vital that this should and would
     take place.   For this reason, detailed reports were not yet ready and
     the meeting, therefore, would not be conclusive.

6.   Dr Alderslade replied that it was felt necessary to hold a debriefing
     quicker than it had been possible to arrange following Kegworth,
     particularly as there was to be a Judicial Inquiry.   The intention of
                                      - 3 -



      this meeting was to discuss matters at a strategic level and fuller and
      more detailed reports could be produced when the individual parties were
      satisfied with them.

7.    In answer to a question about the implications of Lord Justice Taylor's
      decision to refuse the Health Authority's application to be legally
      represented, Mr Evans confirmed that the Health Authority had the right
      to make a further application to be represented, at one or both parts of
      the Inquiry, to protect the legitimate interests of the Authority.

8.    Mr Page was then invited to make a report on the involvement of SYMAS.
      He began by stating that following the Bradford fire, SYMAS had drawn up
      its own action plan to deal with similar major incidents, part of which
      was a decision to have an ambulance presence at all football grounds in
      South Yorkshire on a voluntary basis.    Although the officers were paid,
      this was without any financial help from the clubs.     Although there was
      no statutory obligation to be involved, SYMAS had made an approach to all
      football clubs in South Yorkshire.    The clubs had been slow to respond
      to the SYMAS initiative but, so far as Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
      was concerned, two stand tickets were normally provided.     These were
      withdrawn, however, for major matches, as in this instance, and the two
      liaison officers were stationed at pitch level.    Mr Page then gave a
      brief factual report of the involvement of SYMAS.    A copy is attached
      (Appendix A).   Mr Page mentioned briefly the problems encountered by the
      ambulances entering the ground.   The only access to the pitch, via the
      Penistone Road entrance by the side of the North Stand was very
      restricted and many vehicles were damaged trying to get in.     These
      problems were exacerbated by parked police/other vehicles and, therefore,
      the waiting ambulances had to line up on Penistone Road.     He explained
      that before the 15.08 call from the police the staff of the standby
      vehicle (already at the ground) were attending to a leg injury at pitch
      level.   Following the police request, when the second standby vehicle
      arrived at C gate at the Leppings Lane end there was no indication of the
      scale of the problem.    Within minutes, however, the crew was surrounded
      by the crowd and more ambulances arrived.    At 15.23 hours Mr Hopkins had
      arrived at the Penistone Road entrance.    It was difficult to see what
      was happening at the Leppings Lane end because of the line of police
      separating one end of the pitch from the other.     It was not until Mr
      Hopkins had managed to get through the police line that the nature and
      scale of the problem became apparent.    It was then apparent that there
      were two incidents - one inside the ground and one outside.

9.    Those present were then invited to put questions to Mr Page.

10.   Mr Ferguson, Consultant in Accident and Emergency, referred to the
       statement in the SYMAS report that a request had been made to the Royal
       Hallamshire Hospital to supply a medical team and stated that it had not
       been possible to trace receipt of such a request.   Mr Page confirmed
       that a call had been made on the direct link line, which existed with
       both hospitals, to the casualty sister and, in line with normal practice,
       the call was taped.

11.   In answer to a question from Mr Wardrope, Consultant in Accident and
      Emergency, Mr Page confirmed that in line with their action plan
      (referred to above), the first wave of casualties was transferred to the
      Northern General Hospital because of its proximity to the Sheffield
      Wednesday football ground.
                                    - 4 -



12.   Reference was made to the difficulty being experienced by the hospital
       staff in approximating timings of various events.   Mr McKay asked
       whether there was a transcript available of the call timed at 15.38 to
       the Northern General Hospital requesting a medical team giving more
       detail.   Mr Page explained that because of the size of the task in
       obtaining more than 100 statements from staff and making transcripts of
       the calls, it had not yet been possible to obtain this information.

13.   Mr Page reiterated that by 15.19 hours, it was made clear to SYMAS that
       the police had informed both hospitals of the incident.   He also made
       the point that doctors, nurses and other staff had inundated SYMAS with
      calls offering help and seeking more information because they could not
      get through to hospitals.    In so doing all the lines were blocked.

14.   On the subject of communication, Mr Hopkins was asked whether he had been
      carrying mobile communication equipment.   In reply it was stated that
      the two liaison officers mentioned previously were in possession of radio
      links.   It was acknowledged, however, that there were problems with
      radio communication inside the ground.


15.   Mr Ferguson asked what mode of transport would be sent to pick up medical
      teams, once they had been requested.    Mr Page stated that one of the
      ambulances bringing in casualties would be earmarked to transport the
      team back.    Mr Ferguson then asked what the involvement of the Ambulance
      Liaison Officer had been and whether use had been made of one of the
      direct lines.    It was confirmed that Mrs         lad been at the Royal
      Hallamshire Hospital throughout the incident but that she had had
      difficulty getting the use of a telephone.

16.   Mr Mapplebeck referred to the two main issues which had been identified
       so far.   The first was the fact that it had not been possible to trace
      receipt of the request at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital to supply a
      medical team.    The second associated issue was that it appeared that the
       "incoming" ambulance which had been earmarked for collecting the medical
       team did not appear to have reported as such at the Royal Hallamshire
      Hospital.    Mr Mapplebeck stated that this had caused a great deal of
       frustration at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital since there were a number
      of doctors waiting to assist, because they knew the Northern General
      Hospital was taking the initial pressure.    Mr Page undertook to check
       exactly what instructions had been given to the "earmarked" ambulance
       team.

17.   Discussion then took place on the two quite different roles of the site
      medical team and the site medical offer.   Mr Ferguson stated that the
      role of the SMO had been excluded from their major disaster plan in 1988
      since there was a general consensus that, in an urban setting like
      Sheffield, it was far better to bring casualties to hospital as soon as
      possible in order to have the full range of back-up expertise and
      equipment.   SYMAS concurred with this view.   Mr Wardrope added,
      however, that following the Kegworth air crash, 20 sets of equipment (IV
      drips etc) were kept in readiness at the Northern General Hospital.

18.   Mr Mapplebeck felt that the issue of the definition and role of the SMO
      might warrant further discussion, especially in view of the adverse
      comments by Dr Ashton.   Mr Costley replied that the Department had been
      pressed to change the Circular to clarify this issue but no movement had
                                    - 5 -




      yet been made nationally.   In answer to a question as to why site
      medical teams had been requested, Mr Page replied that they were required
      to certify death so as to avoid as far as possible DOAs at the hospitals.

Sheffield Health Authority

Northern General Hospital

19.   Mr McKay, Unit General Manager, presented a brief factual account of
      events on the day (Appendix B ) . He explained the initial difficulties
      experienced because of the instructions by the police to "stand by".
      Further confusion was caused by the fact that the message referred only
      to "Hillsborough" and no mention was made of the actual football ground.
      Referring to the fact that the Northern General Hospital had received the
      first wave of casualties, although they had coped well he stated because
      of the volume of casualties they had eventually had to request SYMAS to
      convey patients directly from the scene to the Royal Hallamshire
      Hospital.   He added that they had been surprised by the fact that SYMAS
      had requested a medical team to be sent since the Northern General
      Hospital had been first on call and the plan provided for the second
      on-call to provide a mobile team.   Nevertheless two doctors had been
      dispatched.

20.   Communications between the two hospitals had been good and regular
      contact had been maintained.  (The plan provided for the Royal
      Hallamshire Hospital to assume "District" control.)   Because of the
      media coverage of the event, many staff has reported for duty without
      being asked.

21.   One of the main difficulties was dealing with the volume of relatives and
      friends who came to the hospital seeking information, many of whom stayed
      from the afternoon right through the night.   A cafeteria had been
      provided and social workers and chaplains had provided good support.

22.   The media, which had arrived quickly and in force, were ably shepherded
      by the Assistant Public Relations Officer and the only real problems had
      involved the foreign press.

23.   Discussion then turned to the visits to the hospital by the many VIPs.
      Their presence had been welcomed as a boost for the morale of both
      patients and staff.   It was acknowledged, however, that a balance had to
      be struck between this and too many official visits by dignitaries, which
      in time could become counter productive.   Dr Alderslade explained the
      reaction to VIP visits previously experienced by the District Health
      Authorities involved in the Kegworth incident.

24.   In answer to a question about the setting up of the police casualty
      bureau, Mr McKay experienced difficulty in recalling the precise timing
      although he knew that the police had had difficulty in reaching their own
      control.   It was agreed that there would need to be a joint meeting with
      the police to discuss a number of important issues, including the
      identification difficulties.

Royal Hallamshire Hospital

25.   Mr Baldwin, Unit General Manager, likewise presented a brief factual
      account of events on the day (Appendix B).   Their experiences were very
      similar to those of the Northern General Hospital.
26.   Before the cascade system had been put into operation, many of the staff
      had reported in, having learned of the tragedy from media reports.     He
      referred to the fact that in some ways it was fortunate that the incident
      had occurred on a weekend, because of the greater availability of beds
      and, of course, theatres.    There were more than sufficient surgical
      staff available but, because of the nature of the injuries, these were
      not required.    He emphasised, however, that further thought would have
       to be given as to how they would have been able to respond, had the
       incident occurred on a week-day.   As it was, the action taken by the
      hospital had been very satisfactory.

27.   They too had experienced difficulty in accommodating the large numbers of
      anxious friends and relatives, which gathered mainly in the Out-Patient
      Department.   The latter was manned by volunteers, who also provided food
      and drinks.   The same problems had occurred because of insufficient
      information about the deceased and injured and a larger police presence
      would have helped.   He added that the aftermath of dealing with bereaved
      and distressed relatives was very difficult and time consuming to manage.

28.   Communications had been greatly assisted by having the facility to
      by-pass the switchboard with a number of telephone lines and, therefore,
      maintain outside contact.

29.   Arrangements so far as the press was concerned had gone well.

30.   The view expressed by Mr McKay concerning the influx of VIP visitors was
      shared by Mr Baldwin.

31.   He confirmed that the process of debriefing was well underway.

32.   Dr Alderslade referred to the difference in the type of injuries
      sustained between this and the Kegworth incident, and asked whether there
      would have been any problems if more "hardware", chiefly ventilators, had
      been required.   He was informed that there had been no problems with
      shortage of ventilators although they had received many offers of more,
      had they been required.   Dr Edgebrook pointed out that in any event it
      would have been quite acceptable to "hand bag" patients for a sustained
      period of time if necessary.

33.   For his part, Mr Mapplebeck, District General Manager, Sheffield Health
       Authority, referred to the various elements of the major disaster plan
       including the role played by the bed bureau.   He also referred to the
       system at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital for transferring patients to
       other hospitals in Shjeffield so as to free beds.

34.   Again, on the question of the media, he felt that arrangements had worked
      well because of the presence of the PRO and his assistant.   The "pool"
      arrangements, whereby one TV crew acting on behalf of others had worked
      particularly well.

35.   He confirmed the view that discussions with the police were required,
       especially with regard to the need for more information about deceased
       and injured to be provided quicker on the day.   He referred to the fact
       that an ex-directory number for the hospital had evidently been released
       by an unknown source and they had been inundated with calls from anxious
       relatives and friends.
                                     - 7 -



36.   He stated that Social Services had responded well and had provided a 24
      hour service for two or three days. He felt, however, that this was an
      area which needed to be given more thought for the future.    Providing
      the physical space for the counselling service, both the bereaved and
      injured, had been a problem at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital although it
      had been possible at the Northern General Hospital to use the      new
      geriatric unit.    It was understood thatSocial Services had set up their
      own major control centre.

37.   On the need for discussions with the police, Mr Costley confirmed that
      there had been no contact with the RHA on Hillsborough to date.   Mr Page
      reported that he had spoken to the Chief Constable who had informed him
      that for the time being information exchange had been restricted to the
      West Midlands Force who were conducting the Inquiry into the police
      action on the day.   It was unanimously agreed, however, that discussions
      should take place as soon as possible and Mr Evans confirmed that there
      should be no problem with the timing of this at the level being proposed.

38.   On the question of VIP visiting, Mr Mapplebeck felt that caution should
      be exercised in reaching conclusions since there were mixed views about
      the benefits.

39.   Further views expressed on the operation of the police casualty bureau
      confirmed there had been significant operational problems.   Mr Wardrope
      reported that one member of his staff had had to deal at home with 106
      calls from distressed relatives that night.   The fact that nothing had
      been known by NHS staff until the early hours of Sunday morning of those
      supporters detained in police cells had significantly exacerbated the
      problem.   Mr Thornton agreed that the role of the bureau needed precise
      definition and talks with the police were vital to improve the
      information flow in the event of a similar incident occurring.   What was
      needed was a single information point, a single list of casualties/deaths
      and their whereabouts.   Mr Costley stated that similar problems had been
      experienced in the Kegworth incident.   It was therefore necessary for
      shared training to be undertaken with the police to try to overcome these
      problems.   Altogether there were a number of issues requiring joint
      attention, some of which would need national initiatives to resolve.

40.   Mr Page outlined difficulties which had been experienced regarding
      liaison with the police force.   It appeared police communications inside
      and outside the ground had not been satisfactory and he pointed out that
      several decisions of the ambulance service had been countermanded by the
      police eg redirecting ambulances to Leppings Lane instead of Penistone
      Road - the only access point to the ground.

41.   Mr Ferguson briefly outlined the work alreadydone over a period of time
       in conjunction with the police at Snig Hill.    It was agreed, however,
       that no firm plans could be made without first talking through all the
       issues with the police.   Mr Page pointed out that British Telecom had
       had practical problems in dealing with the influx of calls.    Because
       relatives had not been able to contact the emergency numbers, many had
       travelled during the night and had reported to police stations seeking
       information.

42.   Reference was made to the confusion caused by the transfer of a number of
       bodies (12) from hospital to the Medico Legal Centre and then back to the
      gym at Hillsborough.
                                     - 8 -




43.   Reference was also made to the urgent need for stress counselling for
      many of the staff involved, including many experienced staff such as
      pathologists and ambulance personnel.   Mr Page referred to the good
      service already being provided by the Sheffield Occupational Health
      staff.   It was stated that many psychologists, not all NHS staff, had
      been working hard since the incident to help in this regard.   Mr Costley
      reported that the Sheffield Social Services had set up a task group of
      some 180 psychologists from Nottingham, Liverpool and Sheffield to assist
      those involved in the tragedy, whether victims, relatives or carers.

Barnsley District General Hospital

44.   Mr Akroyd, District General Manager of Barnsley Health Authority,
      presented a report on the involvement of Barnsley District General
      Hospital (Appendix C), which although peripheral, had triggered their
      major disaster plan.

General

45.   The question as to who should activate the major disaster plan was
      considered.   It appeared that on the day the police had done this and
      informed the ambulance service who accepted it.   It was agreed that it
      was open to any of the emergency services to "push the button" but
      everyone acknowledged that this was always an issue since there was a
      natural hesitancy to set in train elaborate cascade systems.   In this
      case the problem seemed to be that the incident unfolded too slowly and
      it took some time for the gravity of the situation to be realised.

46.   Dr Edgebrook asked whether, in the event of a similar incident recurring,
      it would be practical to send casualties to the two hospitals
      alternately.   Mr Page explained that the difficulty was in getting
      vehicles through the crowd and the decision as to which hospital to take
      casualties was largely governed by whichever route was quickest.

47.   Mr Wardrope reported that in a notice in the British Medical Journal, Dr
       Ashton was inviting evidence for the public inquiry.   Dr Alderslade
       informed the meeting that he had spoken to Dr Ashton soon after the press
       reports appeared.   It appeared that Dr Ashton had based his views on his
       limited observations on the day.

48.   In conclusion Dr Alderslade thanked everyone for attending and asked for
       sight of the fuller debriefings when they were complete.   In general the
       NHS response had been excellent and any issues requiring further
       discussion would be taken on board in due course and, if necessary,
       embodied in future emergency plans.
                                                                 APPENDIX A
Trent Regional Health Authority


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989


Report of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service


1.   Two Liaison Officers of Station Officer rank were based inside
     Hillsborough with radio communications well before the kick off.        It
     is our normal policy to have one or both Liaison Officers at every match,
     and both attend every major game.      The Liaison Officers were stationed
     at pitch level as for major matches the Club does not supply the tickets
     for the south stand which we normally receive.      In addition there was
     a fully equipped emergency ambulance with two crew members at the
     ground and another as back up at Middlewood Ambulance Station, a little
     under one mile away.      Both ambulances were specifically assigned to
     this match;   that is our usual procedure for major football matches
     at Hillsborough.


2.   The first notification received by SYMAS of any need for our
     involvement came at 1508 hours from Police Headquarters when a fleet
     of ambulances was requested to attend at the Leppings Lane entrance
     to the ground;     no notification of the nature of the incident was
     received.


3.   Within 15 minutes eleven SYMAS ambulances had reached Hillsborough.
     In total forty two ambulances attended, of which thirty one were
     SYMAS vehicles and eleven came from outside areas.      Most of these
     vehicles made several trips between the ground and the Sheffield
     hospitals.    In addition further vehicles were brought in from
     outside SYMAS and were put on stand by.


4.   A Divisional Superintendent arrived on the scene before 1515 hours,
     the Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer and the Senior Duty
     Officer arrived at Hillsborough at 1523 hours and the Assistant Chief
     Metropolitan Ambulance Officer (Operations) before 1600 hours.
 5.   At 1519 hours SYMAS was informed by the Police that they had told the
      Royal Hallamshire and the Northern General Hospital of the incident
      at Hillsborough.   At 1520 hours, SYMAS informed Barnsley and Rotherham
      District General Hospitals that the incident had escalated and at
      1523 hours a Charge Nurse at the Northern General Hospital was verbally
      informed by a Leading Ambulanceman that a major incident had been
      declared.


6.    At 1536 hours the Royal Hallamshire were asked to supply a medical team.
      At 1538 hours the same request was made of the Northern General and at
      1540 hours of the Barnsley District General Hospital.   The medical
      teams from each of the Northern General and the Barnsley District
      General were taken to the ground by ambulance.


 7.   The major incident vehicle arrived at the ground at 1540 hours.


8.    One hundred and seventy two casualties were taken to hospital   by
      ambulance, initially to the Northern General and then to the Royal
      Hallamshire.   Two patients were taken to Barnsley District General
      Hospital.


 9.   All casualties had been removed from Hillsborough by 1620 hours.


10.   Ninety four fatalities were taken to the Medico Legal Centre    in
      Sheffield, some after having been returned from the Northern General
      and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals.   The last of the fatalities left
      Hillsborough at 0528 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.


The incident was closed at 0530 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.
                                                            APPENDIX B
MANAGEMENT IN CONFIDENCE

                           SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY

                 H I L L S B O R O U G H    E M E R G E N C Y

        BRIEF FACTUAL REPORT RELATING TO THE HOSPITALS RESPONSE TO THE
         HILLSBOROUGH EMERGENCY OF SATURDAY AFTERNOON. 15 APRIL 1989

     Activation of Mai or Disaster Plan

     1.1 From approximately 15.15 hours on Saturday, 15 April, information
         regarding some form of incident began to reach the Hospitals in
         Sheffield through staff making enquiries following media reports.

     1 *2 Northern General Hospital

         At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone message was received at the
         Northern General Hospital switchboard from police asking the hospital
         to ‘stand b y ’ as there was an incident with casualties at
         Hillsborough.     A further message was received at approximately 15.25
         hours that a paediatric cardiac arrest was on route to the
         Northern General Hospital.     At approximately 15.27 hours the
         paediatric cardiac arrest arrived and proved to be the first casualty
         from Hillsborough.     The ambulance driver stated that there had been
         a major accident at the Football Ground.

     1.3 Charge N u r s e a t the Northern General Accident and Emergency
         Department arranged for the Accident and Emergency Department to be
         prepared for receipt of a large number of casualties, having
         instructed his staff nurse to commence the Accident and Emergency
         call-out cascade for a major disaster.

     1.4 The Accident and Emergency Department contacted the switchboard at
         approximately 15.35 hours and asked for all available medical staff
         to be called to attend the Department.   This was done.

     1.5 Meanwhile, Mrs B Williams, Assistant Matron, went to the switchboard
         and, at approximately 15.43 hours, she and the telephonist
         implemented the call out of staff for a major disaster.    The
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital confirmed that it, too, had been asked to
         ‘stand b y ’ by the police.

     1.6 At approximately 16.00 hours, the Consultant in Accident and
         Emergency arranged with SYMAS for further cases to be taken to the
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital (which was, in fact, already receiving
         casualties.

     1.7 The Roval Hallamshire Hospital

         At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone call was received from a
         Police Inspector by the nurse in charge of the Accident and Emergency
         Department asking the Hospital to stand by and to expect casualties
         from an incident at Hillsborough.   The switchboard, which had been
         monitoring the call, immediately advised key members of staff of the
         receipt of this message.   The key members of staff included the duty
         Administrator, Accident and Emergency staff and duty Assistant
         Matron.   Preparation of the Accident and Emergency Department, in
         anticipation of a possible major accident alert, commenced.    At


                                      1
    approximately 15.30 hours, police arrived to set up a control room
    and, in response to a hospital staff enquiry, confirmed that a major
    alert was in being and the hospital duty Nursing officer notified
    switchboard which commenced cascade call out for staff in accordance
    with major disaster procedure.

Accident and Emergency Departmpni-

2.1 The first casualties arrived in the Northern General Hospital
    Accident and Emergency Department at approximately 15.27 hours and
    the last at approximately 16.45 hours.   The Department was cleared
    by approximately 17.30 hours.

2.2 The first casualty arrived in the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Accident
    and Emergency Department at approximately 15.40 hours and the last at
    approximately 17.01 hours.   The Department was cleared by
    approximately 18.15 hours.

Site Medical Teams

3.1 SYMAS called the Northern General Hospital for an emergency medical
    team to attend the site at approximately 15.45 hours.    The team,
    comprising two doctors, was collected by ambulance from the
    Northern General Hospital at approximately 15.55 hours (earlier
    response was not possible because of the volume of casualties in the
    Accident and Emergency Department).   The team was sent back on
    arrival at the Ground but the equipment (resuscitation box etc) was
    retained for use at the Ground.

3.2 There is no record of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital having received
    a request although it had put a team on stand by, ready to respond to
    any request to attend the site of the incident.   No ambulance
    reported to collect the team.

Patients Statistics

4.1 Brief statistics, concerning casualties received at the Sheffield
    Hospitals from the incident are as follows

                                      NGH           RHH             TOTAL

Casualties brought
to Accident & Emergency               88            71                  159

Dead on arrival or died in
the Accident & Emergency              11             1                   12

Treated and discharged                21            45                   66

Admitted                              56            25                   81

Admitted to ITUs (included
in total admissions above)            19             7


Subsequent transfers from ITU
(for scans and neurological care)      7 to RHH      7 from NGH           7

Subsequent deaths                      2                                  2
    4.2 The total number of casualties remaining in hospital at 09.00 hours
        on Wednesday, 26 April was 1 (in Intensive Care) at the
        Northern General Hospital and 4 (all in Intensive Care) at the
        Royal
        Hallamshire Hospital.

    4.3 It is understood that 3 minor casualties were also taken to Barnsley
        District General Hospital.

5   Hospital Responses

    5.1 Debriefing of personnel involved in the hospital response is
        proceeding, primarily aimed at identifying whether improvements in
        the procedures, either in the individual hospitals, across the
        District or in the inter-face with the other emergency services can
        be made for future planning.

    5.2 IT IS, HOWEVER, CLEAR THAT THE NORTHERN GENERAL AND ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE
        HOSPITALS RESPONSES WERE TIMELY, EFFICIENT AND EFFECTIVE, AND STAFF
        HAVE EVERY REASON TO BE SATISFIED AT THEIR RESPONSE AND OF THE
        QUALITY OF SERVICES PROVIDED AT THE HOSPITALS.

    5.3 Psychological support services have been provided to the hospital
        staff at the hospitals involved in the emergency, as well as to many
        others involved in the disaster.

    5.4 Other hospitals involved in support roles were:-

        5.4.1 King Edward VII Hospital to which transfers were made (19
              orthopaedic) early in the emergency to clear beds at
              Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

        5.4.2 Lodge Moor Hospital, which prepared (1 ward) ready to receive
              transfers to clear beds at the district general hospitals; no
              transfers were made, but see also note (5.4.6) below.

        5.4.3 Beds were cleared at the Jessop Hospital for Women, again ready
              for transfers to clear beds at the two district general
              hospitals and to release staff for the district general
              hospitals.   No transfers of patients were subsequently made.

        5.4.4 Children’s Hospital brought its state up to full alert ready to
              receive casualties if required.

        5.4.5 Staff from several hospitals and from District and Regional
              Headquarters departments went to and undertook duties at the
              two district general hospitals.

        5.4.6 The Bed Bureau, on hearing of the major emergency, arranged
              with Chesterfield and Rotherham Hospitals to take general
              practitioner emergency admissions if required and Lodge Moor
              Hospital to take medical emergencies.

        5.4.7 Barnsley District General Hospital received 3 casualties.
              Subsequently, at the request of the Sheffield Hospitals
              Control, Rotherham District General Hospital took on the
              ‘initial receiving centre’ for casualties for any further major
              emergency which might occur, and for which the Sheffield
              hospitals would normally have been selected for response, until


                                    3
                 9.00 am on Sunday, 16 April.   The Sheffield Hospitals Control
                 confirmed with Barnsley that the Barnsley District General
                 Hospital could stand down at 18.45 hours.

6   Communications

    6.1 Communications within and between the two district general hospitals
        were very effective.   The rapport between the emergency service
        representatives on the hospital sites was good. Many calls from the
        public came to the hospitals because of apparent difficulties in
        contacting the police emergency number.

7   Volunteers and Other Agencies

    7.1 Volunteers from organisations and individuals reported to hospitals
        to give assistance and made effective contributions, as did the
        social work staff of the Sheffield City Council.   Numerous offers of
        help, particularly to provide accommodation and transport, were
        received from Sheffield residents.

8   Conclusion

    8.1 Finally, the hospitals would wish to formally recognise the many
        offers of help, condolence and support which were received during and
        after the initial emergency, and the many visits (official and
        unofficial) which contributed significantly to the morale of
        patients, relatives and staff.

    8.2 Pre-arranged visits were made to the Northern General and
        Royal Hallamshire Hospitals by the following:-

        Sunday. 16 April :

       Mr D Blunkett MP (to Northern General Hospital)

       Archbishop of Liverpool, the
       Bishop of Warrington (representing the Bishop of Liverpool)
       and the Free Church Moderator of Liverpool

       Mrs M Thatcher, Prime Minister and Mr D Hurd, Home Secretary
       (accompanied by Mr I Patnick MP at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

        Chair of Liverpool Council          )
        Lord Mayor of Sheffield accompanied) Sunday Royal Hallamshire   Hospital
        by Councillor Clive Betts            )Monday Northern General Hospital
        Lord Mayor of Nottingham            )


        Monday. 17 April:

        Liverpool Football Team

        TRHs Prince and Princess of Wales




                                       4
          Tuesday. 18 April:

          HRH Duke of Kent (Northern General Hospital)

          The Archbishop of York (Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

          Mr N Kinnock, Leader of the Labour Party
          accompanied by Councillor Clive Betts


          Wednesday. 19 April:

          The Bishop of Hallam

          Nottingham Forrest Football Team


          Thursday. 20 April:

          Lord Justice Taylor

          Chief Constable Dear, West Midlands Police


          Tuesday. 25 April

          Mr T Clay, General Secretary, RCN




KT/LS
27 4 89




                                      5
                                                                  APPENDIX C
                             BARNSLEY HEALTH AUTHORITY
                         BARNSLEY DISTRICT GENERAL HOSPITAL
                        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 15TH APRIL 1969
                 CALL OUT LOG AND CONTACT WITH EXTERNAL AGENCIES


APPROXIMATE TIME              DETAILS
Approx. 3.20 p.m.             Message taken by A & E Receptionist on the
                              Ambulance Control telephone to warn that casual­
                              ties were being taken to Sheffield Hospitals
                              as a result of a major accident that had occurred
                              and to warn Barnsley District General Hospital
                              that we may get the ’overflow'.   Sister
                                   in the A & E Department was notified.
Approx. 3.25 p.m.             Sister |_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ A & E Department, telephoned
                              Sheffield Police Headquarters to confirm the
                              message.        Ide were informed we were going on
                              standby for 'Operation Catastrophe' and to await
                              further instructions.            On receiving this infor­
                              mation Mr.                   the Charge Nurse, informed
                              the Duty IMursing Manager and the Intensive Care
                              Unit.          He endeavoured to notify the Nurse
                              Manager for the A & E Department and the Senior
                              Sister who were both off duty and could not
                              be contacted.

                              Sister __________ [informed the Consultant in
                              A & E Department at his home and the Hospital
                              Switchboard.

                              The Action Cards and telephone list of addition­
                              al staff were made ready in Sister's Office.

Approx. 3. t+Q p.m.           Sister _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ telephoned Ambulance Control
                              who were just about to inform us that 'Operation
                              Catastrophe' was in full swing.                 Lie were
                              informed that we would receive overflow of
                              patients from Sheffield.              In the process of
                              the communications Sister                       informed
                              them of our Mobile Team if required.

Approx.   3.k5   p.m.         Sister                informed the Switchboard
                              to put out full alert for the Hospital Major
                              Accident Plan and A & E Reception were notified.
                              The Nurse Manager, A & E Department, and Senior
                              Sister were telephoned again but were unobtain­
                              able and therefore the Charge Nurse on duty
                              assumed the role of the Nurse Manager and carried
                              out the duties as listed on the Hospital Major
                              Accident Plan Action Card.

                              Due to congestion the Telephonists were unable
                              to confirm the Catastrophe call with SheffieldPolic* •
                                   - 2 -

     continued

                           All staff who had been informed of standby were
                           informed of full alert during the process of
                           preparing the Department to receive casualties.

                           At this point extra Nursing Staff (A & E Staff)
                           were contacted to come in.

                           In preparation of the A & E Department:

                           a) Nursing Staff were allocated to take equip­
                              ment to Physiotherapy to prepare for minor
                              casualties.

                           b)    The A & E Ward patients were transferred
                                to Ward 29.

                           c) The A & E Waiting Area was cleared.

                           d) The Major Accident Equipment was loaded anto
                              trollies ready for a call out.

5.   Approx. 4.DD p.m.     Ambulance arrived to collect Mobile Team. No
                           prior warning given but this was quickly
                           assembled.

                           The Mobile Team consisted of Staff Nurse Ecuyer,
                           Staff Nurse          and Dr. Qazi (SHD A & E
                           Department). ------

                           The Mobile Team took with them emergency
                           equipment to assist on site with casualties
                           at the Hillsborough Football Stadium. On arrival
                           at the Stadium the Mobile Team were directed
                           to the Gymnasium and on entering were informed
                           by a Co-ordinator that all the casualties had
                           been assessed and sent to local Hospitals.

                           They were advised to return to Barnsley District
                           General Hospital to assist there with any
                           patients that would later be sent there.

                           □nee the Hospital Control Team had been set
                           up the Charge Nurse, Mr.         acted as Liaison
                           Officer and informed the Control Room of the
                           A & E roles.      Medical Staff began to arrive
                           in the A & E Department and were informed of
                           the situation with Mr. Ramnani, Consultant in
                           A & E, in control.    Senior Sister \     Arrived
                           later and assumed the Nurse Manager role.

     Approx.     08 p.m.   Duty General Manager arrived at the Hospital
                           and established Control Room in the Hospital
                           Committee Room in accordance with the Hospital
                           Major Accident Plan.
Approx. 4.15 p.m.   Unit General Manager arrived at Hospital and
onwards             together with Dr. Ghazi, Consultant Physician,
                    and Mrs. Jones, Senior Assistant Matron, formed
                    the Control Team.      The Unit General Manager
                    asked the Duty General Manager to act as Communi­
                    cation Officer and another Manager to act as
                    Press Officer in accordance with the Hospital
                    Major Accident Plan.

                    The Communication Officer contacted Police Head­
                    quarters in Sheffield to ascertain the number
                    of patients we might expect.     Informed by them
                    that we could expect 50+ walking injured.

                    Contact was made with the Police Officer on
                    the Hospital site, Sergeant             sited in
                    the Police Incident Room in the A & E Department.
                    He was asked to communicate with the Control
                    Team.

                    District General Manager arrived     at     Hospital
                    and reported to Control Room.

Approx. 4.50 p.m.   Three patients    arrived   at   Hospital     (Minor
        5.25 p.m.   Injuries).
        5.27 p.m.
                    Control Room advised by Sergeant            that
                    we could expect 27 bodies and arrangements were
                    made for the Mortuary to receive them.     Later
                    told that no bodies were to be sent to us.

Approx. 5.30 p.m.   Contact made by Unit General Manager with the
                    District General Manager of Sheffield Health
                    Authority to ask whether Barnsley could offer
                    any assistance to Sheffield Hospitals. District
                    General Manager, Sheffield Health Authority,
                    indicated that message received.    He would co­
                    ordinate any enquiries at Sheffield and would
                    personally communicate a message back as soon
                    as he was able to.

Approx. 6.30 p.m.   Stand down message received by the Nurse Manager,
                    A & E Department, from the Police.

Approx. 6.45 p.m.   Unit General Manager contacted District General
                    Manager, Sheffield Health Authority, to be
                    advised that no assistance was required from
                    Barnsley but that it would be appreciated if
                    the Hospital would be prepared to be on standby
                    for normal emergency on take for North Sheffield
                    should assistance be required.     The Sheffield
                    Bed Bureau would be advised accordingly.    Unit
                    General Manager confirmed that Barnsley District
                    General Hospital would be prepared to help if
                    asked.
                                                                                        *




                                          - 4 -

12.       Sunday 16th April 1989    Message received from Sheffield Bed Bureau that
          10.00 a.m.               they were 'back to normal' in Sheffield and
                                    that no further standby arrangement was required.
                                    Unit General Manager spoke personally to the
                                    Unit General Managers of the Northern General
                                    Hospital, Sheffield, and the Royal Hallamshire
                                    Hospital, Sheffield, to ask whether there was
                                    any assistance Barnsley District General Hospital
                                    could give.    Advice received was that no assis­
                                    tance was required and that they would let us
                                    know if this should be so.      An indication was
                                    however, given that the Intensive Care Department
                                    workload was heavy and it was conceivable that
                                    should there be further demand for Intensive
                                    Care facilities in Sheffield there may be a
                                    request for assistance from BamslHy. fln indi­
                                    cation was given that all possible help would
                                    be given if requested.

                                   The Duty Consultant Anaesthetist Dr. Gadgil
                                   was contacted who confirmed his willingness
                                   to help if asked. The Consultant Anaesthetist
                                   in charge of the Intensive Care Unit, Dr. Lee,
                                   was contacted at home.     He confirmed he would
                                   give what ever help could be given if asked
                                   and subsequently visited the Hospital.

13.   Monday 17th April 1989        Senior Assistant Matron, B.D.G.H., contacted
      1D.DD a.m.                   the Senior Nurse at both the Northern General
                                    Hospital, Sheffield, and the Royal Hallamshire
                                    Hospital, Sheffield, to ask whether any Nursing
                                    assistance was required especially in specialist
                                    areas e.g. I.T.U. and/or Theatres.      Offer of
                                    help acknowledged but advised that they were
                                    coping well.




PJE/JMD
24.4.89
                                                Sheffield Health Authority



     © fftfe m Ca©ffii©mH IHfcspIitsJ.
                                        Herries Road, Sheffield S5 7AU
Our ref.                                       Telephone (0742) 434 3 4 3
Your ref.

Please reply to               Ext. ^ 9 7 2
 Accident and Emergency Department


   24th July 1990




 Dear Stkz^Madam,

 A medical report has been requested with regard to your
 accident on

 Would you please, therefore, attend   at the Accident and
 Emergency reception desk of this Hospital at 4.00     3CJflK./p«m.
 on  Friday 17th August 1990
 to be examined by   Mr. J. Wardrope, Consultant in Accident
  and Emergency Medicine.

 If this appointment is not convenient for you, please
 let me know.

 Yours faithfully,




 D. STAMP (Mrs)
 Accident and Emergency Secretary




G 1530
