                                                                     ^ S 53 y z lb



             Draft Report on the Hillsborough Disaster for Su*»nigRir»i

                to the Co-ordijnatinq Conmittee care of Mr j jfardrope


1* Alert Procedure

Fran approximately 1*5.15 hours on Saturday the 15th April 1989 information

regarding seme form of incident began to reach the Royal Hallamshire Hospital

switchboard through staff making enquiries following television and radio

reporting.    At approximately 15.20 the Police at Hillsborough telephoned the Nurse

in charge of the Accident & Emergency Department asking the hospital "stand by to

expect casualties".    This call was monitored by the switchboard which advised key

members of staff following this message.     The Senior Registrar and Consultant in

charge of the Department were alerted by a long distance pager and arrived within

minutes of each other at about 15.37.     At that time initial preparation for the

receiving of a large number of casualties had commenced.     Seven patients in the

waiting roan had been advised to leave and alternative arrangements for their

treatment made.    Two uniformed Police Officers arrived and took up position near

the accepted control point.    In response to hospital staff enquiries, they

confirmed that a major alert was in being and the duty Nursing Officer took the

formal step of notifying switchboard to canmence the major disaster procedure.



2. Medical and Nurse Response

Doctors and Nurses who currently work and have previously worked in the Accident &

Emergency Department began to volunteer their services fran 15.40.        They were

alerted by word of mouth fran neighbours and fran radio reports which they tod

overheard in public places.    The medical staff in the Department grew fran

numbering 6 at 15.40 to at least 45 two hours later.     A Senior Surgeon and a Senior

Physician, both of whan happened to be in the hospital at the time of the initial

alert, undertook to clear available beds on their wards.     An E.N.T. ward, which had

been previously designated to receive major disaster victims was cleared.
3. Departmental Arrangements

The A&E Department was divided into resuscitation and major injuries.    The third

area for walking wounded was established in the adjacent orthopaedic clinic, and

staff were distributed between these three areas in such a way that each area had

a number of senior clinicians.



4. Patient Arrival

All patients were brought to the hospital by the Ambulance Service, the first two

arriving without warning at 15.40.   The first of these patients died and his body

remained in the Department for seme hours.    The second patient was intubated and

transferred to the Intensive Care Unit.   There was then a period during which the

departmental plans could be fully organized before the sudden influx of a large

number of patients, seme on stretchers but most walking which occurred a few

minutes after 4.00 pm.   In all 71 patients were brought to the Royal Hallamshire

Hospital, A&E Department, 45 of wham were discharged that day and 25 of whan were
admitted.



5. Patients

The patients were predominantly young males and there was no statistically

significant difference in age between those admitted and discharged on the day of

the incident.   Sane patients were admitted under the Orthopaedic Surgeon of the

day, one of whan required manipulation of a fractured radius and ulna.   Six

patients were admitted under the General Physician of the day, most of whan had

felt dizzy and light headed after being removed the crowd.   Eleven patients were

admitted with varying degrees of abdominal tenderness after being pressed against

projection.   The majority of patients who were not admitted were suffering fran

emotional disturbance and minor soft tissue injuries which did not require

treatment or referral.   All but one of the admitted patients was fully conscious.

That evening the majority were allowed hane within the next 48 hours
                                  -   3-

6. Termination of Incident

The last patient was received at approximately 5.00 pm.    The Department was

cleared and ready to receive routine referrals of both Ambulance and walking

cases by approximately 6.15 pn.



7. Difficulties Experienced

The lack of communication fran both the Police and Ambulance Services at the

scene in the initial stages of the incident was keenly felt.    Because of the

public nature of the disaster the large number of volunteer medical staff, sane

of wham have little recent experience in resuscitation work, proved difficult to

manage.   It was felt that a triage point for volunteer staff was almost as

necessary as one for arriving patients.    These staff lingered long after it

became clear that no further patients would arrive from the football ground.

Sane difficulty was experienced by nursing and clerical staff because worried

relatives were phoning the Department directly from Liverpool and other parts of
Sheffield.
