                                                                   x ssilsl2.
                  SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY


 From   Miss                 Hospital Administrator, R.H.H.


 To     See Distribution List


        MAB/PH

        12th September 1989




        MAJOR DISASTER PLAN


        I enclose the appropriate sections of the revised Major Accident Plan.

        Please read it and discuss with your colleagues whether any further
        amendments are needed and return the amended draft to me as soon as
        possible. If no amendments are required, please senfl back the draft
        to confirm that you are happy with it. If you wish jto see other
        sections that you feel may be relevant to you, please contact my
        secretary for copies.

        As soon as this revised format is agreed, I will circulate full copies
        of the document to all Consultants, Senior Registrars, Wards and Heads
        of Department.




        Hospital Administrator.


        Encs



        Distribution List:

        Mr. D.G. Ferguson, Consultant in A & E Medicine.
        Mr. A.C. Crosby, Consultant in A & E Medicine.
        Mr. K. Thornton, Assistant General Manager, Westbrook House.
        Mr. |           Switchboard.
        Mrs. E. Smith, Superintendent Physiotherapist.
        Dr. D.R. Triger, Consultant in General Medicine.
        Dr. P. Howard, Consultant in General Medicine.
        Dr. W. Morris-Jones, Consultant Surgeon.
        Dr. D.L. Edbrooke, Consultant Anaesthetist.
        Dr. A. Murray-Wilson, Consultant Anaesthetist.
        Mr. T.E. Selvey, Director of Nursing Services.




G231
Distribution   (contd)

Mr. A.G. Kay, Portering Services Manager.
Dr. J.N. Todd, District Medical Officer, Westbrook House.
Mrs.                    Patients Services Officer.
Dr. B. Ross, Chairman, Medical Staff Committee.
Mr. J.F. Talbot, Consultant Ophthalmologist.
Mr. P.D. Bull, Consultant E.N.T. Surgeon.
Mr. D.M.C. Forster, Consultant Neurosurgeon.
Dr. T. Powell, Consultant Radiologist.
Dr. G. Venables, Consultant Neurosurgeon.
Dr. A.R.W. Forrest. Consultant, Clinical Chemistry.
Mrs.          Nurse Education.
Prof. T. Duckworth, Consultant, Orthopaedics.
Mrs.                  1 Sterile Services Manager.
Mr. G. Weeks, Principal Pharmacist.
Mrs-I                    Cardiology Senior Chief Technician.
Mr.I        U   Chief Technician, E.E.G.
Mr.                 1 Principal Social Worker.
Mr. |           |, Senior Operating Department Assistant.
Mr.r                 I I.T.U. Technician.
Rev. W. Watson, c/o Chapel, 'A' Floor.
Mr. I                I Personnel Officer.
Mrs!_______________ Linen Services Manager.
M r J ___________ Catering Manager.
Mr.^           I         ~ Unit Works Officer.
Mrs .n            Domestic Services Manager.
Mr. ____________ , Head of Clinical Isotopes.
Mrs \                   Senior Physicist, Medical Physics.
Dr. A. Rimmer, Consultant, Occupational Health.
Mr. A. Hopkins, Ambulance Service, Rotherham Headquarters.
Station Officer, South Yorkshire Fire Service.
West Bar Police Station.
Hammerton Road Police Station.
      ACC/JMC                                                             26/10/89 / ’



Miss |
     ________
Hospital Administrator
Royal Hallamshire Hospital
Glossop Road
SHEPPIECD
310 2JF


Dear Miss Butler

Re:   Revised Major Disaster Plan

Ifoank you for your letter of the 12th September.      May I suggest a few changes.

1. Page 7. I think the Ambulance Service should establish a control point at
B306 rather than B80, which does not have a direct outside line. This would inprove
canaunications at a time when the Department would be busy and crowded. In
addition, I could have done with Ambulance liaison on 15th April.

2. Page 11. In Section 2(i) I think we should change the name of the so called
Hon-Accident Unit to Emergency Department Control Point i.e. B306. In due course
it might be worthwhile getting a sign made to that effect.

3. Page 12. Section 3. Medical staff should be advised to report to the
Accident & E m e r g e n c y control point, where sane attempt can be made to register
than and provide identification.

4. Page 13. Following on from the above under Section 6 I am not sure how much
use it will be having a Consultant Physician in the Unit Accountant's office.
Physicians of any sort tend to display a robust independence of mind, so we may as
well advise them to report to the control point where they can decide amongst
themselves how best to disperse their available resources. This would also enable
the Accident & Emergency Consultant to collar any available Senior Physician to
assist in manning the triage point.

I hope you will find these comments helpful.      Thank you for all your work in
revising this plan.

Tours sincerely




A C CROSS?
Consultant in Accident & Emergency Medicine
                          SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY
                          ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL
                              MAJOR DISASTER PLAN
This document contains definitive information on the response of the Royal
Hal 1amshire Hospital to a Major Accident.
It has been prepared following consultation with all interested parties and
should be given the widest circulation to ensure all appropriate members of
staff are fully conversant of their role in the event of a major accident.
This procedure is supplemented by departmental action cards (issued separately)
prepared to give each staff member concerned precise details of his role.
Clarification may be sought or amendments suggested via the Hospital
Administrator.
                                   CONTENTS
                                                                PAGE
SECTION 1.      MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE IN SHEFFIELD           1-3
                What is a Major Accident?                       1
                Notification.                                   1
                District Hospitals Control.                     1
                Distribution Principles.                        2
                Site Medical Officer/Mobile Teams.              2-3
SECTION 2.      OUTLINE OF THE ORGANISATION OF THE
                ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL IN THE EVENT
                OF A MAJOR ACCIDENT.                            4-8
                Preparation of the Hospital as soon as the
                Alert is Received.                              4-6
                Control Points.                                 6-7
                Initial Assessment & Treatment.                 7-8
SECTION 3.      DEPARTMENTAL OPERATIONAL POLICIES.                9-31
                Switchboard.                                     10-11
                Accident & Emergency Department Medical
                Staff.                                          11-12
                Medical Staff.                                  12-14
                Anaesthetic Services.                           14
                Nursing Administration.                         14-15
                Unit Administrator.                             16-18
                Medical Records Department.                     19
                Bed Bureau                                      19
                X-Ray Department.                               20-21
                Haematology & Blood Bank.                       22-23
                Portering.                                      23-24
                T.S.S.U./C.S.S.D.                               24-25
                Pharmacy.                                       25
                E.C.G. Department.                              25
                 E.E.G. Department.                             25
                Clinical Chemistry.                             26
                 Post Mortem Technicians.                       26-27


                                        (a)
                                                                PAGE
SECTION 3.    Social Work Department.                           27
(continued)   Physiotherapy Department.                         27
              Orthopaedic Appliance Makers.                     27
              Operating Department Assistants.                  28
              Chaplains of all Denominations.                   28
              Security Staff.                                   28-29
              Laundry.                                          29
              Catering Department.                              29
              Department of Estates Management.                 30-31
              Domestic Services Department                      31
SECTION 4.    INFORMATION RELATING TO INCIDENTS INVOLVING
              CONTAMINATION BY CHEMICALS OR RADIOACTIVITY.      32-35
              Dangerous Chemicals.                              32
              Radioactivity.                                    32-34
              Incident Reports.                                 34-35
              Casualties exposed to large doses of radiation.    35
              "STAND DOWN"                                      36
              COPING WITH AFTERMATH                             37
              DEBRIEFING OF STAFF                               38
              VISITS                                            39
              APPENDIX 1 (Majax Area Controls - RHH)            40-41
              APPENDIX 2 (Flow Chart - Physiotherapy)           42




                                (b)
                           MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE
               SECTION 1 MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE IN SHEFFIELD
             (This Paper briefly describes the arrangements agreed
               across Sheffield and is intended to supplement the
                        detailed plans at each Hospital.)
                           WHAT IS A MAJOR ACCIDENT?
There is no standard definition, but, for hospitals this is generally an
accident where the number and severity of live casualties requires special
arrangements to be made.
                                 NOTIFICATION
It is normally declared by the Ambulance Control but could also be declared by
other Emergency Services, and notification is to the Switchboards of all
designated major accident hospitals (Royal Hallamshire andNorthern General
Hospitals in Sheffield). The Switchboard Operator receiving the call should
notify the Northern General Hospital to ensure that the message is received.
However, on site, the Major Accident procedure should not be put into effect
until confirmed by either:-
      Consultant in A & E
      Senior Registrar in A & E
      Senior Registrar in Surgery.
The Switchboard Operator should contact the above mentioned staff in the order
shown and the first one to be contacted will liaise with the ambulance service
to obtain more precise details of the incident. This doctor will decide
whether or not to implement the Major Accident Procedure. The Switchboard
Operator will take no action to implement the procedure until instructed to do
so by one of the above mentioned medical staff.
Alternatively, if large numbers of severely injured casualties arrive without
notice at the Accident & Emergency Department the Consultant in charge may put
the procedure into action locally.
                           DISTRICT HOSPITALS CONTROL
 To provide co-ordination of Sheffield Hospitals and communications with other
 services and areas, a central point will be manned in the Hospital Admini­
 strator's office at the R.H.H. Local hospital controls will be set up
 separately at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and the Northern General Hospital.




                                    -   1   -
                               DISTRIBUTION PRINCIPLES
The first patients will be taken to the relevant Accident Dept as shown below:-
9.00 a.m. to 8.00 p.m. daily                        Royal Hallamshire Hospital
                                                    (except where accident occurs
                                                    close to the Northern General
                                                    Hospital).
8.00 p.m. to 9.00 a.m. each night                   The hospital whose Accident
                                                    and Emergency Department is
                                                    rostered to be open after
                                                    9.00 p.m. according to
                                                    the following rota:-
                                                    Monday       - R.H.H.
                                                    Tuesday      - N.G.H.
                                                    Wednesday    - N.G.H.
                                                    Thursday     - R.H.H.
                                                    Friday       - R.H.H.
                                                    Saturday     - N.G.H.
                                                    Sunday       - R.H.H.
One hospital will not normally be expected to take more than 25 seriously
injured casualties likely to require admission before the other takes an equal
number.
The District Hospital Control will be responsible for the distribution of
casualties by liaison with the Ambulance Service where necessary.
Children will be taken with adults to the appropriate adult Accident and
Emergency Department (at least initially). Children will not be taken direct
to the Children's Hospital.
SITE MEDICAL OFFICER/MOBILE TEAMS
A medical and nursing team or Site Medical Officer will not be automatically
despatched to the site of a major accident. However, should medical and
nursing assistance be required by the Ambulance Service in the light of the
particular circumstances the Medical Controllers at the Royal Hallamshire
Hospital and the Northern General Hospital will make appropriate arrangements
in the light of the particular needs and staffing resources. The mobile team
will normally be sent from the hospital not accepting the initial casualties
and any further teams required will be sent on a rotational basis. The
Ambulance Service provides a vehicle with certain basic supplies for
transporting a medical and nursing team and further specialised equipment,
supplies and protective clothing are held in readiness at both hospitals. On
arrival at the site the senior person on the medical team will evaluate the
 situation and act as Site Medical Officer. He must contact the Ambulance
 Incident Officer and will normally locate himself at the Ambulance Service
 Communications Point.




                                         - 2 -
The Site Medical Officer is responsible for:-
1.   Formulating a casualty evacuation plan in collaboration with the
      Ambulance Incident Officer.
2.   Arranging for the attendance of further medical and nursing teams
      if required.




                                        - 3 -
                  SECTION 2.   OUTLINE OF THE ORGANISATION OF THE
                             ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL
                          IN THE EVENT OF A MAJOR ACCIDENT
1.   PREPARATION OF THE HOSPITAL AS SOON AS THE ALERT IS RECEIVED
     (i )      Accident and Emergency Department
               IF THE ALERT IS RECEIVED IN THE ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY
               DEPARTMENT BY EITHER THE RED TELEPHONE OR RADIO, THE PERSON
               RECEIVING THE CALL SHOULD INFORM THE SWITCHBOARD TO COMMENCE THE
               PROCEDURE.
               The Department will be cleared of patients being treated as
               quickly as possible. They will be sent home, to a ward, or to
               the Physiotherapy Department, if they require transport home.
               When they leave the Physiotherapy Department, on the arrival of
               their transport, they will depart via the Medical School,
               1B 1 Floor (no. 6) exit. Accident and Emergency Staff will be
               allocated for patient assessment and treatment.
               Security Staff will place notices outside the Department, to the
               effect that it is closed because of a Major Accident, and in
               Claremont Crescent, and will lock all doors in the Department
               except those to the Orthopaedic Clinic.
               The Switchboard will divert G.P. referral calls to Bed Bureau.
               Those that are on their way in will enter the hospital via
               B Floor entrance and go straight to the ward.
               Accident and Emergency X-Ray patients will go back to the
               department.
     (ii)      Orthopaedic Clinic
               The Orthopaedic Clinic will be cleared to receive casualties.
               Patients will either go home or to the Physiotherapy Department
               if transport is required, at the appropriate time leaving the
               hospital at the Medical School entrance. Clinic sheets will be
               set to one side in order that patients may be sent new
               appointments.
     (i i i)   Physiotherapy
               Patients to return to their wards or to rooms B48 & B45 for
               out-patients waiting for transport. Other out-patients should be
               sent home immediately via the Medical School exit on B Floor.
     (i v )    Theatres
               Operations will cease - no more patients to go to theatres from
               wards.




                                           - 4 -
(V)      A Floor Out Patient Department
         The Medical Out Patient Clinic should be cleared as quickly as
         possible and this clinic and the Ambulance Waiting Area should be
         screened off from the rest of the building by the portable
         screens which are sited in this area. The Social Work Department
         will use the Medical Out Patient Clinic as a base to interview
         Majax patients and relatives to make the appropriate discharge
         arrangements for those patients going home and to co-ordinate
         volunteers offering accommodation and transport.
         The Social Workers and Chaplains will use the Out Patient
         Department as a base for counselling relatives using volunteers
         from the Hospital and appropriate outside agencies.
(vi )    Wards
         Junior Medical Staff will assess their patients in preparation
         for discharge. Patients for discharge, if requiring transport
         will gather in the Physiotherapy Department where they will be
         monitored by Nursing Staff who will request additional voluntary
         services via Main Reception if necessary. Ward G1 will be
         cleared by Portering Staff who will transfer patients to wards El
         and E3 for assessment before discharge or transfer to other
         wards. Ward G1 will be available for the reception of Major
         Accident patients. The Senior Nurse in the hospital will
         allocate extra nursing support to the wards receiving
         casualties. If further wards are required at any stage, a
         general surgical ward will be considered, and designated by
         Hospital control.
(vii)    Portering Staff
         Porters will take control, using lift keys, of both patient
         movement lifts, one theatre lift and one passenger lift, holding
         them in readiness for movement of patients. One theatre lift to
         remain under control of theatres. B Floor Theatres then to
         contact Porters Lodge for any patient movement required.
         Trolleys from Transit Ward and the remainder of B Floor will be
         assembled in the Orthopaedic Department entrance.
         Care trolleys will be reserved for patients requiring X-Rays if
         possible. Additional sheets will be obtained from the laundry
         and taken to Ward Gl.
         Ward Gl will be evacuated.
(viii)   Documentation
         At the assessment point members of the Medical Records Department
         will commence documentation, passing a copy of the information
         received to both the Accident and Emergency Department Control
         and having a copy ready for collection by runner for the B Floor
         Control.




                                      - 5 -
              The Police will set up their own documentation procedure room in
              B306 sited in the Accident and Emergency staff offices.
              The Administration will ensure details of patients going home via
              the Physiotherapy Department are collated and passed onto the
              Community Nursing Officer.
     (ix)     Muster Point
              Nursing Volunteers will report to Nursing Administration on B
              Floor. Those staff and volunteers with no designated area to
              report to will go to the Assistant Administrators' Office, Room
              B164, where an Administrator will allocate duties.
     (x)      Relatives
              Relatives will be directed to the A Floor Out Patient W.R.V.S.
              Waiting Area where they will receive information from Social Work
              and Administration Staff.
     (x i)    Press
              The Press will be directed to the Committee Room where the
              Administrator on duty at the Reception Desk will keep them
              informed of the up-to-date situation.
     (xii)    Car Parking
              The Police and Security will control the area around the
              hospital. Staff should park at a distance and walk via C Road.
     (xiii)   Waiting List Patients not yet admitted
              These will be sent home by the Admissions Staff after
              instructions from Nursing Control if necessary.
     (xiv)    General Notification of Staff
              Arrangements exist for notifying Radio Sheffield and Radio Hal lam
              of the need to broadcast pre-arranged messages asking staff to
              report to the hospital.

2.   CONTROL POINTS
     Hospital control points will be set up as follows (in addition to the
     District Control):-
     (i)       The Hospital Control in the General Manager's Office where
               the General Manager, Chairman of the Medical Staff Committee, the
               Director of Nursing Services and the Hospital Administrator, or
               their deputies, will direct the Hospital's response. An
               ex-directory telephone number with six lines is available in this
               area.




                                              - 6 -
     (ii)    Accident and Emergency Department Control which will be
             established in Accident and Emergency Administration. This will                  /
             be staffed by the Accident and Emergency Consultant, Assistant        < M i) &
             Matron (Accident and Emergency) or deputy and an Administrative         /
             Assistant.
     (iii)   Theatre Control will remain and the normal emergency procedures
             will continue.
     Also the following agencies will set up their own controls in the
     hospital:                                               ^
                                                                               \              i
     (i)     The Ambulance Service will establish a control by appointing a \            c**
              liaison officer to be situated in the Ambulance Office Room B80.| w
     (ii)    The Police will establish a control for their own documentation
              purposes using, if necessary, the Non-Accident Area. A telephone
              line separate from the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard may
              be installed in that area (Room B306).
     (iii)   If the disaster results in numbers of unidentified casualties
             the Police will need to make staff available in the relatives
             area of the Out Patient Department to take details.
     A list of Control Desks with phone numbers is shown as Appendix I.
3.   INITIAL ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT
     An assessment team consisting of the Accident and Emergency Senior
     Reqistrar, Orthopaedic Senior Registrar or Registrar of the day, the
     Orthopaedic Senior House Officer and Sister (or Staff Nurse) from the
     Orthopaedic/Accident and Emergency Department will assemble together with
     a documentation team provided by the Medical Records Department at the
     Orthopaedic Clinic entrance and will direct casualties as follows:-
      (a)     The slightly injured to the Orthopaedic Dressing Area.
      (b)     The moderately injured to the Clean Dressing Room.
      (c)     Those with major trauma initially to the resuscitation area with                ^
               the Transit Ward being used as necessary.                  ^    -2'
      (d)     The dead to the temporary mortuary in the Seminar Room,
               Orthopaedic Clinic.
      (e)     Camp beds are available in the main stores should they be
               required for patient use on a temporary basis.
      (f)     in cases involving radioactive and contaminated victims,
               polythene sheeting should be laid on the main corridor from the
               Casualty Department to the Transit Ward. Patients suspected of
               being contaminated should be taken to room B123 in order that
               they may be showered.
               The Fire Brigade also have a mobile decontamination facility
               available if it is required.



                                           - 7 -
( g)   Should any advice be required regarding second stage assistance
       for radiation cases the following numbers should be contacted:-
       (i)    Working Hours -                 ext,
       (ii)   Out of Hours -              ext.
(h)    In incidents involving chemicals or poisons, expert advice may be
       obtained by ringing either:-
       (i)    The National Chemical Emergency Centre -
                          ext.           or
       (ii)   Guys Hospital Poisons Centre -




                                 - 8 -
                        SECTION 3.   DEPARTMENTAL OPERATIONAL POLICIES
                                                                Page

 1.   Swi tchboard                                              10
 2.   A. & E. Department Medical Staff                          11
 3.   Medical Staff - General                                   12
 4.   Anaesthetic Services                                      14
 5.   Nursing Administration                                    14
 6.   Hospital Administration                                   16
 7.   Medical Records Department                                19
 8.   Bed Bureau                                                19
 9.   X-Ray Department                                          20
10.   Haematology                                               22
11.   Portering                                                 23
12.   CSSD/TSSU                                                 24
13.   Pharmacy                                                  25
14.   E.C.G.                                                    25
15.   E.E.G.                                                    25
16.   Clinical Chemistry                                        26
17.   Post Mortem Technicians                                   26
18.   Social Work Department                                    27
19.   Physiotherapy                                             27
20.   Orthopaedic Appliance Makers                              27
21.   Operating Department Assistants                           28
22.   Chap 1ains                                                28
23.   Securi ty                                                 28
24.   Laundry                                                   29
25.   Catering                                                  29
26.    Estates Management                                       30
27.    Domestic Services Department                             31




                                     - 9 -
SWITCHBOARD
A.      The operator who receives the alert to telephone IMMEDIATELY:-
        (i)     Ambulance Control or Police on ex directory number to
                check the call is not a hoax and then confirm with the
                Switchboard at the Northern General Hospital.
        (ii)    Inform either:-   1. Consultant in A. & E.
                                   2. Senior Registrar in A. & E.
                                   3. Senior Registrar in Surgery.
                The first of the above doctors to be contacted will
                instruct the Switchboard Operator whether or not the
                Major Accident Procedure is to be implemented.
                If the Switchboard Operator is instructed to implement
                the procedure the following staff should be telephoned.
        (iii)   The Senior Assistant     Matron or Assistant Matron on
                duty.
        (iv)    Accident and Emergency Reception.
                When Department closed, Accident & Emergency Consultant
                or Senior Registrar.
        (v)     The Orthopaedic Senior House Officer on take.
        (vi)    Chairman of the Medical Staff Committee.
        (vii)   Specials On-Call Anaesthetist.
        (viii) Porters' Lodge.
        (ix)    General Surgical House Surgeons.
        (x)     On-Call Blood Transfusion Technician.
        (xi)    Contact the Superintendent Radiographer Accident and
                 Orthopaedic, X-Ray (ext. 2640). If not available or
                 after 5.00 p.m. contact the On-Call Radiographer.
        (xii)   On-Call Radiologist.
B.      Another Operator on duty will telephone:-
        (i)     Any other operator at home to request her to telephone
                all other operators and ask them to report to the
                hospital.
        (ii)    On-Call Administrator.
        (iii)    Patients Services Officer or Deputy Patients Services
                 Officer.




                                       - 10 -
        (iv)    On-Call House Staff in E.N.T., Orthopaedics not on take,
                 Neurosurgery, Medicine and Ophthalmic Surgery.
        (v)     On-Call Physiotherapist.
        (vi)    Clinical Chemistry M.L.S.0. On-Call.
        (vii)   On-Call Pharmacist (If not available after 10 minutes,
                ring down master list of Pharmacists until one is
                contacted.)
        (viii) On-Call E.C.G. Technician (If not readily available,
                contact any Technician on the list).
        (ix)    Histopathologist and M.L.S.O. (according to list).
        (x)     E.E.G. Technician.
        (xi)    Senior Dining Room Supervisor or Catering Manager.
        (xii)   Social Worker.
        (xiii) Chaplain.
        (xiv)   Engineer or emergency Wo'"ks Control Centre out-of-office
                 hours.
ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT MEDICAL STAFF
(i)     The Accident and Emergency Consultant on-call will be
         contacted by the switchboard and will decide whether to implement
         the procedure and will then proceed to the Q N o npAccidentUnit))
         Office area (telephone ext. 2178) in the AccTHent and Emergency
         Department in order to co-ordinate the reception, assessment and
         treatment of casualties.
        In the absence of the Accident & Emergency Consultant the On-Take
        Surgeon will undertake this role.
(ii)    The Casualty Officers will clear the Accident and Emergency
         Department as soon as possible. Patients will be sent home
         directly after treatment or asked to return home and be seen by
         their General Practitioner. Any patients requiring transport
         will be directed to the Physiotherapy Gymnasium to await
         transport.
        The Senior House Officer will notify the Accident and Emergency
        Consultant of the staffing situation, who will make arrangements
        to clear the department of patients and man the Resuscitation
        Area and Moderately Injured Area.
(iii)   The Switchboard will contact the Orthopaedic House Surgeon on
         duty who will in turn inform the Orthopaedic Registrar and Senior
         Registrar and Consultant and will then proceed to the assessment
         point.
             The Orthopaedic Senior Registrar will join the Senior House
             Officer and the Senior Registrar in Accident and Emergency at the
             assessment point as soon as possible.
     (iv)   The Anaesthetist on-call will be notified by the switchboard and
             will proceed to the Accident and Emergency Department and call in
             any additional staff required.
     (v)    The Accident and Emergency Senior House Officers will go to
             Resuscitation Area where they will be joined by the Orthopaedic
             Senior House Officer when he becomes free from the assessment
             area. The Accident and Emergency Senior House Officer will stay
             in the "Moderately Injured" area. As additional staff arrive
             they will be directed by the Accident and Emergency Consultant to
             the following areas:-
             A      Control Point
             B      Major Injury Area
             C      Moderately Injured Area
             D      Major Injury Area
     (vi)   The Accident and Emergency Control will be established in the
             Accident and Emergency Office Area (extn. 2178) and will be
             staffed by the Accident and Emergency Consultant, Assistant
             Matron (Accident and Emergency or Deputy) and an Assistant
             Administrator.
3.   MEDICAL STAFF - (Non Accident and Emergency)
     The organisation of medical staff in the Accident and Emergency, and
     Orthopaedic Departments will be at the direction of the Accident and
     Emergency Consultant. The following sections give an indication of how
     the area w i 11 operate.
     (i )   Orthopaedic Staff
             The Orthopaedic Senior House Officer will be alerted by the
             Switchboard and will inform the Orthopaedic Senior Registrar,
             Registrar and Consultant and will then go to the assessment area
             to assist the Accident and Emergency Senior Registrar.
             The Consultant will report to the non-Accident Unit either to man
             the Accident and Emergency Department control in the absence of
             the Accident and Emergency Consultant or to work as suggested by
             the Accident and Emergency Consultant. He will make contact with
             other Orthopaedic Consultants as necessary.
             The Orthopaedic Senior Registrar and Registrar having been        0
             contacted will proceed to the Orthopaedic Clinic entrance to lead
             the assessment team. At an appropriate time, the Orthopaedic
             Senior House Officer will support the Accident and Emergency
             Senior House Officers in the Resuscitation Area.




                                        - 12 -
      (i i)          E.N.T.
                     The E.N.T. Senior House Officer will be informed by the
                     Switchboard that a major accident has occurred and will proceed
                     to Ward Gl to make arrangements and clear the ward for the
                     reception of casualties.
      (iii)          Consultant General Surgeon On-Take
                     The Consultant General Surgeon on-take will be informed by his
                     House Officer that a major accident has occurred and will report
                     to the Accident and Emergency Control and then determine his
                     appropriate course of action.
      (iv)           The Chairman or Secretary of the Medical Staff Committee
                     On being alerted by the Switchboard, the Chairman or, if he is
                     Consultant General Surgeon on-take, the Secretary of the Medical
                     Staff Committee will report to the General Manager's Office to
                     set up the hospital control.
       (v)           Neurosurgery, and Ophthalmic Surgery Consultants
                     These staff will be contacted by their Junior Staff and will
                     proceed to the main theatres.
       (vi)          Consultant Physicians
                     The Consultant Physician on-take will be contacted by the RMO and
                     will report to the Accident and Emergency Department to assess
                     the situation.
                     He will determine whether or not to call upon his colleagues for
                     assistance and will set up a base in Room B163A (Unit
                     Accountant's office) on the Administration Corridor in order to
                     contact his colleagues.
                 I Any physicians arriving on site without a specific role should
  f              \ report to Room B163A where the Consultant Physician on-take will
                 \ determine the duties they are to undertake.
  A .0 ^ 7       \

kU 7                 In certain circumstances when the Consultant Physician arrives in
  1          '       the Accident and Emergency Department, following discussion with
                     the senior doctor in Accident and Emergency, he may feel it
                     appropriate to provide immediate medical assistance personally.
                     In such circumstances another doctor should be designated to
                     fulfil his role in Room B163A.
       (vii)          All Junior Staff
                      On being alerted by the Switchboard, junior medical staff will:
       (a)           assess their in-patients to see if they can be discharged or
                     transferred and if necessary inform their consultants of any
                     assistance required.




                                                    - 13 -
     (b)     report to the Accident and Emergency Control in the Non-Accident
             Unit to be allocated to duties in the Department.
4.   ANAESTHETIC SERVICES
     (i)     Switchboard bleeps "Specials" on-call Anaesthetist at the Royal
              Hallamshire Hospital to contact the "First on-call Anaesthetist,
              and direct the First on-call Anaesthetist to the Accident and
              Emergency Department.
             The "Specials" on-call Anaesthetist contacts the Second on-call
             (Senior Registrar) Anaesthetist, then goes himself to the
             Accident and Emergency Department.
     (ii)    The Second on-call (Senior Registrar) informs the
              Consultant Anaesthetist (General) on call for the Royal
              Hallamshire Hospital before leaving for the Accident and
              Emergency Department.
     (iii)   The (General).Consultant Anaesthetist 'on-call' telephones
              another Consultant Anaesthetist and directs him/her to the
              Accident and Emergency Department of the Royal Hallamshire
              Hospital to set up Anaesthetic Control in Room B127 Transit.
     (iv)    The Consultant Anaesthetist (General) 'on-call' for the Royal
              Hallamshire Hospital telephones from his/her home base, six
              Registrar Anaesthetists, six Senior Registrar Anaesthetists and
              three Consultant Anaesthetists, who are told to report to the
              Consultant Anaesthetic Control (Room B127 Transit).
     (v)     The Consultant Anaesthetist (General) on call Royal Hallamshire
              Hospital then proceeds to the Anaesthetic Emergency Control in
              Room B127 Transit.
5.   NURSING ADMINISTRATION
     A list of staff available by telephone is maintained in NURSING
     ADMINISTRATION.
     OUTLINE POLICY
     On being notified of a MAJOR ACCIDENT the Senior Nurse in Charge of the
     Hospital will:
      1.      Inform the Nurse in charge of Accident and Emergency, Transit,
              Theatres (A Floor) and Ward Gl.
      2.      Inform Senior Assistant Matron (General Medicine, Surgery and
              Accident and Emergency).
      3.      Assume the role of 2 above until her arrival in Hospital.




                                         - 14 -
SENIOR ASSISTANT MATRON (General Medicine, Surgery, Accident and
Emergency)   "
1.      On being informed of a MAJOR ACCIDENT proceed to Nursing
        Administration and set up Nurse control.-
2.      Inform Director of Nursing Services, who will inform D.N.O.
        and D.N.S. Community.
3.      Inform Orthopaedic Assistant Matron.
4.      Inform THEATRE MANAGER.
5.      Arrange extra Nursing staff for Ward Gl.
6.      Inform Assistant Matron Out-Patient Department of Major
        Accident.
7.      Liaise with Assistant Matron or Deputy in Accident and Emergency
        and Ward Gl.
8.      Co-ordinate Nursing staff needs calling in extra staff as
        necessary and deploy as necessary.
9.      Instigate Nursing Administration ACTION PLAN.




                                   - 15 -
     Procedure for Theatre Manager
     On receipt of the message 'Major Accident':
     (i)     Contact Theatre Nursing Officer.
     (ii)    Liaise with the duty Surgical and Anaesthetic Consultant.
     (iii)   Provide back up support for other Senior Assistant Matrons as
              need arises.
     (iv)    Inform Senior Operating Department Assistant on duty.

6.   UNIT ADMINISTRATOR
     (i)     Maintain an up-to-date list of telephone numbers of all Unit
             Administrators plus supporting clerical and secretarial staff,
              District General Manager and Assistant General Manager.
     (ii)    Upon hearing that the Major Accident plan is in operation, the
              on-call Administrator should contact the General Manager, other
              on-call Administrators, the on-call Administrator for the
              Northern General Hospital, the District General Manager and
              Assistant General Manager.
             If no other Administrator is available he should ring
             administration clerical and secretarial staff until he finds a
             member of staff to undertake the duties in item (iii).
     (iii)   The first R.H.H. Administrator to be contacted by the Duty
              Administrator should ring down the list of administration
              secretaries and receptionists for a reasonable time.
     (iv)     THE ADMINISTRATOR FIRST TO ARRIVE in the Hospital Administrator's
              office will set up the hospital control ensuring that the
              following services are organised:-
              (a)     Contact is made with Northern General Hospital
                      Administrator and the Police at Snig Hill.
              (b)    If additional staff are required e.g. out of normal
                     working hours, contact should be made with Radio Hallam
                      and Radio Sheffield in order that they may put out the
                      pre-determined message over the air.
              (c)    Portering Services
                      Head Porter and/or Deputy Head Porter contacted and
                      duties carried out as listed.
              (d)    Medical Records
                      Patients' Services Officer or most senior member of
                      Medical Records Staff on site to ensure documentation of
                      all patients and maintenance of a list of all patients.




                                          - 16 -
      (e)    Switchboard
             Ensure that all available telephonists are on duty.
      (f)    P.P.A. (ITU)
             Inform the Senior O.D.A. on duty or on call for the ITU.
      (9 )   C.S.S.D.
             Ensure responsible officer is on duty.
      (h)    Pharmacy
             Ensure responsible officer is on duty.
      ( \)   Linen
             Ensure responsible officer is on duty (by telephoning
             him/her at home if necessary) to supply linen to wards,
             starting with Ward Gl.
      (j)    O.A.M.
              Ensure O.A.M. are available.
      (k)    Catering
             Telephone extn. 2577 to ensure that a responsible officer
             is on duty to provide services as required.
      (1)    Chaplai ns
              Ensure that all Hospital Chaplains are informed that the
              Major Accident Plan is in action.
              Send runners to A Floor Out Patient Department and
              Orthopaedic Desk to relay information between these areas
              and General Manager's office - (Hospital Control).
      (m)    Other Administrators in the District are alerted to
              provide support.
      (n)    Man the hospital control on an ongoing basis unless
              instructed to carry out other duties by a more senior
              officer.
(v)   THE SECOND ADMINISTRATOR TO ARRIVE will man B Floor Reception
      and:-
       (a)   Ensure that the Committee Room is set up for the Press
              using the jack point telephone and that the Press are
              confined to that room and fed with information as
              appropriate.




                                  - 17 -
                            (b)    Ensure information of patients received is gathered by
                                   runner from the Orthopaedic Department entrance in
                                    preparation for informing relatives authoritatively via
                                    the Administrator based in A Floor of the Out Patient
                                    Department. Lists should also be compiled for
                                    Switchboard, Main Reception and the on site Police
                                    control.
                            (c)    Control crowds to ensure adequate access to lifts and
                                    direct Press to Committee Room. Ensure Press stay in
                                    this area and prQvide them with relevant information.
                            (d)    Direct AStaff volunteers to report to Room B164 for
                                    instructions. If necessary, volunteers should be
                    5               instructed to wait in the Board Room while the needs are
                                    determined.
^    S-       |.y           (e)     Ensure information on patients going home from the wards
                        '           via the Physiotherapy Department is collated and passed
                                    on to the Community Nursing Office.
                            (f)    Continue to undertake this role until instructed to carry
      *                            out other duties by a more Senior Officer.
    p-,        (vi)         THE THIRD ADMINISTRATOR TO ARRIVE will go to the Orthopaedic Desk
                            and:-
          r                 (a)    Obtain details of the patients seen in the Accident and
                                    Emergency Department will be sent by runner to the
                                    Hospital Control Point in the General Manager's office.
                            (b)    Obtain details from the on site Police of any patients
                                    admitted to other hospitals and send via runner to
                                    Hospital Control in the General Manager's office.
                            (c)    When there are no further patients to be booked in and
                                    all information has been relayed to Hospital Control,
                                    the Administrator should report to Control for further
                                    instructions.
                            OTHER ADMINISTRATORS TO ARRIVE will man the hospital control and
                            provide information to relatives, press etc as appropriate.
                (vii)       THE FOURTH ADMINISTRATOR TO ARRIVE will man the A Floor relatives
                            area and keep them informed as necessary.
                            The District General Manager or Assistant General Manager will
                            set up the District Control point sited in the Hospital
                            Administrator's office and will call the District Nursing Officer
                            and any other District staff he requires to give assistance.




                                                           - 18 -
7.   MEDICAL RECORDS DEPARTMENT
     (i)     Patients' Services Officer or Deputy Patients' Office and
             Accident and Emergency Reception will be notified by the
             Switchboard.
     (ii)    Accident and Emergency Department Reception staff will notify
             Admissions Office.
     (iii)   Admissions Office staff will notify Medical Records Officer
              and Bed Bureau.
     (iv)    Medical Records Officer will notify member*of staff at home, who
              by pre-arrangement will telephone other Medical Records staff to
              call them into the hospital.
     (v)     Staff on arrival will report to the Admissions Office on B Floor
              and sign in.
     (vi)    Staff will then proceed to the assessment area where they will
              sign an action card and act accordingly.
     (vii)   The Medical Records Officer is responsible for maintaining a
              Major Accident box in which will be found a supply of folders
              containing casualty card, identity bracelet, X-Ray request form,
              blood transfusion request form, operation consent form,
              appropriate bag for clothing and envelope for valuables. A MAJAX
              patient register will also be maintained.
     (viii) The Medical Records Officer will ensure that all documents are
             available in the assessment area and that clerical staff document
             patients as they arrive.
     (ix)    A list of patients will be maintained with details of immediate
              disposal. This information will then be passed via a runner to
              the Main Hospital Control.

8.   BED BUREAU
     Bed Bureau will be notified of a Major Accident by the Admissions Office.
     They will then contact the Medical Referee who will report to the
     District Control in the Hospital Administrator's Office on B Floor,
     R.H.H.
     The Medical Referee will then liaise with other hospitals in the district
     and neighbouring Health Authorities to ensure arrangements are made to
     care for patients needing emergency Hospital admission until the Northern
     General Hospital and Royal Hallamshire Hospital advise him/her that they
     can accept non Majax emergency admissions.




                                         - 19 -
  9.       X-RAY DEPARTMENT
            (i)         A list of staff available by telephone is maintained in the X-ray
                        Departments and at the homes of the Superintendent Radiographers
                        and Senior Staff.




                               WORKING HOURS
                                                  SW ITCHBOARD




                                                   S U P T /S E N IO R      RAD IO G R APH ER

                                                   IN   A /0      X-R A Y    ON   2646




            S U P T /S E N IO R   RADIO G RAP HER                    R A D IO L O G IS T   IN      A /0           MAJAX         CARD   -

            ON    IN -P A T IE N T     X -R A Y                      X-R AY                                       S U P T S .O F F IC E




S U P T /S E N IO R     CONSULTANT                S IS T E R /S T A F F      S U P T /S E N IO R      SETS        UP   CONTROL

O U T -P A TIE N T      R A D IO L O G IS T       NURSE      IP              CT   SCANNERS            IN     IP    STAFF        ROOM

X-R A Y                 IP   X-R A Y              X-R AY                                              ON     2764




MAJAX      CARD-        MAJAX      CARD-          MAJAX      CARD-           MAJAX      CARD-         MAJAX        CARD-

SUPTS      O F F IC E   REPORTING                 NURSES                     SCA N    CONTROL         SUPTS        O F F IC E

                        ROOM                      S T A T IO N                ROOM                        (GWD)



       E                      A                         G                         H                               F
                                                                    - 20 -
                                   OUT OF HOURS
                                               S W IT C H B O A R D




O N -C A LL       RADIO GRAPHER                                                     O N -C A LL    R A D IO L O G IS T

V IA   2646         OR B L E E P                                                    AT   HOME OR V I A              A IR -C A L L


             *                      CALLS      3rd     0 /C     AT      HOME

                                    OR V I A      A IR -C A L L
CALLS        2nd        0 /C                                                        CONTACTS        A     CONSULTANT
(IF    N OT        IN    D EPT,)                                                    R A D IO L O G IS T       AND    OTHER

                                                                                    R A D IO L O G IS T S      AS    R EQ U IR E D
                                    CONTACTS           A S U P T.A T

                                    HOME OR          F A IL IN G        THAT
MAJAX        CARD        -
                                    ANOTHER          S E N IO R
S U P T 'S       O F F IC E                                                         ASSEMBLE        IN        REPORTING
                                    R ADIO GRAPHER

         B                                           I
                                                                                    ROOM ON       C F L OO R




                                    U S IN G    IN F O R M A T IO N

                                    P R O V ID E D     BY     O /C      STAFF,
                                                                                    MAJAX     CARD        -
                                    CALLS       OU T    S U F F IC IE N T
                                                                                    REPORTING           ROOM
                                    RADIO GRAPHERS                 AND D / R

                                    TECHS,

                                    OF WHO T H E Y
                                                  KEEPS        A

                                                              HAVE
                                                                     L IS T
                                                                                            A
                          ✓         T R IE D /F O U N D .



1ST    A R R IV A L

                                    GOES T O         DEPT,         TO    L IA S E

                                    W ITH      S U P T /S E N IO R       IN
MAJAX        CARD         -         DEPT.

 IP    SUPTS         O F F IC E

 (GWD)



\c/                                                            - 21 -
10.   HAEMATOLOGY AND BLOOD BANK
              normal working hours)
      “[ D u r i n g


           (i) The telephone operator will inform the blood bank staff that a
               'Major Accident' has occurred.
         (ii) Senior Member of staff present will proceed as follows:-
                   (a)       Contact the Blood Transfusion Service and request the
                             immediate supply of:-
                             20   units   0+
                             20   units   A+
                             20   units   0-
                             20   units   A-
                             10   units   B+
                             50   units   Plasma
                       (b)   Organise an adequate supply of equipment and materials
                             (antisera, saline etc.)
                       (c)   Organise the service to supply suitable and/or compatible
                             blood according to the requests CLEARLY made.
        (iii) When the immediate need for urgency has passed, the senior member
              of Blood Bank Staff should institute a "search" to ensure that
              blood and blood products removed from the Blood Bank but not used
              are returned and not wasted unnecessarily.

        HAEMATOLOGY AND BLOOD BANK
        (Out of normal working hours)
        General
        A list of names and telephone numbers of staff is issued weekly to
        Switchboard.
        In the event of a 'Major Accident1 the following procedure of calling
        staff should be adopted:-
                       Inform the person who is already on-call for emergency blood
                       bank duty. If the person on-call is already working in the Royal
                       Hallamshire Hospital Blood Bank, it is imperative that he must be
                       able to telephone out. Such outgoing calls will activate the
                       procedure.
        Internal
        On receipt of the 'Major Accident' warning the person on-call will
        contact the member of staff on-call for the diagnostic haematology who




                                                    - 22 -
      will immediately telephone the Blood Transfusion Service requesting the
      immediate delivery of:-
      20    units   0+
      20    units   0-
      20    units   A+
      20    units   A-
      10    units   B+
      50    units   Plasma
      He will subsequently telephone a third person from the on-call list.
      The third person will then contact a fourth person from home.       All will
      proceed to the laboratory as quickly as possible.
      The senior member present will organise within the Blood Bank:-
      (a)      the reception of samples;
      (b)      the provision of essential equipment (anti-sera, saline slides
               etc.);
      (c)      Organise the rapid preparation and issue of suitable and/or
               compatible blood according to the requirements CLEARLY made on the
               request.
11.   PORTERING
      (i)      The Switchboard will contact Porters' Lodge who will inform the
               Head Porter or the Senior Deputy who will be responsible for
               contacting other members of staff. The Assistant Head Porter on
               the Porters' Lodge will also inform Main Reception.
      (ii) The staff will report to the Assistant Head Porter at the        Porters'
            Lodge.
       (iii) The Assistant Head Porter on duty at the Porters' Lodge will ensure
             that:-
               (a)     the assessment areas are clear of chairs;
                (b)    stretchers, trolleys and wheelchairs from Transit are
                        available in the Accident and Emergency and Orthopaedic
                        areas.
                (c)    Porters are sent to Accident and Emergency Department to
                        assist Sister-in-charge with transportation of patients.
                (d)    Porters are sent to Ward G1 to assist with transferring and
                       clearing patients. Discharged patients will be taken to the
                       Physiotherapy Department until transport has been arranged.
                (e)    Extra linen is supplied to the wards beginning with Ward Gl.




                                            - 23 -
             (f)    Barrier off A Floor of O.P.D. between Ambulance Waiting/WRVS
                    and MOP/MOPX.
             (g)    Relatives are taken to the A Floor Main Entrance Foyer in
                    Outpatient Department.
             (h)    The Press are taken to the Committee Room.
             (i)    Lift control is undertaken.
12.   T.S.S.U./C.S.S.D.
      (i)    An Administrator will contact either the Sterile Services Manager
             or her deputy
             Mrs.
             Mrs.
             If neither of the above are available the Administrator should make
             arrangements to contact other staff.
      (ii)   The first person contacted will then be responsible for contacting
             the rest of the available staff to come in. Other staff who hear
             of the accident should report to the department in the first
             instance.
      (iii) Staff attending will, under the direction of the most senior member
            of staff:-
             (a)    give priority to Orthopaedic, Neurosurgical and General
                    Surgery instruments;
             (b)    ensure the distribution of sterile trays, instruments and
                    supplementary packs is continued;
             (c)    arrange to "top-up" the Accident and Emergency Department,
                    Ward Gl, ITU, Ward N2, Theatres and any other area as
                    required.
             (d)    be available on extn. 2817 to ensure that C.S.S.D. requests
                    are processed and extra procedure packs and ward instruments
                    are made available for Accident and Emergency Department and
                    Wards.
             (e)    advise the Hospital Administrator if extra instruments are
                    required from the Children's Hospital.
             THE FOLLOWING DAY - Particularly at weekend or Bank Holiday
             The Sterile Services Manager or Deputy should be contacted to
             assess if staff are required to perform the following duties:-
      (i)    Process used theatre trays.




                                            - 24 -
      (ii)   Make up C.S.S.D. ward packs as required.
      (iii) "Top-up" wards as required paying particular attention to
            Casualty, Theatres, Wards Gl, N2 and ITU.
      (iv)   Empty Theatre Hatches.
      (v)    Collect used instruments from the wards.

13.   PHARMACY
      (i)    The Switchboard will contact the on-call Pharmacist who will
             be responsible for contacting other available staff.
      (ii)   If the Switchboard receives no response after 10 minutes
             they should ring down the master list of Pharmacists until one can
             be contacted who will undertake the role of the Duty Pharmacist.
      (iii) The department has stocks of certain items which are most
            1ikely to be in demand.
      (iv)) Pharmacy Staff will deliver items on demand.
      (v)    Patients being discharged who require urgent medication
             should be given priority.
14.   E.C.G. DEPARTMENT
      (i)      Switchboard will inform the Senior Chief Technician either on
               bleep 195 or at home. If she cannot be contacted the Switchboard
               Operator will ring down the master list of Technicians until one is
               informed.
      (ii)     The first Technician to be contacted will inform all other
               colleagues who are required to report for duty.
      (iii) E.C.G. Technicians will be available in department on bleep 193/194
            for use as required during normal working hours.
      (iv)     All other staff in the In-Patient Department will report to general
               muster point for duties as required.

15.   E.E.G.
      Switchboard Operator to contact the E.E.G. Technician on-cal1.
      (Dr. Gumpert arranges for an on-call rota to be supplied to Switchboard
      at the beginning of each month).




                                      - 25 -
16.    Cl INICAL CHEMISTRY
       Major Accident Plan
       If the hospital's major accident plan is activated during normal working
       hours? senior staff will organise the work of the department as appears
       to be appropriate under the circumstances.
       Outside normal working hours, the on-call MLSO will be informed by the
       hospital switchboard that the hospital's Major Accident Plan has been put
       into operation.
       If the MLSO is within the hospital, he should at once telephone a senior
       member of laboratory staff and inform him that the Major Accident Plan
       has been activated. A list of senior staff member's telephone numbers is
       he^d in the Hot Area. It may be impossible to telephone out of the
       hospital via the dial '9' facility as the switchboard will almost
       certainly be overloaded. In such circumstances use the public telephone
       fn the F or H Floor lift hall, using the lOp coins held for the purpose
       in the "Hot Area".
       If the MLSO is at home he       should contact a senior member of staff before
       leaving for the hospital.
        When a senior member of staff is informed that the Major Accident Plan
        has been activated, he should inform at least two other staff members,
       ■includlnq the Head of Department or his deputy by telephone from home,
        before l i v i n g for the hospital. All staff so informed should proceed to
        the hospi tal.
 17.   POST MORTEM TECHNICIANS
        It is possible that large numbers of dead patients may have to be
        accommodated in the Royal Hallamshire Hospital in the event of a Major
        Accident as the Ambulance Service may not have the ■r esources to_take
        bodies to the Medico-Legal Centre after they have been certified dead.
        The following arrangements will therefore obtain:-

        Call-Out
        The Switchboard will have a list of Histopathology Medical and Scientific
        staff     Mortuary Technicians and will ring the home numbers if
                  a n d

        appropriate until a response is obtained.

         Duties
         Post Mortem Technicians should report to the Post Mortem Suite to:-
         (i)      receive bodies from the portering staff who will bring them from
                  the holding area in the Orthopaedic Clinic.
         (ii)      complete as much o f the documentation related to the body as
                   possible.




                                              - 26 -
       (iii) keep the bodies in order in the Post Mortem Suite.
       (iv)   arrange for viewing individually in the Viewing Room.
18.    SOCIAL WORK DEPARTMENT
       (i)    The Group Principal Social Worker will be contacted by
              Switchboard.
       (ii)   All available staff will be contacted by the Group Principal or
              Principal Social Worker by telephone from home. All staff should
              report to the Main Desk in A Floor of the Out Patient Department.
       (iii) Medical Social Workers will liaise with Social Services Departments
             arranging services for discharged patients and for patients
             receiving minor injuries to the incident who are allowed home.
       (iv)   The Social Work Department cash box will be made available if
              necessary. The cash box is stored in the Cashier's Office.
19.    PHYSIOTHERAPY STAFF      (See Appendix 2 - Page 42)
       (i)    The on-call Physiotherapist will be notified by Switchboard that
              a Major Accident has occurred.
       (ii)   The on-call Physiotherapist will telephone her Head of Department
              or Deputy before coming to the department and will remain on bleep.
       (iii) The Head of Department or Deputy will contact all other staff from
             home.
       (iv)   All staff will report to the Physiotherapy Department and assist
              with return of patients to wards, and of non MAJAX patients for
              discharge to B Floor Medical School (door 6).
        (v)   A member of staff within the Physiotherapy Department will be
              designated to arrange ambulance, taxi and other necessary transport
              to discharge patients.
        (vi) A member of staff will be designated to man extn. 2420 adjacent to
              the Medical School B Floor entrance and will inform Physiotherapy
              of the arrival of transport.
        (vii) Patients involved in the Majax or relatives and friends should be
               escorted to A Floor of the Out Patient Department via the A Floor
               connecting corridor to the Out Patient Department.
        (viii)Requests for physiotherapy will be through the on-call
              Physiotherapist via the switchboard.
 20.    ORTHOPAEDIC APPLIANCE MAKERS
        Orthopaedic Appliance Makers are called out as required by the
        Administrator.




                                       - 27 -
21.   OPERATING DEPARTMENT ASSISTANTS
      The Theatre Manager or Deputy is informed by the Nurse in charge of the
      hospital that a 'Major Accident' has occurred and makes contact with the
      Senior Operating Department Assistant on duty for the Operating Theatres.
      He then contacts as many members of their staff as possible and ask them
      to report for duty. The Senior Operating Department Assistant in
      Theatres deploys staff according to need.
      The Senior O.D.A. (ITU) on duty or on-call will be informed by the
      Administrator and will contact as many members of his staff as possible
      to report for duty.
      (The ITU based Operating Department Assistant allocates staff round the
      hospital after discussion with the Accident and Emergency Department
      Control.)
22.   CHAPLAINS OF ALL DENOMINATIONS
      (i)    Switchboard will contact the Hospital Chaplain by bleep numbers
             206 and 500. The Hospital Chaplain will then contact the part-time
             Free Church and Roman Catholic Chaplain.
      (ii)   Chaplains will assemble at the Main Desk, A Floor, Out Patient
             Department.
      (iii) Liaise with the Social Workers to set up a reception area for
            relatives. One Chaplain will be based in the Accident and
            Emergency Department.
23.   SECURITY STAFF
      (i)    Staff on duty will receive notification from the Accident and
             Emergency Reception.
      (ii)   One man on duty w i 11:-
             (a)   Lock all entrances/exits other than the Orthopaedic Clinic,
                   C Road, Medical School, B Road, B Road Main Entrance and
                   Out-Patient Department (during weekdays).
                   Outside normal working hours, the main Out Patient Department
                   doors opposite Reception on A Floor should be opened as
                   should the central doors on A Floor linking the Out Patient
                   Department and the main building and the B Road Medical
                   School Doors and the University Domestics Office adjacent to
                   the B Floor Medical School Doors.
             (b)   Unlock the Physiotherapy Department if it is locked and
             (c)   Place the "Department Closed" signs outside:-
                   the Accident and Emergency Department
                    and on Claremont Place.




                                         - 28 -
      (iii) The second man on duty will remain behind in the office at all
            times to give out keys as required. He will then telephone another
            Security Officer at home and ask him to call in all other staff.
      (iv)   All other Security staff will report to the Administrator at
             B Floor Reception to carry out the following duties:-
             (a)     Control Press on B Floor.
             (b)    To be available in Orthopaedic area to take charge of any
                   excess amounts of valuables.
             (c)   To assist with the control of staff/patients on B Floor.
             (d)   Assist the Police with traffic control in hospital roads
                    and car park.
24.   LAUNDRY
      (i)    The Laundry Manager or one of his/her assistants will be
              contacted by the Administrator and they will contact other staff as
              necessary.
      (ii)   On arrival at the hospital he/she will liaise with portering staff
             and if necessary will take emergency linen trolleys to:-
             (a)   Ward G1
             (b)   Transit Ward
      (iii) He/she will remain available on the Laundry Manager's bleep (197)
             to take linen to other areas as required.
      (iv) Other Laundry staff who hear of the Major Accident will report to
            the Laundry for instructions.
25.   CATERING DEPARTMENT
      (i)    The Catering Manager/Assistant Managers will be contacted by the
              senior person in the kitchen to come to the hospital. The
              Managers, if available, will at the same time contact Dining Room
              Supervisors and Kitchen Supervisors and any personnel necessary.
      (ii)   Other staff who hear of the accident should report to the Catering
             Department in the first instance but may be re-directed to B Floor
             Reception to give general assistance.
      (iii) The Department will provide free food and beverages as requested
            by Administration and call staff in as necessary.




                                      - 29 -
26.   DEPARTMENT OF ESTATES MANAGEMENT
      During Normal Working Hours
      In the event of a Major Accident during normal working hours (0900 to
      1720 hours) the Switchboard Operator will contact the emergency works
      extn. 2899.
      Clerical Officer - Ext. 2899
      The Clerical Officer receiving the call will contact the most senior
      Unit Works Officer available, by bleep or by telephone.
      Unit Works Staff
      On being notified, the Unit Works Officer or most senior officer
      available shall draw a bleep from the pool in Room B179 and report to the
      Mai ax Control in the General Manager's Office, B Floor, Royal Hallamshire
      Hospital. He will notify the Control Centre of the bleep number on which
      he can be contacted if Works support is required, and then return to his
      normal duties carrying the bleep.
      Outside Normal Working Hours
      In the event of a Major Accident outside normal working hours (1720 to
      0900 hours) the Switchboard Operator will contact the Works Emergency
      Control in the Boiler House (extn. 2332).
      Attendant on duty at Works Emergency Control
      On receipt of a call stating that a Major Accident has occurred (note
      there is no specific code phrase as previously) the attendant on duty
      wi 11: -
       (i)    bleep the Chargehand on duty and inform him that a Major
              Accident has been notified.
       (ii)   telephone the on-call Supervisor and notify him that a Major
              Accident has been notified.
       (iii) complete a DW 18 stating "Major Accident Notified".
       (iv)   arrange to turn on heating and/or ventilation to Out Patient
              Department and B Floor Administration offices so that relatives can
              be accommodated in comfort.
       Chargehand
       On beinq notified, the Chargehand will report to the Majax Control in
       the Hospital Administrator's Office, B Floor, Royal Hallamshire Hospital.
       He will notify the Control Centre of his bleep number on which he can be
       contacted if Works support is required, prior to the arrival of the
       on-cal1 Supervisor. He will then return to his duties and obtain a
       craftsman's bleep to hand to the on-call Supervisor when he arrives.




                                         - 30 -
      On-Call Supervisor
      On being notified, the on-call Supervisor must proceed immediately to
      the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, draw a craftsman's bleep from the
      Chargehand and report to the Majax Control in the General Manager's
      Office, B Floor, Royal Hallamshire Hospital. He will notify the Control
      Centre of the bleep number on which he can be contacted if Works support
      is required and then leave the Control Centre but remain in the Hospital,
      and await any contact.
27.   DOMESTIC SERVICES DEPARTMENT
      (i)    The Administrator will contact the senior person on duty in the
             Domestic Services Department who in turn if the situation occurs
             out of normal working hours will contact the Domestic Services
             Manager and/or the Deputy Domestic Services Manager.
      (ii)   In liaison with the Administrator, the Domestic Services Manager
             will re-deploy and/or arrange extra staff to undertake the extra
             cleaning duties and to provide support with refreshments in
             Accident and Emergency, Theatres, Wards,Out-Patients and in any
             other location.
      (iii) Domestic Services staff who hear of the accident should report to
            the Domestic Services Department on C Floor where co-ordination of
            the departments efforts is taking place.




                                     - 31 -
          SECTION 4. INFORMATION RELATING TO INCIDENTS INVOLVING
                CONTAMINATION BY CHEMICALS OR RADIOACTIVITY


1.   DANGEROUS CHEMICALS
     Expert Advice and assistance can be obtained from:-
     A.    The National Chemical Emergency Centre
           Tel.                ext
     B.    Guy's Hospital
           Tel.
     The procedures to follow will be those invoked for any Major Accident
     with the exception that there must be a demarcation line established
     in the Accident and Emergency Department to separate "clean and
     "dirty" areas in terms of contamination. This also applies to
     Ambulance Personnel who may accidently become contaminated. Blankets
     and stretchers used in the "dirty" areas must not cross the
     demarcation line.
     On stand down from the emergency situation staff engaged on the
     "dirty" side of the demarcation line should use the shower facilities
     on site or alternatively the Fire Brigade may be requested to provide
     decontamination facilities which may also be used for items of
     equipment.

     RADIOACTIVITY
     Expert advice and assistance can be obtained from:
     A.    Medical Physics Department
           Weston Park Hospital
            T e l . Tie Line          or            during normal working hours.
     B.     A.E.R.E.
            Tel.               ext.                   (working hours)
            Tel.               ext.                   (other hours)




                                           - 32 -
Name                  Hospital          Home Address            Home Tel No
                      Tel Extn
Mr                    RHH        2313                           Sheffield
                                        Sheffield

Mrs                   RHH        2822                           Chesterfield
                                        Chesterfield

Mr._______            BDGH       2389                           Barnsley
(Barnsley HA)                           Peni stoner
                                        Sheffield

Dr W D FIatman        RDGH        264                           Sheffield
(Rotherham HA)                          Sheffield

Dr D Ottewell         DRI         312                           Doncaster
(Doncaster HA)                          Barnby Dur^
                                        Doncaster

Mr                    C&NDRH     2420                  Walton   Chesterfield
                                        Chesterfi eld S40 3HF
University
Radiation Safety
Officer               SU         6190

Mr                    WPH        2326                           Sheffield
                                        Sheffield
       (i)    An area should be set aside (the "dirty area") for the
              reception of casualties and should be covered with plastic
              sheeting.
       (ii)     Protective clothing should be issued for all staff who will
                handle the patient.
       (iii) A plentiful supply of paper towels and tissue should be
             avai1able.
       (iv)     Large polythene or paper bags will be needed for the collection
                of the patient's clothing and contaminated equipment etc.
       (v)    An area should be cleared where the ambulance can wait for
               monitoring and possible decontamination.
       (vi)     A limited number of staff should be appointed to handle the
                patient and a person should be designated to log the movements
                of any of those staff who must leave the "dirty" area after the
                casualties have arrived, in order to minimise the difficulty of
                tracing contamination.




                                            - 33 -
(vii) If other areas of the hospital become involved in handling the
      patient, e.g. a theatre or intensive care unit, similar
      arrangements should be made for these areas as appropriate.
The following initial decontamination procedure should be followed:-
(i)    Experience has shown that washing with soap and water will
       effectively remove contaminated material from the skin in most
       cases. Initial treatment and any necessary washing to remove
       as much of the suspected contamination as practicable should be
       done in the "dirty" area.
(ii)   Open wounds should be irrigated. Special care needs to be
       taken in the cleaning of areas near the eyes and in preventing
       the spread of possible contamination to other parts of the
       body.
(iii) It will usually be possible to seek further expert advice from
      a designated hospital before proceeding beyond the initial
      treatment stage, it is inadvisable to excise wounds unless
      contamination is obvious or unless surgically indicated before
      monitoring assistance is available.
As far as is reasonably practicable, all scattered radioactive
material and contaminated surface materials (e.g. soil, herbage etc)
should be collected and contained in order to minimise the amount of
residual contamination which may subsequently have to be flushed into
sewers or watercourses. The consent of the Department of Environment
Senior Radiochemical Inspector (tel. 01 273 4014 during office hours
a n d d u r i n g silent hours) should be obtained before any
flushing is undertaken but if decontamination by flushing is urgently
necessary before the Department can be contacted, then sufficient
flushing water should be used to keep the activity of the effluent
below the following limits and the Senior Radiochemical Inspector
should be informed of the action taken as soon as circumstances
permit.
1.     500 microcuries per 1,000 gallons of water for discharge to
       sewers;
2.     50 microcuries per 1,000 gallons of water for discharge into a
       watercourse.
 Incident Reports
 In order that the effectiveness of NAIR can be assessed, a brief
 report on each incident will be required from the radiation staff
 involved and should be sent to the National Radiological Protection
 Board, Harwell, Didcot, 0X11 0RQ (tel. 023 583 600) as soon as
 possible. This is in addition to any police report and should cover
 the following points:-




                            - 34 -
1.     Date, location and time of incident.
2.     Nature of incident and who reported incident.
3.     Assessment of radiological hazard, whether present or not.
4.     Nature of assistance given and any difficulties encountered.
5.     Whether Second Stage assistance was sought.
6.     Effectiveness of arrangements.
7.     Outcome of incident.
Casualties exposed to large doses of radiation
It is not intended that the Royal Hallamshire Hospital should treat
casualties affected by a high radiation dose such as might occur from
an accident at a nuclear power station or Ministry of Defence
establishment. Facilities for the treatment of persons suffering
from severe whole body irradiation exist at the following hospitals.
Enquiries about treatment or admission of casualties should be made
to the appropriate officer or department indicated.
(1)    The Hammersmith Hospital,
        Duncane Road,
        London, W12 OHS.
        Tel No. 01 743 2030
        (The Duty Medical Registrar)
(2)    The Middlesex Hospital,
        Mortimer Street,
        London, WIN 8AA.
        (Tel No. 01 636 8333)
        (The Admitting Medical Officer)
(3)     The Royal Marsden Hospital,
        Fulham Road,
        London, SW3 6JJ.
        (Tel No. 01 352 8171)
        (The Medical Physics Department)
 (4)    The Royal Marsden Hospital,
        Downs Road,
        Sutton,
        Surrey. SM2 5PT.
        (Tel No. 01 642 6011)
        (The Medical Physics Department)




                               - 35 -
                                  STAND DOWN

The Police and Ambulance Control at the site of the disaster will have kept the
Accident and Emergency Department informed of the numbers of casualties injured
at the disaster, so that they can prepare for their arrival.
When all casualties have left the disaster area, the Police and Ambulance
Controls will inform the Accident and Emergency Department.
Accident and Emergency Department Control and the Hospital Control will consult
and agree when the Accident and Emergency Department has cleared casualties and
is able to return to normal.
The Hospital Control will then consult with other control desks and establish
what extra services will be needed over the next 24 hours and inform those
departments who can return to normal levels of service that they can stand
down"   The Hospital Control will inform other departments of the services that
they will need to provide for the next 24 hours and confirm that these needs
can be met.
When departments feel that they have concluded their contribution to the
disaster they should notify the Hospital Control that they are reverting to
normal service.
The Hospital Control will continue to monitor the need for additional services
and co-ordinate press statements and other activities in the following days.
The Hospital Control will liaise with the Police to ensure that relatives are
informed where casualties have been taken and what arrangements are being made
to trace missing persons, and to identify any unidentified casualties and to
identify the dead.




                                     - 36 -
                          COPING WITH THE AFTERMATH


After a major disaster, it is important that staff are offered an opportunity
and encouraged to talk through the events that have occurred.
As soon as possible after the disaster, the Hospital Administrator will
circulate to all Heads of Department, information about the counselling
services available including telephone numbers of Helplines, counselling
services and the Family and Community Services Task Group.
Heads of Department should make arrangements for debriefing of staff as soon
as possible.
The Occupational Health Service will be available to provide confidential,
professional counselling for any member of staff who requires it. Any
individual member of staff can approach them. Any Head of Department who is
concerned about any of their staff should ask Occupational Health for advice on
how best to offer support and help.
During debriefing meetings, Heads of Departments will receive comments about
the way the Hospital responded. These comments should be forwarded to the
Hospital Administrator to assist in planning for future major disasters.




                                       - 37 -
                             DEBRIEFING OF STAFF


After a major disaster, many staff will have been involved in caring for the
injured, their relatives and the bereaved. Even staff who normally work with
patients and relatives may find that a major disaster is stressfull.
Heads of Departments should ensure that all staff have an opportunity to meet
in a group (large departments may need to organise several groups) to talk
through the events, how the hospital as a whole coped, how their department
responded and to emphasise areas that worked well, as well as identify areas
for improvement.
Staff who did not come in should also be involved and assured that their help
is needed now to support their colleagues who are tired and to cope with the
increased workload which occurs for a time after the event.
Heads of Departments should ensure that staff who have been under pressure,
worked long hours or were upset by the event are given time off to rest and
relax. These measures will be all that the majority of staff need to come to
terms with the events. Some staff may need more help in coming to terms with
their feelings about the disaster. Various organisations who normally are
involved in counselling will be available to help individuals e.g. C.R.U.S.E.,
Relate (marriage guidance), Hospital Occupational Health Services and Hospital
Chaplains are also available for individuals or groups who need more
professional help.
After a disaster, Family and Community Services will establish a 'Help Line'
for individuals to seek advice and be directed to appropriate organisations
offering practical help and counselling.
Health Service Psychology Departments will also provide help in leading group
discussions and individual counselling. Details of these services will be
circulated as soon as possible after the event.




                                       - 38 -
                                    VISITS


After major disasters, it is probable that a number of public figures will wish
to visit the hospital to thank staff for the work they have done and are
continuing to do and to meet the injured and their relatives.
In a major disaster, both the Northern General Hospital and the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital will be involved. Therefore, the District General Manager
himself or his nominee will co-ordinate the arrangements for those public
figures who are making official visits to both Hospitals.
The Unit General Manager and the Hospital Administrator will co-ordinate
arrangements within the Royal Hallamshire Hospital liaising with other Heads of
Departments as required and ensuring that any security arrangements requested
by the Police can be met.
"Official" visitors are deemed Members of the Royal Family and members of the
Government only. "Official" visitors will be accompanied by the Unit General
Manager and a few other staff he selects on a route planned in conjunction with
their representatives, the Police and the Regional Health Authority Public
Relations Officer.
Members of Parliament including members of the opposition may visit in a
private capacity only.
Any clergy who wish to visit, will make private pastoral visits to those
patients, relatives and staff who wish to meet them.


Following a major disaster, patients, their relatives and the hospital staff
will be the object of much attention from the media. Many people find
prolonged publicity stressful, and unwelcome, particularly when they are coming
to terms with after effects of a major disaster. The Unit General Manager will
designate one person to co-ordinate visits so that individual patients,
relatives and staff are not subjected to unwelcome attention or publicity.
Apart from the official visits of members of the Royal Family and members of
the Government, other visits will be conducted in as unobtrusive and low key
manner as possible.
Press inquiries will be channelled through the Hospital Administrator's office
and after a few days should be reduced to basic statements about the numbers of
patients still in hospital, and the numbers of discharges or deaths.




                                     - 39 -
                                                                     APPENDIX 1




                                MAJAX AREA CONTROLS - R.H.H.
                    Control Desks will be set up in the following areas



Control Desk        For Areas    Manned By             Phone No-    Purpose
Unit General                     Hospital Control                   Hospital Liaison
Manager's Office
- B 167


Hospital                         District GM/                       District Liaison.
Admini strator' s                District Staff
Office - B 170
Accident and        A & E        Person delegated                   A & E Services.
Emergency Offices                by Senior A & E                    Co-ordination of
B 307b                           Medic.                             Staff and Requests.
Transit - B 127                  Cons. Anaesthetist                 Anaesthetic Services.
                                 (General) On Cal 1                 Co-ordination of
                                                                    Staff and Requests.
Unit Accountants                 Cons. Physician                    1. Receive calls from
Office - B 163a                  On Take                               Medical Staff
                                                                       Volunteers to help.
                                                                    2. To co-ordinate
                                                                       requests for extra
                                                                       Medical help.
                                                                    3. To organise the
                                                                       deployment
                                                                       of Medics.
Orthopaedic - B80                S.Y.M.A.S.                         Ambulance Liaison
                                 Personnel
A & E - B 306                    Police Personnel                    Police Liaison
Nursing                          Assistant Matron                    1. Receive calls from
Administration                                                          from Nursing Staff
- B 145                                                                 Volunteers to help
                                                                     2. To co-ordinate
                                                                        requests for extra
                                                                        Nursing help.
                                                                     3. To organise the
                                                                        deployment of
                                                                        nurses.




                                              - 40 -
Control Desk      For Areas      Manned By               Phone No.   Purpose
Main Reception    O.P.D.         Social Work/                        1. Base for relatives
'A' Floor OPD                    Chaplains                           2. Area for
                                                                        counselling for
                                                                        relatives and
                                                                        offers of help
                                                                        from Volunteer
                                                                        Counsellors.
                                                                     3. Co-ordinates lists
                                                                        of offers of
                                                                        Transport and
                                                                        Accommodation for
                                                                        Relatives.
Main Reception                   Person delegated by                 1. Receive calls from
*B ‘ Floor                       Hospital Control                       all other Staff
                                                                        Volunteers.
                                                                     2. Receive calls
                                                                        from al1 Non-
                                                                        Staff Volunteers.
Physiotherapy     Physio Dept.   Senior                              1. Base for patients
                                 Physiotherapi st                       from wards
                                                                        awaiting transport
                                                                        home.
                                                                     2. Arrange transport
                                                                        for patients from
                                                                        wards to go home.
Theatre Control   Operating      Person delegated by                 Co-ordinate operating
                  Theatres       Senior Theatre                      theatre requests.
                                 Personnel.




                                                - 41 -
                   THE PHYSIOTHERAPY DEPARTMENT - ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL.
                                         FLOW CHART DURING MAJAX.




                                                                                            OT COMPLEX
   POOL
   COMPLEX
                                         A & E patients for discharge +
                                                                                                    A & E patients for discharge
                                         minor injuries from MAJAX
                                                                                                    + minor injuries from MAJAX
                                                                                                       Orthopaedic patients

Holding area for                      B 226                     229 A
                                                                                                                              I
pool patients.
                           Holding area for Physio
                           Ambulance patients




                                                                                      Waiting area for
                                228              228 A                                Orthopaedic patients

                           RECEPTION
                                                                                            O /P GYM
    A & E patients for discharge.                                                              B 51
    Ward patients for discharge
    Orthopaedic patients for discharge

  MAIN ENTRANCE
                                                             Waiting area for




                                                                                                                                   APPENDIX 2
                                                             ward patients
                                                                                               Toilet.
                                                          Immediate clearance of IP


                                                               I I P GYM
