                                                                 'vS33/'2./n


            Medical and Nursing Debriefing relating to the Hillsborough Disaster

                                 of 15th April 1989

                  Date of Debriefing - Wednesday 19th April 1989

                  Chairman             : A C Crosby
                                       : Mrs


Procedure

A medical debriefing was carried out at the Wednesday lunchtime meeting. A
subsequent meeting with senior nurses in the Department was carried out in Mrs
Okogba’s office at 1400.

Major Problems Identified

1. There was little or no ccnmunication frcm the Police or Ambulance Service.
2. The area for intermediate injuries became overcrowded and manoeuvring of
trollies was difficult.
3. When the patients arrived, they arrived all in what seemed to be a single
wave. This appears to result frcm the decision of the Ambulance men at the
ground to take the first wave of patients to a near by hospital and then
transferred the next wave to us.

Minor Problems

1. The large number of volunteer staff.
2. Attempts by the Police and Clerking staff to do full documentation on a
patient who had just arrived instead of giving him a number. This had the effect
of slowing up the reception of patients at the triage point.
3. Insufficient Doctors at the triage point.
4. Failure of medical students to attach themselves to a named Doctor, rather
than attempting to act as Doctors themselves.
5. Overflow B.I.Ds being brou^h to the A&E Department for certification because
Watery Street was full.
6. The normal hand over procedures for patients being referred to a specialist
team do not seem to work.
7. There appeared to be no co-ordination of relative helpers, although this did
not directly concern the A&E Department at the time of reception of patients.


Reocnmendation

1. There should be an Ambulance liason officer at the control point in the A&E
Department and he should be in close contact with his colleague fran the Police.
2. The current minors area of the A&E Department should be redeveloped, removing
the existing cubicles and opening out the available space.
3. There should be additional oxygen and suction points put into the area that
will became "intermediate injuries" during a major incident.
4. A further five trollies should be purchased and placed on minors in lieu of
the existing examination couches which are not mobile and which were dispensed
with on the day of the disaster.
5. Consideration should be given for the development of a public address system
within the Department. The Consultant in Charge would have overall control of
this system. An alternative means of ccmnunicating with the Sub-Directors of the
various regions would be by named runner.
6. Large stick-on labels bearing the title Doctor, Nurse and Clerical Staff
should be available at the control point and should be handed to those staff who are
attached to the Department and to those useful volunteers who present themselves
to the Consultant and Nurse in Charge. Unless a person has such a designated
                                 -   2-


label he or she could be asked to leave the Department.

7. The following equipment needs to be purchased:-
   Twelve portable sphygmomanometers
   Six drip stands
   Twenty arm boards
   Supply of pens for writing and marking on patients skin.

    These would be stored in the Major Accident Cupboard.

8. The spare furniture currently blocking the Transit area should be removed
iirmediately. The additional resources that this area represented could not be
easily mobilized on the day of the disaster.



The overall impression was that the Major Accident Plan had worked very well and
comparatively view fine tuning exercises were required. It was felt that one A&E
Department alone in this City could not have dealt with the Hillsborough
Disaster.



A C CROSBY
