                                                                     X S3.3./ ^ A f

                          REPORT FROM SWITCHBOARD DEPARTMENT
                RE:     MAJOR ACCIDENT PROCEDURE - 15TH APRIL 1989




Notification of Major Accident to Royal Hallamshire Hospital

The Switchboard received a call from "South Yorkshire Police at Hillsborough"
requesting that they be put through to Casualty.  The operator receiving the
call was concerned that the call originated from Hillsborough and not from one
of the police stations and listened into it, fearing that some problem had
arisen at the football match.  From the content of the conversation between the
Police and Casualty, it was clear that the Royal Hallamshire Hospital was on
standby to receive patients from Hillsborough following a possible Major Accident.
The Switchboard were not aware of the identity of the Police Officer initiating
the call which was received at 1 5 . 2 0 hrs.

The Switchboard were not informed officially of the standby for Majax by either
the Police or the Accident and Emergency Department.

At 15-33 hrs M i s s   contacted the bleep board to ask if the Switchboard were
aware that the hospital was on a Majax.


Notification of Staff

Although the Switchboard had not officially be informed of the Majax, again at
1 5 . 2 0 hrs they received a call from one of the operator’s husbands, telling
them to put the television on immediately as "something bad has happened at
Hillsborough".      Upon seeing the scenes at Hillsborough, and also following the
call from South Yorkshire Police, the Senior Telephonist used his own initiative
to telephone three members of the Switchboard staff at home, who live close to
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and requested that they report for duty
immediately.

The rest of the Switchboard staff, during the next half hour either reported for
duty without being called, or telephoned first to see if they were needed.

Because of the immediate media coverage of the disaster, there was insufficient
time to implement the cascade call out for the Switchboard staff, as the
majority had either seen or heard of the disaster via the news media, and had
reported for duty of their own accord.

Following the notification to the first three telephonists, the Senior
Telephonist again used his own initiative by notifying key members of the
hospital staff, that the R.H.H. was on standby for a Majax.

By this time, Accident and Emergency had requested that all of their Doctors be
contacted via their long range pagers, and staff from various departments had
started to telephone the hospital to see if they should report for duty or not.
The Switchboard had also received several enquries from the press for
information regarding the "catastrophe at Hillsborough".

At this time the Switchboard had not been informed officially about the Majax,
but following the call from Miss     [ the operators immediately followed their
instructions for Majax (enclosed).

It was apparent very quickly that it might not be possible to use the cascade
system for calling staff, as so many had already either contacted the hospital,
or started making their own way in, without waiting to be informed.


                                                                                      contd.
                                                                                       }




- 2 -




All staff were contacted in the order given on the instructions, although, when
bleping staff, the operators could not wait for one person to answer before
bleeping the next.


Enquiries

Before the Majax had been officially declared, the Switchboard started to
receive many calls in connection with the disaster. These calls can be
separated into four categories:

      Relatives and Friends - enquiring about patients. To start with we had no
      information regarding admissions from Hillsborough, so we advised the
      callers to contact the emergency number - Sheffield 570800.

      Press enquiries - these calls were put through to Administration.

      Staff - enquiring whether they could be of help, and whether they should
      report to the hospital or not. - We could only put these calls through to
      their respective departments.

      Public - Offers of help for accommodation for relatives/friends, blood donors,
      voluntary work councilling bereaved relatives, clerical work, switchboard
      work, General Practitioners and other Consultants offering medical help,
      nurses, and many retired N.H.S. workers offering their help.


Recommendations for Switchboard procedure

 1.    It is imperative that the Switchboard receives instructions that the Majax
       plan is in operation.  Perhaps it could be written into the A & E Majax
       cards that as soon as they receive information concerning a Majax they
       should inform Switchboard immediately utilising one of the emergency
       numbers e.g.     lo r

 2.    A check list should be kept by the operators of all personnel they have
       informed regarding the Majax. This should stop the possibility of anyone
       being overlooked, as many have happened in this instance, due to bleeps not
       being answered for whatever reasons.

 3.     It should be stressed that staff should not contact the Switchboard except
        in cases of extreme urgency. All lines into the hospital were engaged
        very quickly, mainly due to R.H.H. staff asking whether they were required
        or not. This not only created extra work, but also contributed to the
        outgoing lines being blocked.

 4.     There were insufficient lines to get press enquiries through to
        Administration, and whilst the calls that were put through were answered
        immediately, it would have helped to ease the congestion on the Switchboard
        were more lines to have been utilised for this purpose.

 5.     There were no instructions given to the Switchboard about what should be
        done with offers of help from the public. All that we could do was to
        take names and telephone numbers, together with details of the service
        being offered, and take these notes round to the Social Workers. The
        only exception to this was in the case of people offering to donate blood.
        These callers were given the telephone number of the Blood Transfusion Service.


                                                                                  contd.
- 3 -



 6.   It would have been beneficial had each department informed the Switchboard
      when they had sufficient staff in their respective departments, so that
      any callers could be advised accordingly. This would have helped to keep
      many calls to a minimum duration, again helping to ease the congestion on
      the board.

 7.   There were insufficient lines through to both the Police Incident room and
      also the Social Work Department.  In one case the Police Incident phone
      was engaged for J hour on the same call.  It is understood that the Police
      were talking to a police station for the duration of the call and perhaps
      may have been able to use their two-way radios instead of the telephone.
      For the first few hours we had only one extension to put relatives’ calls
      through to the Social Workers. These callers were extremely distressed,
      and due to the lack of any information on admissions at Switchboard for
      several hours, the callers had to wait for the one extension.

8.    We are not aware of how many lines actually went to the emergency number
      Sheffield 570800, but it is apparent that there were insufficient to deal
      with the amount of callers trying unsuccessfully to get through.

9.    Several S.T.D. telephones should be made available for relatives trying to
      call home. Again at times the Switchboard was blocked with level 'O' calls
      from people trying to call Liverpool. Unfortunately, most of our outgoing
      lines were blocked, and so we were unable to deal with these calls
      efficiently.  Also whilst dealing with these calls the operators were
      unable to deal with incoming calls which again would have helped to
      alleviate the congestion.

10.   It would have been preferable to have had several more telephone operators
      in the department in order to relieve the tension and stress suffered by
      the operators on duty that day. No-one should work for more than one
      hour under these conditions without having at least some time away from
      the board.  It must be noted that whilst ten telephonists reported for
      duty, the rest of the staff had either called in offering their services,
      or remained at home waiting to be contacted. The ones who had called in
      were told not to report as the board was fully manned. No contact was
      made to the others.
                       N.£>. Please dauefk aU Gr-?. referral calls auiay -from th#> Vy&pvJfcaJI


                                      Majax Instructions
O perator        fl>        Th? np^rntnf uhn remufis* -thp nWl-              +o -tp|<>phan#>       IM M eW        eU .


       ». Ambulance. Control ot. Police on n -directory number *o check -the ca.ll is not
          a hoaif , and then confirm uiitb w SwuxnboaTd a t the N.Gt.H.
 flmbuiance (network)                      Fblice                  N.G.H. (network)

       d. Inform either              \.   Corwin    fU fc.    Hr. D.far^uson                          (bleep
                                £. Sen.ReQ.In FU£. Kf. ft.Crosby                                      (bleep
                                     .................. Hr. H. Hockey                                 (bleep
                                3. Sen. Reg. in Surgpry
          The first of the abooe doctors to be contacted will instruct you uhetter or not
       l..flie Major Rcudent Procedure is to be implemented.
           If ijou are instructed to implement th<r procedure, the folkwing  should be contacted.
            The mes&OQ€ -to be cjioen \s                                                       ‘             '*
            a') Senior ftsst. Matron         or ftsst. Matron on duly

            b)     Rcadent and Emercjenc^ Reception      ejefc ______
                   Uien departsnent closed contact either Kr. 0. fer^ason , Hr.ft. Crosby or Mr. rt. Hockey
                   if thoj haue t\ot already been informed.

            t) The Ortjhopaedic           S.H.O. on take

            d) The Chairman oj the Kedkal StaffCommute . Dr. £. Perks                                  (.bleep____

            0 Specials on call ftanesthetist                 (UQTGrEMERflO.

            J) Porters       Lodge          ext 2.1S1

            cj) fill general     Surreal       W.O.'b.

            hV On CaU          B.T.s. Tech.         ext             (bleep        ]

            \)    On Call Radiographer             bleep £05 |£OU- faam- bpm Men - fn. ext clbUG)

            \) On Cali        Radiologist     - uia Radiographer.
   IN. D .   rI6£IS£ utue»c au c|-r. utus»                                     u«


                                      l% »        to fu c tto n s .

Operator .fci      Rs soon as Operator ft has concerned that the Major Accident Prooedu/e
                   is> +o be implemented, contact_the following.
                  The message          to be cjuaen Is


                  a) Telephone Supervisor

                   b)   f\ni] other    operator    not on duty              ( lis t on reuefse^

                   0    On Call       ftdm inistyator


                  dl Patients Seruices            O^icef qT             Mrs                          ext £5%ul home
                          Depuly Patients Sefuices Officer              Mrs.                         ext awhoax                (bled

                  e) all on cali h.o.'s m t.M.T., Neurosu/cjerij, HedvcOne, Oph&alraics-

                        all Orthopaedic H.O.s                  qo     <&U

                  c^Y On cjaii PYiqiio&erapist                     during dcu^       K(S._____ ext ETS2.

                  h) Clinical Chemistry on call                    ext £3U$         (bleep

                  i) On oail Pharmacist                   ext £W*tU | £5t»l            (bleep

                  j) On call fe.CA.Tech.                  Mrs.

                  W)    V\istQpatho\o^ist eUhef            Prof.   Undenoood
                                                           Pfoij. Wenr^


                  l) JL.fLCs. Technician on call                   ext £2-^ | £51 i t             (W&p

                  rtf) Senior Oininc^ Room 5upefolior   fxk                     £5TT          ( Mon +o fti %im * Sp«\)
                          or Catering Hamper        Mr,
                                               oi Hr.                                                        outside office houfc.
                                                    Hrs

                  n) Social Worker                                                                    ext &qbllE«IU
                        QL                                                     qj   filison       rtu fs t


                  o} hiospital Chaplain _                                                                              (bleep SOt/ 50C

                  p! Shift foreman                                          (bleep m          )
                     and Engineer on call.
