CONFIDENTIAL                                                                DRAFT




 DE-BRIEFING OF MEDICAL STAFF       FRIDAY 28th APRIL 1 9 8 9 AT 2.00p.m.
 IN THE ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY/ORTHOPAEDIC LIBRARY




                      Dr.   F.   Ryan, Consultant Physician
                      Dr.   G.   Clark, Consultant Anaesthetist
                      Dr.   T.   Shaw,   Consultant Anaesthetist
                      Dr.   G.   Davies,   Consultant Anaesthetist
                      Mr.   J.   Duncan, Senior Registrar, General Surgery
                      Mr.   I.   Winson, Lecturer, Orthopaedics
                      Dr.   S.   Yates,      Registrar in X-Ray
                      Mr.   J.   Wardrope,   Consultant in Accident and
                                                          Emergency Medicie

 1.      Staff Call Out

         This did not work for medical staff.   A combination of ad hoc
         calls from switchboard and media coverage combined to bring
         large numbers of medical staff into the hospital.

         At least two key members of medical staff were not called,
         namely the Anaesthetic first on call and the Orthopaedic first on
         call.   This resulted in delay in these two arms of the cascade
         system.

         Review Recommendations

         The whole system of the call out will require detailed replanni ng
         specifically -

         a)    The junior medical staff may well require deployment urgently
               to Resuscitation and cannot take time in telephoning their
               immediate superiors.   The junior medical staff of the
               hospital should probably be alerted by a cardiac arrest type
               call on the implementation of the Major Disaster Plan.

         b)    Added thought should be given to electronic means of calling
               in other key members of medical staff, but this will probably
               be a rather complex task and will require careful consideration.

 2.            Accident and Emergency Department

               Problems arose in the Accident and Emergency Department due
               to the large numbers of severely ill people arriving without
               prior warning and these being summarised as follows -

               1.   Initial shortage of Doctors.
               2.   Shortage of nursing staff experienced in resuscitation
                    technique.
               3.   Initial lack of documentation since many of the patients
                    arriving early required immediate direction to the
                    Resuscitation Room and this occurred before the documentation
                    triage point was set up.
               k.   For the first thirty minutes of the plan the Accident and
                    Emergency Triage Point virtually became the hospital
                    control.    The Senior Doctor in Accident and Emergency was
                    called upon to treat and triage patients, to direct medical
                    staff coming into the hospital and to make management
                    decisions concerning the routeing of casualties to the
                    Hallamshire, sending out the mobile team etc.
CONFIDENTIAL                                                        DRAFT

                               -    2   -

               Accident and Emergency Department (Continued)

               5.   The shortage of drugs, especially Diazepam.
               6.   There was a shortage of oxygen flowmeters.

           Review Recommendations

     a)   As stated under 'Staff Call Out' the medical staff in the
           hospital should be alerted at the beginning of a Major
           Disaster by a cardiac arrest bleep.

     b)   The Accident and Emergency Triage Point is a natural focus
           of entry for medical staff as well as casualties and
           consideration should be given to setting up 'Staff Triage Post'
           in this area.

     c)    The presence of operating department assistants greatly helped
           the process of resuscitation and their roll in the Major
           Incident Plan should be formalised.    Certainly, some of these
           key personnel should be sent initially to the Accident and
           Emergency Resuscitation Room.

     d)   The drug and oxygen flowmeter shortages should be addressed
          within the Accident and Emergency Department part of the
          Major Incident Plan.

3.        Mobile Team

          The request for a mobile team was made to me between 3 * ^ 0 and
          3.V?P»m.   At this point medical staff were only just arriving
          and therefore I could not despatch the team immediately.
          However, very shortly after this I was able to despatch an S.H.O
          in Accident and Emergency and an Anaesthetic Registrar, along
          with the Accident and Emergency Department’s MAJAX equipment, as
          well as our mobile team equipment and transfer equipment.
          No nurses were sent with the mobile team since the Accident and
          Emergency nurses were essential in the department at this time.

           In the rush, the team forgot to take their protective clothing
           and identification clothing.

           On arrival at the ground most of the equipment was taken to the
           temporary triage point, which had been set up in the Sports Hall
           at Hillsborough.   There were a large number of General
           Practitioners present here and they began using the equipment.
           After treating treating two or three casualties, the Accident
           and Emergency S.H.O. returned to the department.

           Review Recommendations

           Again, there was some confusion   over the call out procedures
           for the mobile team.   Since we   are the primary receiving hospital
           it was impossible to respond to   this request immediately, due to
           the lack of adequate numbers of   medical staff.

           The type of equipment carried in the Major Accident boxes
           should be reviewed and comments sought from the General Practitioners
           at the ground who were using the equipment.
          Thought should be given as to the composition of the Mobile Team keeping
          in mind the need to train these Doctors in triage and site management.
CONFIDENTIAL                                                         DRAFT


                              -   3   -

 4.      Ward 60

         Large numbers of casualties were triaged to Ward 60 since
         their initial complaints were those of chest injury with
         difficulty breathing, or with pelvic crush injury.

         There was a major problem in that the Surgical Controller was
         not notified until some time after the event.    His place was
         taken by a Senior Registrar in Surgery who fulfilled this roll
         very well.    However, he was also under pressure to help in
         the Resuscitation Area due to shortage of Doctors.     He was
         also required to give surgical opinions on possible abdominal
         injuries as well as carry out the managerial tasks in Ward 60.

         There was  a lack of easy means of communication regarding the
         injured patients.

         There was   a lack of identification of key personnel.

         There was   a lack of oxygen and suction points.

         There were no anaesthetic drugs kept in store on the department.

         Review Recommendations

         In a Major Disaster such as this Ward 60 would appear to have a
         critical roll.   The Plan should be modified to direct the
         Surgical Consultant of the day, the Consultant Physician of the
         day and Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon of the day to Ward 60.
         A consultant Anaesthetist should also be placed in Ward 60.

         In this incident the major injury was one of traumatic asphyxia
         which the General Physicians would normally manage.

         Although it is hoped that such an incident will not occur again,
         it is quite feasible that there will be other types of major
         accidents where a Consultant Physician would have more experience
         in treating the casualties than a Consultant Surgeon or
         Orthopaedic Surgeon.

         Staff identification should be made easier hy provision of tabards.

         There should be a large write-on board to ease communication
         regarding the types of injuries which are being found and
         patient identification.

         There should be greater provision of oxygen points and suction
         points on Ward 60.

         The Major Accident equipment on Ward 60 should be reviewed,
         especially with respect to anaesthetic and drugs.

         Key medical staff in the Major Incident Plan should have action
         cards which sets out the duties which must be performed (like
         most of the nursing staff and paramedical staff).
CONFIDENTIAL                                                DRAFT

                              -   if   -



5.      Intensive Care Unit

        Both the General Intensive Care Unit and the Candiac Intensive Care
        Unit were relatively quiet, since it was a weekend.    They
        received a total of 16 ventilated patients, oije of these patients
        died soon after arrival in General Intensive Care Unit and k
        patients were transferred to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital for
        CT scanning, leaving 11 patients on both Units the next morning.

        There was a great response from the Anaesthetic staff in the
        hospital and also from Anaesthetists from other hospitals with
        a total of 25 Anaesthetists reporting for duty.   This enabled
        one Anaesthetist to take overall charge of one patient, which
        greatly helped in speeding the treatment and monitoring of these
        patients.

        The Anaesthetic staff were also very busy in the Accident and
        Emergency Resuscitation Area, in Ward 60 and also on Ward 3A
        where one patient required ventilation.   They also took one
        patient to Theatre and any patients transferred to the Royal
        Hallamshire Hospital went in the company of at least one
        Anaesthetist.

        Once the situation was under control a Management Meeting took
        place where duties were allocated for the night and the next day
        to ensure that all the staff had sufficient rest time.
        At this meeting the staff were also allocated to review all the
        patients on the ward lest there should be important conditions
        requiring intensive care which had been overlooked.

        A definite antibiotic policy was formulated since many of the
        patients appeared to have suffered from aspiration of gastric
        contents.

        Review §ecommendations

        It was fortunate that this incident occurred at the weekend when
        the I.T.U's were quiet.   Thought must be given to earmarking a
        secondary Intensive Care Area, probably in one of the Theatre
        Recovery Suites.

        Antibiotic policies should be decided very early in such an
        incident and should probably be on the Action Cards of one of
        the Senior Controllers.

        Both the Anaesthetic, General Surgical and Orthopaedic staffs
        carried out full ward rounds once the situation was under
        control and these ward rounds were repeated later that evening.
        These ward rounds were thought to be essential in ensuring that
        no injuries were missed.   T^ig should be written into the
        Major Incident Plan.

        The Anaesthetic Department were highly organised in respect of
        providing cross cover arrangements and ensuring adequate time off
        for the staff.   These arrangements are essential and again should
        be written into the Accident Plan and should be the responsibility
        of one of the Senior Controllers.
CONFIDENTIAL                                                DRAFT

                              - 5 -

6.       Medical Department

         The Medical Department had a very large part to play in this
         incident.   The Junior Medical Staff were of great value in
         the acute resuscitation of patients and in the treatment of
         those with traumatic asphyxia.

         Dr. Ryan had a major roll in co-ordinating the treatment of
         these patients and it was on his own initiative that he came
         into hospital.    Other members of the Consultant Medical
         staff also came into hospital.    I have noted previously
         there were great problems with the call-out procedures, with
         documentation and in Ward 60.     There was also a problem with
         traffic and access to the Northern General Hospital site.

         Review Recommendations

         The Consultant Medical Staff should have a much more clearly
         defined roll in the Major Incident Plan and certainly a
         Consultant Physician should be assigned to Ward 60 as part
         of the secondary triage team.

         There is little note given in the Plan to bed clearance and
         again a definite senior member of Medical Staff should be
         assigned this important roll.

         Again it was noted that in view of the excess staff reporting
         after the incident, definite cross cover and take over
         arrangements should be made to ensure adequate rest time for
         staff involved in the incident.

7.      Minor Injuries

        The minor injuries area is the Physiotherapy Department.
        There were problems again in the call out in that the
        physiotherapists were not informed and therefore there was
        delay in opening this Department.    There were also some
        minor equipment problems, such as lack of adequate x-ray
        viewing facilities, especially bright light facilities.

         Review Recommendations

        There should be further x-ray viewing facilities in the
        Minor Injuries Area, especially bright light facilities.
        Also some minor items of the minor injuries equipment
        should be checked.

8.      X-Ra.v Department

        Because of the nature of the injuries there were few problems
        in the X-Ray Department, although large numbers of x-rays were
        taken.   There were also ultrasound examinations performed and
        one angiogram.

        There were initial problems with the call out of Radiographers
        since most of the Radiographers were at a Conference in
        Liverpool.   However, an appeal on Radio Hallam brought a good
        response and the department was able to function dfectively.
        The stick-on reporting system was of great value.   Again
        there were some minor problems with identification, mainly due
        to the first lot of patients arriving in the Accident and
        Emergency.
CONFIDENTIAL                                                          DRAFT

                                - 6 -

8.        X-Ray Department    (Continued)

          There were also some problems with axygen supplies and. lack
          of portable oxygen cylinders.

9.        Other Review Recommendations

     a)   Major item   stated by all members ofmedical staff was   that
           the lack of a CT Scanner made the management of patients
           much more difficult.     The clinical development of some of
           the patients conditions was fairly classical of extra-dural
           haemorrhage.   Fortunately this was not the case but using the
           clinical and routine x-ray procedures at the disposal of the
           Northern General Hospital it was impossible to be sure.    This
           made the management of these patients much more difficult.

     b)   At present the Royal Hallamshire Hospital   is the major receiving
           hospital for major incidents.   Should thought be given to giving
           both hospitals equal status in the District Major Incident Plan,
           the casualties going to the nearest hospital?     Should S.Y.M.A.S.
           be given the responsibility of deciding the nearest hospital and
           full responsibility for implementing the Major Incident Plans?




          One other major problem experienced by members of staff was
          access to the hospita l.   Some members of staff coming in
          early after the call out had little trouble, but as the roads
          became busier then it became increasingly difficult to gain
          access to the Northern General and in some cases it took
          approximately three quarters of an hour to reach hospital.

          The Police obviously had many other duties to perform that
          afternoon and this made traffic control difficult.   However
          even so, some form of identification is necessary for staff
          cars and this should be investigated.

SUMMARY

The incident at Hillsborough Football Ground on the 15th April was
a severe test of the Northern General Hospital's Major Incident Plan.
The lack of a clear warning, the speed in which large numbers of
acutely ill people arrived and the large numbers of relatives and
friends arriving at the hospital made the management of the incident
very difficult.

'The medical staff call out system did not     function adequately and this
will require complete review.     However,     due to the nature of the event
lar^e numbers of staff came into hospital      without awaiting formal
notification, thereby by-passing the call      out system.

Apart from this major problem and. numerous other minor problems, the
plan functioned exceedingly well.

It demonstrated the ability of the      Accident and Emergency Department
to receive large numbers of people      requiring resuscitation.   The
utility of Ward 60, acting as the       secondary triage point and the
anility of the Intensive Care Units      to receive and treat large numbers
of severely ill patients.

The Theatres were not stretched but the theatre staff 'were in and waiting
CONDIFENTIAL                                               DRAFT

                              - 7 -

SUMMARY   (Continued)

The Service Departments, especially X-Ray, coped very well and the
documentation and immediate reporting systems were of great clinical
use.    Other support services all appeared to function well.

Although the Northern General Hospital can be justifiably proud  of its
response to the incident at Hillsborough, it should be realised that
there was a very fine dividing line between coping extremely well,
as we did, and chaos.    This message must not been forgotten since
the next Major Incident will come, as this one did, out of the blue
and when we least expect it.
                            SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY - MEMORANDUM

From        Hr N S McKay                         To     See Distribution
            General Manager

Date        27 April 1989
Ref.        NSM/NW
Tel. Ext.   4835                                 Ref.                                    G.1779




            Hillsborough Disaster - Debriefing


            I enclose the latest draft of the Northern General Hospital's account
            of events on 15 April 1989. This document is not now required for
            the Regional Meeting on Tuesday. 2 May 1989 where the hospital will
            be represented by myself, M i s s ______ Mr Wardrope and Mr

            However, Westbrook House will be arranging a meeting to take place
            as soon as possible for Representatives of the Northern General Hospital,
            the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and District to meet to consider any
            City-wide improvements which are needed for our Major Accident Plans.
            At or before that meeting, we will receive a copy of the Royal Hallamshire
            Hospital's draft version of events and it is intended that this document
            and our own will be finalized then.

            I am required to send our latest draft to District as background briefing
            material only for Tuesday's meeting and this I have done. They realise
            there may still be some corrections, etc.

            Meanwhile, if you have any alterations to suggest then please contact
            either myself or|          \




             Distribution

             \M £ Members
            v/W J VJardrope
             Mr I         I

             cc:    Mr




             Enc.
                                       •   .

                                ..

                                                                              ■•■•.■■■■■-
                                                                                    ^;,r
                                                                                      .


                       m   m




                                               ,   ..

                                                        . , / r '
                               /A„ .




      Introduction

      On 15th April 1989 the Northern General Hospital and the Royal
      Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield were involved in receiving casualties
      from an incident at the Hillsborough Football Ground which resulted in a
      number of casualties and deaths. This report describes the Northern
      General Hospital's response to the situation and in particular the role
      of certain key officers in managing the incident, treating the casualties
      and liaising with other departments both within and outside the hospital.

2.    Summary
                                                                                                  :
2.1   The Northern General Hospital received a total of 88 casualties of whom
      11 were dead on arrival or died within the Accident and Emergency                   _ _
      Department, 56 were admitted including lfc into Intensive Care, 3 <'«**** ^         7t*tw
      Subsequently, 7 patients were transferred for CT Scans and specialised
      Neurological/Neurosurgical Care to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and two
      patients died. Most patients were young men and suffered crush injuries.

2.2    The first patient arrived at about 1527 hours and within about an hour 87
       patients (plus 5 other routine casualties) were received. The last
       casualty was received at about 1645 hours.

2.3    The hospital responded exceptionally well. Staff werfe summoned but
       because the disaster arose from a        made event many staff had begun
       to make their own way into the hospital A

2.4    The nature of the injuries was very unusual in terms of major accidents
       with large numbers of patients requiring immediate ventilation and only 1
       patient requiring surgery.

2.5    Large numbers of relatives and friends arrived to seek information about             §
       the injurek and about people with whom they had lost contact during the              I
       crush at the football stadium. Major efforts were employed to deal
       consistently with these people.

2.6    Lare numbers of local, national and worldwide media arrived at the
       hospital and stayed for about 48 hours.

2.7    A great number of pre-arranged visits from VIPs took place from Sunday,
       16 April 1989 until Wednesday, 19 April 1989.

2.8    Intensive and comprehensive arrangments are in place to provide group and
       individual counselling to staff.

2.9    A number of issues have arisen in subsequent debriefings and are listed
       in this paper as matters for further action and consideration.
                                  '                                  ■■   ■

                                VS                  .            ;                    -V
                                              S     : v;        ;■
                                      •J\..
                                                  :.-v yv-v\-
                     ■ s   :-


                                                           ■.


_____    -...........                 and Subsequent Call Out ArrangeBentg
                                                                   ,   „ ,    «...
 3.1     The Kdrthera General Hospital Major Disaster Plan states that declaration
         of a major disaster will be «ade.

         "By one or other of the emergency services, the most likely of these
         being the ambulance service. Notification will be made to the
         switchboards of the receiving hospitals. However, if large numbers of
         seriously injured casualties arrive without notice at the Accident and
         Emergency Department, the procedure may be put into action locally on the
         instructions of the senior doctor present in the Accident and Emergency
         Department."

  3.2    At approximately 1520 hours one of the two Switchboard Operators at the
         hospital received a call from the Police which indicated, in the words of
         the Operator "we were on casualty stand-by". The words stand-by were
         used by the Police. The Switchboard Operator contacted the Accident and
         Emergency Department and the Assistant Matron on duty and advised them of
         the situation. At about the same time two routine accidents were
         received in the Department with the Ambulance men reporting that there
         was, what was thought to be either a road traffic accident or a problem
         at Hillsborough Football Stadium.

  3.3    Between 1520 and 1525 hours the Assistant Matron contacted Admissions to
         ascertain the current bed state and then proceeded to the Accident and            ■'X-


         Emergency Department.   At about 1520 hours the Charge Nurse on duty in           a
                                                                                           v.
          the Accident and Emergency Department attempted to contact the Consultant
                                                                                               ?
          in Charge of the Department at home. He was not at home but the
                                                                                           ;   >!
         Switchboard immediately bleeped him and asked him to come into the
         hospital. The Consultant arrived at the hospital at approximately 1533            :%
          hours. On arrival, the Consultant confirmed with the Charge Nurse that            : :■
          the Major Disaster Plan for the Accident and Emergency Department had
          been put into operation.

  3.4    At approximately 1525 hours, SYMAS contacted the Accident and Emergency
         Department and told them to expect a child who had had a cardiac arrest.
         No further details were received from SYMAS. About two minutes later and
         therefore approximately 1527 hours, the first casualty arrived from y ^
         Hillsborough and the first patient was "the child", about whom a call had
         been received earlier. Precise accounts vary but the Assistant Matron
         remembers an ambulance man stating, at this point, that there was a major
         accident at Hillsborough Football Stadium. At this point, the Charge
         Nurse in the Accident and Emergency Department instructed a Staff Nurse
         to call out Accident and Emergency Staff in line with the hospital's
         procedure. At the same time a second Assistant Matron arrived in the
         Accident and Emergency Department and began to ring for nursing help.
         Simultaneously, the Assistant Matron on duty returned to the Switchboard
         and it is believed she arrived there at approximately 1535 hours.

   3 5    At this point the Switchboard had still not received a call to implement
          the Major Disaster Plan". However, they responded to a request from the
          Accident and Emergency Department to contact all available doctors. This
          they did in a very thorough manner.
■
                                         '


                    .K:   :                   "S. ".V.
                                                         -




    '    ..■■■■■!                     irSy
                                              ■                    ■
        3 .6                       »ly 1543 Juittrs, the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard
                                   to ascertain whether they had received information about a
                           Disaster Plan. The Operator is said to have stated that they also
                     had received a call to be on "stand-by".

        3.7          Knowing that both hospitals could not be on stand-by at the same time,
                     the Assistant Matron and the telephonists decided to implement the
                     communications cascade as ie r t the hospital's plan.
                                                         !+*
        3.8          The Switchboard at Northern General Hospital also continued throughout
                     this time to contact Medical Staff. During this time, as the
                     Switchboard's electronic record shows, an enormous number of calls were
                     being received particularly from hospital staff who had heard of the
                     events at the Football Stadium either by television or radio.

        3.9          At about 1600 hours a member of the Medical Staff was asked by the
                     Consultant in Charge of the Accident and Emergency Department to contact
                     SYMAS and ask them to divert further casualties to the Royal Hallamshire
                     Hospital as the Northern General Hospital was-^aturated-with injured
                     nnnnl (*■

        3.2          Comment

                     3.2.1       Ho member of staff has so far acknowledged that the Switchboard or
                                 the Accident and Emergency Department received an instruction from
                                 SIMAS or the Police to implement the Major Disaster Plan other       ....
                                                                                                       'V
                                 than a conversation between the ambulance men and staff in the
                                 Accident and Emergency Department at approximately 1527 tours
                                 referred to above.

                     3.2.2       There was uncertainty amongst Switchboard, Accident and Emergency
                                 anrf Senior Nursing Staff on duty as to whether a Major Disaster
                                 had actually been declared. It is to the credit of the Charge
                                 Burse in the Accident and Emergency Department and the Switchboard
                                 Staff on duty that they took the initiative in implementing the
                                 hospital's communications cascade.

                     3.2.3       Although key Medical and Nursing Personnel were called quickly,
                                 the length of time taken by the Switchboard Staff in operating the
                                 cascade system is of some concern. This is not a criticism of the
                                 Switchboard Operators but the hospital will be investigating ways
                                 of using modern technology to speed up this laborious task. This
                                 would also save Switchboard and other staff valuable time, which
                                 on such occasions is at a premium.

                     3.2.4       Whilst the Switchboard do keep and check monthly their list of
                                 staff who may be needed during a major accident, it seems that
                                 some key staff had had not yet been put onto the list and the ways
                                 of updating the list more speedily will be investigated.

                     3.2.5       Despite all of the above, Switchboard Staff and Nursing Staff in
                                 the Accident and Emergency Department behaved in an exemplary
                                 manner.




                                                               3
                                                             ■;
                                                       .
                                                 ••
                                                                                       -S
                                                           ". -S"                      :s'xSj
                                                      *■




                                                             -

                                            t received the first patients from
                       and Initially there were four SHOs from various areas of
                       shortly afterwarc^, the Consultant in Charge of the
                       reencv Dei»artment/available
      Accident and Emergency  Department            to receive-casualties. By
      1545 hours, doctors were arriving in sufficient'numbers'to have one                           ■ l.
      doctor per patient. This relieved the Consultant in Charge of the                                  S'
      Accident and Emergency Department to dedicate himself totally to the
      triage team, a task which he had had to undertake previously, whilst at
      the same time, treating patients. There were 16 patients requiring
      resuscitation and this, together with the fact that 87 patients were seen
      in the Department within about one hour, led to considerable pressure
      upon the staff in the Department. The last patient was received
      approximately 15 minutes after the 87th patient.

4.2   It was at approximately 154® hours that there was a request from SYMAS
      for a site team td be sent from the hospital and when sufficent doctors
      had arrived at approximately 155® hours a Registrar in Anaesthetics and
      SHO from Accident and Emergency were released to attend the Stadium.

4.3   The last patient was received in the Department at approximately 1645
      hours.                                                                                               A-

4.5   Comment           ,■;

      4.5.1   There were initial difficulties in the Department in rant receivxng               ■."-S
              clear instructions regarding the implementation of the Major
              Accident Plan.

      4.5.2     There were also problems because of the number of casnalt^u|4tM.<s.
                presenting themselves in a short time scale, although the^Medical
                Staff coped admirably.
                                                                                                •    W -
      4.5.3     As the hospital was the first receiving Unit, the northern General
                Hospital Should not have been asked to send out its mobile team
                ami it is understood th<|£ t&en the team did attend Hillsborough
                Stadium, they wwe^turned aS&p as there mere sufficient doctors in                   •' .v \ S


                attendance althougji the equipment was retained on site. The Major
                                                                                                SS-
                Disaster Plan clearly indicates that the second receiving hospital
                should be the first one to be asked to send a mobile team. This
                requires clarification.
                                                                                                         s
5.    Control Centre Arrangements

5.1   The Hospital’s Major Disaster Plan indicates that three areas should be
      set up to act as control centres for major disasters, these being a
       nursing base, hospital control and administrative base. The General
      Services Manager (Surgery and Accident and Emergency) had witnessed the
       incident on television and had telephoned the hospital at approximately
       1515 hours and enquired of the Accident and Emergency Department whether
       the Major Disaster had been declared. At that time, it had not and he
       therefore took the decision to come into the hospital to set up the
       control centres. The General Services Manager (Surgery and Accident and
       Emergency), upon arrival, quickly established the necessary control            • •'           :


                                                                                             V- ■    -X"..-:'



                                                                                       .-:a4
      centres. The situation delevoped rapidly such that the dedicated nursing
      base was not established in its planned location, although the nursing
      base was effectively provided within the hospital control and
      administrative base which appeared to work more satisfactorily than if
      the base had been set up in its designated area*

5.2   By this time, Police Officers had also arrived in the Department and
       their control centre was set up in the Sister's Office in the Orthopaedic
       Clinic, this being done by approximately 1605 hours.

5.3   The Control Centres were fully in operation at approximately 1615-1620
       hours and directing various aspects of the hospital's response and
       dealing with enquiries from Relatives, etc. when sufficient staff had
       arrived at the hospital although they had begun to function before then.

5.4   Coament

      5.4.1     Although the Major Disaster Plan clearly indicates that three
                hospital controls should be set up (ie. Nursing Base, Hospital
                Control and Administrative Base), with a fourth area being set up
                for the police, it is felt beneficial to have the three hospital
                bases together with the police base all in the same area. This
                view is shared by the Police who attended the hospital to staff
                their control base. C v                    -.f*

      5.4.2     The hospital Control Boom was closed down at about 1830 hours on
                Sunday and comprehensive Management On-Call arrangements were
                made. Very many enquiries continued and were taken by on-call
                Managers at home. With the benefit of hindsight, it would have
                been better to have kept the control centre open until the
                following morning.

6.    X-Ray Department

6.1   On-Call Radiographers were alerted by Staff in the Accident and Emergency
      Department. The Radiographers immediately implemented their own cascade
      system. Meanwhile, other staff attended who heard via their media.
                                                        *
6.2   There was some concern that there might not be enough Radiographers
      available so the Department asked local radio stations to broadcast for
      assistance, which they did.

6.3   The staff within the Department acted in a very efficient manner and the
      procedure was fully implemented.

7.    Ward Admission Arrangements

7.1   Receiving Ward and Other AdmittingArrangements

      At 1545 hours the first patients were being admitted to Ward 60, which
      had, by this time, been cleared to receive casualties.




                                        5
       Tnterisive Care/IiatensiVe Treatment Units

       Tlie Northern General Hospital has a General Intensive Treatment Unit
       ^hich can accommodate 10 beds but is normally staffed for 6 and a Cardiac
       Intensive Care Unit which is normally used for the immediate post
       operative care of patients having undergone cardiac surgery. Hie General
       Intensive Treatment Unit had 5 patients transferred and 3 patients
       had to be transferred from the Cadiac Intensive Care Unit to Wards
       accommodate the overflow from the General ITU. Initially 19 patients
       required ventilation, one died and seven were transferred to Royal
       Hallamshire Hospital for CT Scanning. Within five days this had reduced
       to only one continuing to occupy an Intensive Care Bed.

8.     Patient Documentation

8.1    Patient documentation was initially hampered by the initial lack of
        clarity that the Major Disaster Plan had been implemented. This resulted
        in the first cases not being recognised as being from a Major Disaster.
        There were also some cases of patients not involved in the Hillsborough
        Disaster being documented as part of it but this was later rectified.

8.2    Comment

       8.2.1     Hie difficulties highlighted above resulted in problems being
                 experienced in matching documentation with patients and
                 consequential problems of identification of patients. This
                 resulted in some lack of clarity regarding information to friends
                 ami relatives. This is one area of concern which will be further
                 investigated. However, once the Major Accident Plan is
                 implemented, it is inevitable that some other routine   casualties
                 could be included in the number of major accident patients.

9.     Operating Theatres

9.1    Only one patient required surgery (an abdominal investigation). However,
       theatre staff of all disciplines were available in numbers, had there
       service been required.

10«    Patient Care/Treatment

10.1   Patients arrived in large numbers in the two hours from 3.30 pm resulting
        in a total of 88 patients being treated of which 56 were admitted,
        including 19 to Intensive Care areas, 7 of who were transferred to the
        Royal Hallamshire Hospital Intensive Care Unit.     were dead on arrival
        or died in the Accident and Emergency Department and a further 2 deaths
        occurred on General Intensive Therapy Unit. In addition to being
        admitted to the General Intensive Treatment Unit, Cardiac Intensive Care
        Unit and Ward 60 patients were also admitted to wards 65 and 66 with one
        patient being accommodated on ward 3A and one on Ward 63. In addition,
        during this time, 5 patients were treated who were not involved in the
        incident.




                                         6
                                                   T'"-~
                                                     •' ..        .   -■■■■■ :v   ■•S-.-SS
                                            t                '


               s   s   s   s   r



                                                             :S S s ;: S S S S v '-i;-r - ^ S y S ^ r ,x m m
                                                                                  ^       : :y-::■-
                                        walking              to be treated in the
                                                                         i*ome delays In
                                                                   am.■ delay in
                                                                  •n             opening
                                                                              — wr v *i * M0
                                                                                                           :'vl!




         10.3.1 Some difficulty existed in patients locating Physiotherapy and
                this requires attention.

         10.3.2 Ways of ensuring this important area is unlocked should be
                investigated.                                                                                             "S'
                                                                                                                              ■"V
                                                                                                                          .

11 .     Support Departments

11.1     It would appear that the majority of support departments responded                                             ,-v-r
         extremely well. There was an initial problem with a shortage of oxygen
         flow meters but this was very quickly rectified by the Technical                                      . "
                                                                                                                        -■•
                                                                                                                          'S:lv
         Equipment Department.
                                                                                                               •;. r
1 1 .2                                                                                                                  ■-V
                                                                                                               .

                                                                                                                        ';S
         11.2.1 The Portering Staff perforated in an exemplary fashion.                                            :




         11.2.2 A regular supply of refreshments were available fro* Catering
                Staff (and also volunteers) throughout the incident and its
                aftermath. The Catering Staff Banned the servery in the hospital
                snack bar throughout the night as it doubled as the Relatives                                          ■ :■-&
                base.
                                                                                                                       V. > -S

         11.2.3 Linen Services were very well covered.                                                             s'J

         11.2.4 Messengers were generally well available but it is felt that
                consideration should be given in any revisions of the plan to
                allocate Messengers to key areas.

         11.2.5 Bags and envelopes are available for personal property within each
                case note folder for major accident patients. These do not appear
                to have been used and this requires review.

         11.2.6 The Mortuary was prepared for the bodies of deceased patients.
                Sane relatives were distressed that once their kin had been
                identified, nonetheless, all bodies were removed by the Police.
                It is suggested that this is reviewed for the future.                                          -




         11.2.7 Arrangements for clerical, secretarial, laboratories, CSSD,
                Supplies and Pharmacy all worked exceptionally well.
                                 V


                                                    ■/   -y: •.

                      ,   ■■■-                 y^ yy~
  :     . ' - V-

y -J
  -       ■ ,-X-VX
                                        and Access.j p H o sp italS ite
                     The main problem with communications appears to have been that distraught
                     relatives were ringing the hospitals for information which was not
                     speedily available particularly regarding the fatalities. It was clear
                     that the vast majority of callers had already tried the Police emergency
                     number without success. Relatives were therefore ringing the hospital
                     in desperation. The Police Hospital Control appears to have closed too
                     early resulting in many calls being received by the hospital (about
                     midnight on Saturday 15.4.89).

       12.2          Communications were however soon established between the Royal
                     Hallamshire Hospital and the Northern General Hospital with a ready
                     exchange of information between the two.

       12.3          Access to the Accident and Emergency Department was maintained within the
                     Hospital grounds although with some difficulty as described below.

       12.4          Comment

                     12.4.1 There would appear to be a need to improve communications with the
                            Police, especially regarding traffic control arrangements oar              -fHS
                            Herries Road which, on this occasion, became severely congested.
                                                                                                                 ':
                            This resulted in a member of staff acting as "Control Officer** on                   .-V

                            I h i i iu lilii  j . < prf              v>~ r        Ao~ J U * . S * * 9'

                     12.4.2 The special telephone lines set up by the Police were constantly
                            engaged thereby creating additional calls being made to the
                            hospital. It is suggested that the Police should need to re­
                            assess that requirement for the future.

                                 (It is interesting to note that the hospital Switchboard normally
                                 deals with 2 ,0 0 0 telephone calls at the weekend with these
                                 increasing to 7,000 over this particular weekend).

                     12.4.3 It would be helpful if a member of staff could be Alloyed in
                            front of the reception desk to deflect queries « S » t h e staff * 4       - tXffk
                            trying to gain information regarding the-casualties. This should
                            then reduce the amount of queries being received by the reception
                            staff.

       13.           Inter Agency Liaison

       13.1          The Social Workers, Psychologists and Chaplains of all denominations
                     responded to the incident and quickly set up a patients relatives centre
                     in the hospital's dining room which is situated one level lower than the
                     Accident and Emergency Department but, owing to the sloping nature of the
                     site, also has ground floor access. The various voluntary organisations
                     also responded with ther Hospital's League of Friends, Salvation Army,
                     WRVS and Red Cross amongst others comforting distressed relatives and
                     friends.




                                                           8
'Sv                           S
            S'/":':
                                           : ■'
      '•■        '■     .o y v•;■           -.yv
                                       S     ‘r*   ..   .-'   ...   '•   •

                                                                     '       -■
                                                                    -Vs •
                                                                        -
                           ••••   ■•



                  itoe Press Room was very quickly set up, this being in the Out Patients
            ■              1. of level 'C* adjacent to the main entrance of the hospital.
                      Whilst the majority of the press acted with decorum there were a number
                      who sought to gain interviews and would appear to go to any lengths to
                      obtain them from patients, their friends or relatives and members of the
                      hospital staff. This resulted in valuable managerial time being taken up
                      with keeping the situation under control. The Assistant Public Relations
                      Officer was invaluable in managing this area.

      14.2            In addition, very soon after the commencement of the incident the Press
                      started to telephone the Hospital.

      14.3            The first Press Conference was held by the Unit General Manager and
                      Consultant in Charge of Accident and Emergency at about 1830 hours on
                      Saturday.

      14.4            In addition, Press enquiries were also dealt with by other Managers,
                      mainly over the telephone but on some occasions face to face. A further
                      Press Conference was held on the Sunday morning at approximately 1000
                      hours involving Unit General Manager, Consultant in Charge of Accident
                      and Emergency, Consultant Anaesthetist and Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
                      Officer. Another conference was held on Monday morning and many other ad
                      hoc statements were issued and interviews given.

      14.5            Comment

                      14.5.1 Some confusion arose at one point about information being given to
                             the press. In future, only one Senior Officer will be the
                             designated officer for issuing press statements and giving
                             interviews, etc.                                                  ^

      15.             Relatives and Friends
                                                                                                   'h a
      15.1            There were many visitors to the hospital very soon after tVie event who
                      were anxious to have news of their friends and relatives.-' It is
                      estimated that between 200 and 300 people were present at any time for a
                      number of hours. The patients’ relatives base was very quickly set up
                      Within the Staff Dining Room on level ’C’ of the Out Patients Department,
                      this being manned by members of staff and various voluntary agencies
                      including the Salvation Army, League of Friends, Social Workers and
                      Chaplains of all denominations.

      15.2            Senior Managers took full responsibility for co-ordinating activity here.
                      The main problem was providing information to people.

      15.3            Comment

                      15.3.1 This does appear to have been one of the major successes of the
                             whole operation in that relatives were able to congregate in one
                             area resulting in information being more easily disseminated as it
                             became available. All those who manned this area should be
                             commended for their patience and fortitude under considerable
                             pressure.


                                                                                  9
16,    Volunteers

16.1   As indicated above, the hospital's Dining Room was set aside for the
       relatives base and was very quickly manned by a number of volunteers
       including staff volunteers.

17.    Visits by VIPs

17.1   After the event the hospital received a number of visits from celebrities
       and dignitaries, these including on the Sunday Mr David Blunkett MP, the
       Prime Minister and Home Secretary, theArchbishop of Liverpool and the
       Anglican Bishop of Liverpool. On Monday, Liverpool FC, the Lord Mayor of
       Sheffield, the Leader of Liverpool City Council and the Prince and
       Princess of Wales. On Tuesday, the Leader of the Opposition, the Duke of
       Kent, Bishop of Hal lam and on Wednesday, Nottingham Forest FC.

17.2   Coraent

       17.2.1 W i i l s ^    visits were appreciated by many of the staff and
              patients      ey did cause significant extra worl% f m stuff .^and for
                                   ii.....In-i*       acpocially ward-based staff,
                                                It is inevitable that a number of
                 dignitaries and celebrities will wish to visit patients, their
                 relatives and the staff who are involved in such incidents, but,
                 this does result in additional stress.

18.    The Aftermath

18.1   Managing the consequences of the disaster within the hospital has been a
       major task since the patients were received.

18.2    Counselling sessions have been arranged for staff which take the form of
       •group therapy and are being organised by Clinical Psychologists.
        Facilities are also available for staff to have individual counselling
        sessions should they wish to avail themselves of the facility.

19.    Conclusion

19.1   All staff responded exceptionally well to the incident and reinforces the
        view that an excellent relationship exists at the Northern General
        Hospital between all grades and disciplines.

19.2   As with every other Major Disaster there are undoubtedly lessons to be
       learned from this incident.

19.3   In particular the hospital and other agencies will need to clarify
        the way in which a Major Disaster should be declared.

19.4   The operation of the cascade procedures will require close scrutiny and
        modification to hasten the procedure. Unboubtedly, the fact the incident
        happened on a Saturday afternoon and received much media attention
        assisted in getting staff into the hospital.
        ■•                   ■V
            .
                             :
                                                  ... V   .   .   y   r X
        Vv.;..-
    .            ..
.
        .               ■
            -.        r-;                                                                               .




                            This accident was a severe test for treating a large number of acutely
        ■'                  asphyxiated casualties requiring resuscitation. However, because of the
                            nature of the injuries, did not test some parts of the plan, for example,
                            the Theatres.




JA/NW/26.4.89




                                                                       11
                                    v ’V -

APPESDIX



Fact and Figures

      Saturday 15th
                                                               3      CMf Ufa*0’
      88 patients treated
      56 admitted (l4 of whom were admitted to Intensive Care Wards, 7 subsequently
                  transferred to Royal Hallamshire Hospital)
      11 BID or died in Accident and Emergency Department
       2 significant deaths - GITU
           t> V»i>
      Sunday 16th

      17 discharged

     Monday 17th

       9 discharged

      Tuesday 18th

      1 discharged
      3 transferred to Liverpool
      1 death on GITU

      Wednesday 19th

      1 transferred to Liverpool
      1 discharged

      Thursday 20th

      1 discharged

      Friday 21st

      2 discharged
DRAFT

SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY
NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989

1.      Introduction

1.1     On 15th April 1989 the Northern General Hospital and the Royal
        Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield were involved in receiving casualties
        from an incident at the Hillsborough Football Ground which resulted in a
        number of casualties and deaths.  This report describes the Northern
        General Hospital's response to the situation and in particular the role
        of certain key officers in managing the incident, treating the casualties
        and liaising with other departments both within and outside the hospital.

2.      Summary

2.1     The Northern General Hospital received a total of 88 casualties of whom
         11 were dead on arrival or died within the Accident and Emergency
         Department, 56 were admitted including IS* into Intensive Care and
         ventillated on Wards. Subsequently, 7 patients were transferred for CT
         Scans and specialised Neurological/Neurosurgical Care to the Royal
         Hallamshire Hospital and two patients died. Most patients were young men
         and suffered crush injuries.

2.2     The first patient arrived at about 1527 hours andwithin   about anhour                                 87
        patients (plus 5 other routine casualties) were received.  The last,
         casualty was received at about 1645 hours.

2.3     The hospital responded exceptionally well. Staff were summoned but
         because the disaster arose from a major media event many staff had begun
         to make their own way into the hospital.

2.4     The nature of the injuries was very unusual in terms of major accidents
         with large numbers of patients requiring immediate ventilation and only 1
         patient requiring surgery.

 2.5    Large numbers of relatives and friends arrived to seek information about
         -
         j-j-
            jp injured and about people with whom they had lost contact duiing the
         crush at the football stadium. Major efforts were employed to deal
         consistently with these people.

 2.6    Large numbers of local, national and worldwide media arrived at the
         hospital and stayed for about 48 hours.

 2.7    A great n u m b e r of p r e - a r r a n g e d vi s i t s f r o m VIP s took p lace f r o m Sunday,
         16 Ap r i l 1989 until Wedne s d a y , 19 April 1989.

 2.8    I n t e n s i v e and c o m p r e h e n s i v e arrangrnents are in p l a c e to prov i d e g r o u p and
          in d i v i d u al c o u n s e l l i n g to staff.

 2.9    A number of issues have arisen in subsequent debriefings and are listed
         in this paper as matters for further action and consideration.




                                                       1
3.     Alerting Procedure and Subsequent Call Out Arrangements

3.1    The Northern General Hospital Major Disaster Plan states that declaration
        of a major disaster will be made.

       "By one or other of the emergency services, the most likely of these
       being the ambulance service. Notification will be made to the
       switchboards of the receiving hospitals. However, if large numbers of
       seriously injured casualties arrive without notice at the Accident and
       Emergency Department, the procedure may be put into action locally on the
       instructions of the senior doctor present in the Accident and Emergency
       Department."

3.2    At approximately 1520 hours one of the two Switchboard Operators at the
        hospital received a call from the Police which indicated, in the words of
        the Operator "we were on casualty stand-by". The words stand-by were
        used by the Police. The Switchboard Operator contacted the Accident and
        Emergency Department and the Assistant Matron on duty and advised them of
        the situation. At about the same time two routine accidents were
        received in the Department with the Ambulance men reporting that there
        was, what was thought to be either a road traffic accident or a problem
        at Hillsborough Football Stadium.

3.3    Between 1520 and 1525 hours the Assistant Matron contacted Admissions to
        ascertain the current bed state and then proceeded to the Accident and
        Emergency Department. At about 1520 hours the Charge Nurse on duty in
        the Accident and Emergency Department attempted to contact the Consultant
        in Charge of the Department at home. He was not at home but the
        Switchboard immediately bleeped him and asked him to come into the
        hospital. The Consultant arrived at the hospital at approximately 1533
        hours. On arrival, the Consultant confirmed with the Charge Nurse that
        the Major Disaster Plan for the Accident and Emergency Department had
        been put into operation.

3.4    At approximately 1525 hours, SYMAS contacted the Accident and Emergency
        Department and told them to expect a child who had had a cardiac arrest.
        No further details were received from SYMAS. About two minutes later and
        therefore approximately 1527 hours, the first casualty arrived from
        Hillsborough and the first patient was "the child", about whom a call had
        been received earlier. Precise accounts vary but the Assistant Matron
        remembers an ambulance man stating, at this point, that there was a major
        accident at Hillsborough Football Stadium. At this point, the Charge
        Nurse in the Accident and Emergency Department instructed a Staff Nurse
        to call out Accident and Emergency Staff in line with the hospital's
        procedure. At the same time a second Assistant Matron arrived in the
        Accident and Emergency Department and began to ring for nursing help.
        Simultaneously, the Assistant Matron on duty returned to the Switchboard
        and it is believed she arrived there at approximately 1535 hours.

 3.5    At this point the Switchboard had still not received a call to "implement
        the Major Disaster Plan". However, they responded to a request from the
        Accident and Emergency Department to contact all available doctors. This
        they did in a very thorough manner.


                                        2
3.6   At approximately 1543 hours, the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard
      was contacted to ascertain whether they had received information about a
      Major Disaster Plan.  The Operator is said to have stated that they also
      had received a call to be on "stand-by".

3.7   Knowing that both hospitals could not be on stand-by at the same time,
       the Assistant Matron and the telephonists decided to implement the
      communications cascade as in the hospital's major disaster plan.

3.8   The Switchboard at Northern General Hospital also continued throughout
       this time to contact Medical Staff. During this time, as the
      Switchboard's electronic record shows, an enormous number of calls were
      being received particularly from hospital staff who had heard of the
       events at the Football Stadium either by television or radio.

3.9   At about 1550 hours the Consultant in Charge of the Accident and
       Emergency Department asked the Ambulance Liaison Officer and ambulance
       mane bringing patients in to inform SYMAS to divert further
       casualties to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital. This was repeated by a
       member of the Medical Staff at about 1600 hours.

3.2   Comment

      3.2.1     No member of staff has so far acknowledged that the Switchboard or
                the Accident and Emergency Department received an instruction from
                SIMAS or the Police to implement the Major Disaster Plan other
                than a conversation between the ambulance men and staff in the
                Accident and Emergency Department at approximately 1527 hours
                referred to above.

      3.2.2     There was uncertainty amongst Switchboard, Accident and Emergency
                and Senior Nursing Staff on duty as to whether a Major Disaster
                had actually been declared.   It is to the credit of the Charge
                Nurse in the Accident and Emergency Department and the Switchboard
                Staff on duty that they took the initiative in implementing the
                hospital's communications cascade.

      3.2.3     Although key Medical and Nursing Personnel were called quickly,
                the length of time taken by the Switchboard Staff in operating the
                cascade system is of some concern. This is not a criticism of the
                Switchboard Operators but the hospital will be investigating ways
                of using modern technology to speed up this laborious task. This
                would also save Switchboard and other staff valuable time, which
                on such occasions is at a premium.

       3.2.4    Whilst the Switchboard do keep and check monthly their list of
                staff who may be needed during a major accident, it seems that
                some key staff had had not yet been put onto the list and the ways
                of updating the list more speedily will be investigated.

       3.2.5    Despite all of the above, Switchboard Staff and Nursing Staff in
                the Accident and Emergency Department behaved in an exemplary
                manner.



                                        3
4.         A c c id e n t   and Em ergency   Response

4 1        The Accident and Emergency Department   received the first patients from
            about 1527 hours and initially there were four SHOs from variousareas of
            the hospital and shortly afterwards, the Consultant in Charge of the
            Accident and Emergency Department was available to receive casualties.
            By 1545 hours, doctors were arriving in sufficient numbers to have one
            doctor per patient.  This relieved the Consultant in Charge of the
            Accident and Emergency Department to dedicate himself totally to the
            triage team, a task which he had had to undertake previously, whilst at
            the same time, treating patients. There were 16 patients requiring
            resuscitation and this, together with the fact that 87 patients were seen
            in the Department within about one hour, led to considerable pressure
            upon the staff in the Department. The last patient was received
            approximately 15 minutes after the 87th patient.

4.2        It was at approximately 1540 hours that there was a request from SYMAS
            for a site team to be sent from the hospital and when sufficent doctors
           had arrived at approximately 1545 hours a Registrar in Anaesthetics and               ^
            SHO from Accident and Emergency were released to attend the Stadium.

4 3        The last patient was received in the Department at approximately 1645
            hours.

 4.5       Comment

             4.5.1          There were initial difficulties in the Department in not receiving
                            clear instructions regarding the implementation of the Major
                            Accident Plan.

             4.5.2          There were also problems because of the number of casualties
                            presenting themselves in a short time scale, although the Medical
                            and Nursing Staff coped admirably.

             4.5.3          As the hospital was the first receiving Unit, the Northern General
                            Hospital should not have been asked to send out its mobile team
                            and it is understood that when the team did attend Hillsborough
                            Stadium, they were turned to the Department as there were
                            sufficient doctors in attendance although the equipment was
                            retained on site. The Major Disaster Plan clearly indicates that
                            the second receiving hospital should be the first one to be asked
                            to send a mobile team.   This requires clarification.

     5.      Control Centre Arrangements

     5.1     The Hospital's Major DisasterPlan indicates that three areas should   be
             set up to act as control centres for major disasters, these being a
             nursing base, hospital control and administrative base. The General
             Services Manager (Surgery and Accident and Emergency) had witnessed the
              incident on television and had telephoned the hospital at approximately
              1515 hours and enquired of the Accident and Emergency Department whether
              the Major Disaster had been declared. At that time, it had not and he
              therefore took the decision to come into the hospital to set up the
              control centres.  The General Services Manager (Surgery and Accident and
              Emergency), upon arrival., quickly established the necessary control


                                                        4
      centres.  The situation delevoped rapidly such that the dedicated nursing
      base was not established in its planned location, although the nursing
      base was effectively provided within the hospital control and
      administrative base which appeared to work more satisfactorily than if
      the base had been set up in its designated area.

5.2   By this time, Police Officers had also arrived in the Department and
       their control centre was set up in the Sister's Office in the Orthopaedic
       Clinic, this being done by approximately 1605 hours.

5.3   The Control Centres were fully in operation at approximately 1615-1620
       hours and directing various aspects of the hospital's response and
       dealing with enquiries from Relatives, etc. when sufficient staff had
       arrived at the hospital (although they had begun to function before
       then).

5.4   Comment

      5.4.1     Although the Major Disaster Plan clearly indicates that three
                hospital controls should be set up (ie. Nursing Base, Hospital
                Control and Administrative Base), with a fourth area being set up
                for the police, it is felt beneficial to have the three hospital
                bases together with the police base all in the same area. This
                view is shared by the Police who attended the hospital to staff
                their control base. It is felt that the Police Officers manning
                the control base should have local knowledge and be of a
                sufficient seniority to make independent decisions.

      5.4.2     The hospital Control Room was closed down at about 1830 hours on
                Sunday and comprehensive Management On-Call arrangements were
                made. Very many enquiries continued and were taken by on-call
                Managers at home. With the benefit of hindsight, it would have
                been better to have kept the control centre open until the
                following morning.

6•    X-Ray Department

6.1   On-Call Radiographers were alerted by Staff in the Accident and Emergency
       Department. The Radiographers immediately implemented their own cascade
       system. Meanwhile, other staff attended who heard via their media.

6.2   There was some concern that there might not. be enough Radiographers
      available so the Department asked local radio stations to broadcast for
       assistance, which they did.

6.3   The staff within the Department acted in a very efficient manner and the
       procedure was fully implemented.

7.    Ward Admission Arrangements

7.1   Receiving Ward and Other Admitting Arrangements

       At 1545 hours the first patients were being admitted to Ward 60, which
       had, by this time, been cleared to receive casualties, their patients
       Having been transferred to other Wards in the hospital.


                                         5
7.2    Intensive Care/Intensive Treatment Units

       The Northern General Hospital has a General Intensive Treatment Unit
       which can accommodate 10 beds but is normally staffed for 6 and a Cardiac
       Intensive Care Unit which is normally used for the immediate post
       operative care of patients having undergone cardiac surgeryand which has
       8 staffed beds. The General Intensive Treatment Unit had 5 patients
       transferred and 3 patients had to be transferred from the Cadiac
       Intensive Care Unit to Wards accommodate the overflow from the General
       ITU. Initially Inpatients required ventilation, one died and seven were
       transferred to Royal Hallamshire Hospital for CT Scanning. Within five
       days this had reduced to only one continuing to occupy an Intensive Care
       Bed.

8.     Patient Documentation

8.1    Patient documentation was initially hampered by the initial lack of
        clarity that the Major Disaster Plan had been implemented. This resulted
        in the first cases not being recognised as being from a Major Disaster.
        There were also some cases of patients not involved in the Hillsborough
        Disaster being documented as part of it but this was later rectified.

8.2    Comment

       8.2.1     The difficulties highlighted above resulted in problems being
                 experienced in matching documentation with patients and
                 consequential problems of identification of patients. This
                 resulted in some lack of clarity regarding information to friends
                 and relatives. This is one area of concern which will be further
                 investigated. However, once the Major Accident Plan is
                 implemented, it is inevitable that some other routine   casualties
                 could be included in the number of major accident patients.

9.     Operating Theatres

9.1    Only one patient required surgery (an abdominal investigation).  However,
        theatre staff of all disciplines were available in numbers, had there
        service been required.

10.    Patient Care/Treatment

10.1   Patients arrived in large numbers in the two hours from approximately
       1527 hours resulting in a total of 88 patients being treated of which 56       -fj,   (i
       were admitted, including     to Intensive Care areas, ^ o f whom were                      Totrtg
       transferred to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Intensive Care Unit.    11                   '
       were dead on arrival or died in the Accident and Emergency Department and             *
       a further 2 deaths occurred on the General Intensive Therapy Unit.    In
       addition to being admitted to the General Intensive Treatment Unit,
       Cardiac Intensive Care Unit and Ward 60 patients were also admitted to
       wards 65 and 66 with one patient being accommodated on ward 3A and one on
       Ward 63. In addition, during this time, 5 patients were treated who were
       not involved in the incident.




                                         6
10.2   The hospital plan requires the walking wounded to be treated in the
       Physiotherapy Department and there appeared to have been some delays in
       contacting the Physiotherapist on-call and therefore a delay in opening
       the Department.

10.3   Comment

       10.3.1 Some difficulty existed in patients locating Physiotherapy and
              this requires attention.

       10.3.2 Ways of ensuring this important area is unlocked should be
              investigated.

11•    Support Departments

11.1   It would appear that the majority of support departments responded
       extremely well. There was an initial problem with a shortage of oxygen
       flow meters but this was very quickly rectified by the Technical
       Equipment Department.

11.2   Comment

       11.2.1 The Portering Staff performed in an exemplary fashion.

       11.2.2 A regular supply of refreshments were available from Catering
              Staff (and also volunteers) throughout the incident and its
              aftermath. The Catering Staff manned the servery in the hospital
              snack bar throughout the night as it doubled as the Relatives
              base.

       11.2.3 Linen Services were very well covered.

       11.2.4 Messengers were generally well available but it is felt that
              consideration should be given in any revisions of the plan to
              allocate Messengers to key areas.

       11.2.5 Bags and envelopes are available for personal property within each
              case note folder for major accident patients. These do not appear
              to have been used and this requires review.

       11.2.6 The Mortuary was prepared for the bodies of deceased patients.
              Some relatives of deceased patients were distressed that even
              though their kin had been identified, all bodies were removed by
              the Police.  It is suggested that this is reviewed for the future.

       11.2.7 Arrangements for clerical, secretarial, laboratories, CSSD,
              Supplies and Pharmacy all worked exceptionally well.




                                      7
12.     C o m m u n ic a tio n s   and A ccess   to   H o s p ita l   S ite

12.1    The main problem with communications appears to have been that distraught
         relatives were ringing the hospitals for information which was not
         speedily available particularly regarding the fatalities.  It was clear
         that the vast majority of callers had already tried the Police emergency
         number without success. Relatives were therefore ringing the hospital
         in desperation.  The Police Hospital Control appears to have closed too
         early resulting in many calls being received by the hospital (about
         midnight on Saturday 15.4.89).

12.2    Communications were however soon established between the Royal
        Hallamshire Hospital and the Northern General Hospital with a ready
        exchange of information between the two.

12.3     Access to the Accident and Emergency Department was maintained within the
         Hospital grounds although with some difficulty as described below.

12.4    Comment

         12.4.1 There would appear to be a need to improve communications with the
                Police, especially regarding traffic control arrangements along
                the Herries Road drive which became severely congested. This
                resulted in a member of staff acting as "Control Officer" within
                the hospital.

         12.4.2 The special telephone lines set up by the Police were constantly
                engaged thereby creating additional calls being made to the
                hospital.  It is suggested that the Police should need to re­
                assess that requirement for the future.

                     (It is interesting to note that the hospital Switchboard normally
                     deals with 2,000 telephone calls at the weekend with these
                     increasing to 7,000 over this particular weekend).

          12.4.3 It would be helpful if a member of staff could be deployed in
                 front of the reception desk to deflect queries made to staff on
                 the desk by friends and relatives trying to gain information
                 regarding the casualties. This should then reduce the amount of
                 queries being received by the reception staff.

 13 .     Inter Agency Liaison

 13.1   The Social Workers, Psychologists and Chaplains of all denominations
         responded to the incident and quickly set up a patients relatives centre
         in the hospital's dining room which is situated one level lower than the
         Accident and Emergency Department but, owing to the sloping nature of the
         site, also has ground floor access.  The various voluntary organisations
         also responded with ther Hospital's League of Friends, Salvation Army,
         WRVS and Red Cross amongst others comforting distressed relatives and
         friends.




                                                            8
14.    Press

14.1   The Press Room was very quickly set up, this being in the Out Patients
       Area 1 of level 'C' adjacent to the main entrance of the hospital.
       Whilst the majority of the press acted with decorum there were a number
       who sought to gain interviews and would appear to go to any lengths to
       obtain them from patients, their friends or relatives and members of the
       hospital staff. This resulted in valuable managerial time being taken up
       with keeping the situation under control.  The Assistant Public Relations
       Officer was invaluable in managing this area.

14.2   In addition, very soon after the commencement of the incident the Press
       started to telephone the Hospital.

14.3   The first Press Conference was held by the Unit General Manager and
       Consultant in Charge of Accident and Emergency at about 1830 hours on
       Saturday.

14.4   In addition, Press enquiries were also dealt with by other Managers,
       mainly over the telephone but on some occasions face to face. A further
       Press Conference was held on the Sunday morning at approximately 1000
       hours involving Unit General Manager, Consultant in Charge of Accident
       and Emergency, Consultant Anaesthetist and Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
       Officer. Another conference was held on Monday morning and many other ad
       hoc statements were issued and interviews given.

14.5   Comment

       14.5.1 Some confusion arose at one point only about information being
              given to the press.   In future,the need for only one Senior
              Officer to be designated for issuing press statements and giving
              interviews will be emphasized.

15.    Relatives and Friends

15.1   There were many visitors to the hospital very soon after the event who
       were anxious to have news of their friends and relatives.  It is
       estimated that between 200 and 300 people were present at any time for a
       number of hours.  The patients' relatives base was very quickly set up
       within the Staff Dining Room on level ’C' of the Out Patients Department,
       this being manned by members of staff and various voluntary agencies
       including the Salvation Army, League of Friends, Social Workers and
       Chaplains of all denominations.

15.2   Senior Managers took full responsibility for co-ordinating activity here.
       The main problem was providing information to people.

15.3   Comment

       15.3.1 This does appear to have been one of the major successes of the
              whole operation in that relatives were able to congregate in one
              area resulting in information being more easily disseminated as it
              became available. All those who manned this area should be
              commended for their patience and fortitude under considerable
              pressure.


                                      9
16.     Volunteers

16.1    As indicated above, the hospital's Dining Room was set aside for the
        relatives base and was very quickly manned by a number of volunteers
        including staff volunteers.

17.     Visits by VIPs

17.1     After the event the hospital received a number of visits from celebrities
        and dignitaries, these including on the Sunday Mr David Blunkett MP, the
        Prime Minister and Horne Secretary, the Archbishop Warlock of Liverpool, the
        Bishop of Warrington, and the Free Church Moderator of Liverpool. On
        Monday, Liverpool FC, the Lord Mayor of Sheffield, the Leader of
        Liverpool City Council and TRH's Prince and Princess of Wales. On
        Tuesday, the Leader of the Opposition, HRM Duke of Kent, Bishop of Hal lam
        and on Wednesday, Nottingham Forest FC.

17.2    Comment

        17.2.1 The visits were appreciated by many of the staff and patients
               however, they did cause significant extra work. It is expressed
               that a number of dignitaries and celebrities will wish to visit
               patients, their relatives and the staff who are involved in such
               accidents, but, this does result in additional stress especially
               when staff are anxious to  return the hospital to normal working
               patterns.

18.     The Aftermath

18.1    Managing the consequences of the disaster within the hospital has been a
        major task since the patients were received.

18.2    Very comprehensive managerial and clinical debriefing has taken place and
        will continue.

18.3     Counselling sessions were arranged for staff from the night of the
         incident onwards which take the form of group therapy and are being
         organised by Clinical Psychologists, facilities are also available for
         staff to have individual counselling sessions should they wish to avail
         themselves of the facility.

 19.    Conclusion

 19.1   All staff respondedexceptionally well to the    incident and reinforces the
         view that an excellent relationshipexists at   theNorthern  General
         Hospital between all grades and disciplines.

 19.2    As with every other Major Disaster there are undoubtedly lessons to be
         learned from this incident.

 19.3    In particular the hospital and other agencies will need to clarify
         the way in which a Major Disaster should be declared.




                                       10
19.4   The operation of the cascade procedures will require close scrutiny and
       modification to hasten the procedure.  Undoubtedly, the fact the incident
       happened on a Saturday afternoon and received much media attention
       assisted in getting staff into the hospital.

19.5   This accident was a severe test for treating a large number of acutely
       asphyxiated casualties requiring resuscitation.  However, because of the
       nature of the injuries, did not test some parts of the plan, for example,
       the Theatres.




JA/NW/26.4.89




                                      11
  *   Jfk



APPENDIX




Fact and Figures

            Saturday 15th

            88 patients treated
            56 admitted US' of whom were admitted to Intensive Care Wards and A.
                        ventillated on Wards, 7 subsequently transferred to Royal
                        Hallamshire Hospital)
            11 BID or died in Accident and Emergency Department
             2 subsequent deaths - GITU

            Sunday 16th

            17 discharged

            Monday 17th

             9 discharged

            Tuesday 18th

            1 discharged
            3 transferred to Liverpool
            1 death on GITU

            Wednesday 19th

            1 transferred to Liverpool
            1 discharged

            Thursday 20th

            1 discharged

            Friday 21st

            2 discharged




                                           12
                                                                             Sheffield Health Authority



                                 P fcfftfem                                 M@©pStaIl
Our ref.    JW /D S                                                Herries Road, Sheffield S5 7AU
Your ref.                                                                 Telephone (0 7 4 2 ) 4 3 4 3 4 3

Please reply to                  Ext.


            Accident and Emergency Department


            *+th May 1989




            Mr.
            Administration Assistant,
            Northern General Hospital.



            Dear Mr.


            With reference to our discussion yesterday I enclose a draft report
            regarding the Major Incident on the 15th April for distribution to the
            medical staff for the Hospital Medical Staff Committee Meeting on
            Tuesday.




            Yours sincerely,




            J. WABDROPE
            Consultant in Accident and Emergency Medicine




G. 1530
CONFIDENTIAL                                                           DRAFT




REPORT TO THE MEDICAL STAFF COMMITTEE, NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL
REGARDING THE MAJOR INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND ON
SATURDAY 15th APRIL, 1989



There has been       much confusion regarding the implementation of the
Major Disaster       Plan on the 1 5 th April and I will therefore begin
by setting out       the time scale of events between 1 5 - 0 0 hours and
1 6 . 0 0 hours on   that day.

15.06     Play was stopped in the F.A. Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough
          Football Ground.    There appeared to be trouble in the ground.
          At that time there was no evidence of any casualties or of the
          seriousness of the incident.

15*10    A message from the Police was relayed via the switchboard at the
         Northern General Hospital to the Accident and Emergency Department.
         The message read "There is some trouble at Hillsborough*'. At
15.20    approximately 15-20 the Northern General Hospital switchboard
         received a call which said we were to"Stand-by to receive
         casualties from Hillsborough'!     I believe that this call came
         from the Police.

          At this time,           telephoned me at home and then bleeped
          me.    I answered the bleep fairly promptly.   At 15-23 I left
          home bound for the Accident and Emergency Department.

15»25     There was a message from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
          Ambulance Service over our emergency telephone "Expect a child
          cardiac arrest".   (There is no mention in this message that
          the child was coming from Hillsborough, or any other mention of
          Hillsborough).

15»27     The cardiac arrest arrived along: with another ambulance.   At
          this point Charge Nurse       (Nurse in charge of the Accident
          and Emergency Department on that day) declared a Major Incident
          and began implementing the Accident and Emergency part of the
          Major Accident Plan.    At the same time a nursing officer went
          from the Accident and Emergency Department to the switchboard.

15.30     ^'he Nursing Officer arrived at the     switchboard but since the
          switchboard had still not received      any further instructions to
          implement the Major Accident Plan,      switchboard began calling in
          Doctors and the cascade system was      not implemented.

15.33     I arrived in the Accident and Emergency Department.    I asked
          Charge Nurse       ’’Have you implemented the Major Disaster Plan?"
          and he answered "Yes".     I then checked the Resuscitation Area.
          There were three patients with an S.H.O. from Accident and
          Emergency, a Paediatric S.H.O. and an S.H.O. in Anaesthetics from
          Rotherham, who had come in the hospital'on hearing of the trouble
          at Hillsborough.

15.35     Almost immediately after my arrival the second wave of casualties
          began arriving.   Many of these were unconscious, or indeed in a
          state of cardiac arrest.   These v/ere triaged to the Resuscitation
          Area.   I had to go and help in Resuscitation before returning to
          triage.
CONFIDENTIAL                                                          DRAFT

                            _   2   -


15-^3      The switchboard were able to get through to the Hallamshire
           switchboard and heard that they were also on stand-by and
           realising that both hospitals could not be on stand-by, the
           Major Incident cascade was implemented.    However, the
           switchboard operator did not start on the first page since they
           knew that Accident and Emergency was aware, the senior nurses
           were aware and that the General Surgical Doctors were aware,
           since they had already called them.   However since starting
           at the second page, they did not call the Senior House Officer
           in Orthopaedic ourgery or the first on-call Anaesthetist.

15.^5      Medical staff were arriving in numbeis and this allowed the
           Accident and Emergency Consultant to concentrate on triage and
           in directing other medical staff.

           About this time a request was received to send a mobile team
           to the ground.   As soon as enough staff were in the department
           I despatched an Anaesthetic Registrar and an G.H.Q. in Accident
           and Emergency, along with our Major Accident equipment and also
           our mobile team transferred equipment to the ground.     In the
           rush the team did not take their protective clothing and
           identification clothing.    No nurses were sent since experienced
           Accident and Qnergency nurses were still essential in the
           department at that time.

1 5 .5 0   •‘■he department was becoming saturated with acutely ill patients.
           I therefore requested ambulance liaison and then the ambulance
           drivers themselves to make it known to SYMAS control that they
           should direct casualties to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.



During the first hour 87 patients were received from Hillsborough and by
1 7 . 3 0 the department had received 93 patients, 88 of these were from
Hillsborough and 5 of these were other casualties (one of these was a
cardiac arrest, and there was also one with a fractured dislocation of the
ankle).
CONFIDENTIAL                                                           DRAFT




REPORT TO THE MEDICAL STAFF COMMITTEE, NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL
REGARDING THE MAJOR INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND ON
SATURDAY 1 5 th APRIL, 1989



There has been       much confusion regarding the implementation of the
Major Disaster       Plan on the 1 5 th April and I will therefore begin
by setting out       the time scale of events between 1 5 . 0 0 hours and
1 6 . 0 0 hours on   that day.

15.06     Play was stopped in the F.A. Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough
          Football Ground.    There appeared to be trouble in the ground.
          At that time there was no evidence of any casualties or of the
          seriousness of the incident.

15.10    A message from the Police was relayed via the switchboard a t t h e
         Northern General Hospital to the Accident and Emergency Department.
         The message read "There is some trouble at Hillsborough". At
15.20    approximately 15*20 the Northern General Hospital switchboard
         received a call which said we were to"Stand-by to receive
         casualties from Hillsborough'!       I believe that this callcame
         from the Police.

          At this time,           telephoned me at home and then bleeped
          me.    I answered the bleep fairly promptly.   At 15*23 I left
          home bound for the Accident and Emergency Department.

15«25     There was a message from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
          Ambulance Service over our emergency telephone "Expect a child
          cardiac arrest".   (There is no mention in this message that
          the child was coming from Hillsborough, or any other mention of
          Hillsborough).

15.27     The cardiac arrest arrived along with another ambulance.    At
          this point Charge Nurse       (Nurse in charge of the Accident
          and Emergency Department on that day) declared a Major Incident
          and began implementing the Accident and Emergency part of the
          Major Accident Plan.    At the same time a nursing officer went
          from the Accident and Emergency Department to the switchboard.

15.30     The Nursing Officer arrived at the      switchboard but since the
          switchboard had still not received      any further instructions to
          implement the Major Accident Plan,      switchboard began calling in
          Doctors and the cascade system was      not implemented.

15.33     I arrived in the Accident and Emergency Department.    I asked
          Charge Nurse        'Have you implemented the Major Disaster Plan?"
          and he answered "Yes".     I then checked the Resuscitation Area.
          There were three patients with an S.H.O. from Accident and
          Emergency, a Paediatric S.H.O. and an S.H.O. in Anaesthetics from
          Rotherham, who had come in the hospital on hearing of the trouble
          at Hillsborough.

15*35     Almost immediately after my arrival the second wave of casualties
          began arriving.   Many of these were unconscious, or indeed in a
          state of cardiac arrest.   These were triaged to the Resuscitation
          Area.   I had to go and help in Resuscitation before returning to
          triage.
CONFIDENTIAL                                                         DRAFT

                            -   2


15.43      The switchboard were able to get through to the Hallamshire
           switchboard and heard that they were also on stand-by and
           realising that both hospitals could not be on stand-by, the
           Major Incident cascade was implemented.    However, the
           switchboard operator did not start on the first page since they
           knew that Accident and Emergency was aware, the senior nurses
           were aware and that the General Surgical Doctors were aware,
           since they had already called them.   However since starting
           at the second page, they did not call the Senior House Officer
           in Orthopaedic Surgery or the first on-call Anaesthetist.

15.45      Medical staff were arriving in numbers and this allowed the
           Accident and Emergency Consultant to concentrate on triage and
           in directing other medical staff.

           About this time a request was received to send a mobile team
           to the ground.   As soon as enough staff we’
                                                      r e in the department
           I despatched an Anaesthetic Registrar and an S.H.O. in Accident
           and Emergency, along with our Major Accident equipment and also
           our mobile team transferred equipment to the ground.     In the
           rush the team did not take their protective clothing and
           identification clothing.    No nurses were sent since experienced
           Accident and Energency nurses were still essential in the
           department at that time.

1 5 .5 0   ^'he department was becoming saturated with acutely ill patients.
           I therefore requested ambulance liaison and then the ambulance
           drivers themselves to make it known to SYMAS control that they
           should direct casualties to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.



During the first hour 87 patients were received from Hillsborough and by
1 7 . 3 0 the department had received 93 patients, 88 of these were from
Hillsborough and 5 of these were other casualties (one of these was a
cardiac arrest, and there was also one with a fractured dislocation of the
ankle).
CONFIDENTIAL                                                           DRAFT




REPORT TO THE MEDICAL STAFF COMMITTEE, NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL
REGARDING THE MAJOR INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND ON
SATURDAY 1 5 th APRIL, 1989



There has been       much confusion regarding the implementation of the
Major Disaster       Plan on the 1 5 th April and I will therefore begin
by setting out       the time scale of events between 1 5 . 0 0 hours and
1 6 . 0 0 hours on   that day.

15.06     Play was stopped in the F.A. Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough
          Football Ground.    There appeared to be trouble in the ground.
          At that time there was no evidence of any casualties or of the
          seriousness of the incident.

15.10    A message from the Police was relayed via the switchboard at the
         Northern General Hospital to the Accident and Emergency Department.
         The message read "There is some trouble at Hillsborough'*. At
15.20    approximately 15.20 the Northern General Hospital switchboard
         received a call which said we were to"Stand-by to receive
         casualties from Hillsborough'!     I believe that this call came
         from the Police.

          At this time, __________ [telephoned me at home and then bleeped
          me.    I answered the bleep fairly promptly.     At 15*23 I left
          home bound for the Accident and Emergency Department.

15«25    There was a message from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
         Ambulance Service over our emergency telephone "Expect a child
         cardiac arrest".    (There is no mention in this message that
         the child was coming from Hillsborough, or any other mention of
         Hillsborough).

15*27    The cardiac arrest arrived along with another ambulance.     At
         this point Charge Nurse        [Nurse in charge of the Accident
         and Emergency Department on that day) declared a Major Incident
         and began implementing the Accident and Emergency part of the
         Major Accident Plan.    At the same time a nursing officer went
          from the Accident and Emergency Department to the switchboard.

15.30     The Nursing Officer arrived at the      switchboard but since the
          switchboard had still not received      any further instructions to
          implement the Major Accident Plan,      switchboard began calling in
          Doctors and the cascade system was      not implemented.

15.33    I arrived in the Accident and Etnergency Department.     I asked
          Charge Nurse        ’Have you implemented the Major Disaster Plan?"
          and he answered "Yes".     I then checked the Resuscitation Area.
          There were three patients with an S.H.O. from Accident and
          Emergency, a Paediatric S.H.O. and an S.H.O. in Anaesthetics from
          Rotherham, who had come in t h e •hospital on hearing of the trouble
          at Hillsborough.

          Almost immediately after my arrival the second wave of casualties
          began arriving.   Many of these were unconscious, or indeed in a
          state of cardiac arrest.   These were triaged to the Resuscitation
          Area.   I had to go and help in resuscitation before returning to
          triage.
CONFIDENTIAL
           ■ i        A                                              DRAFT

                            -   2   -




15.43      The switchboard were able to get through to the Hallamshire
           switchboard and heard that they were also on stand-by and
           realising that both hospitals could not be on stand-by, the
           Major Incident cascade was implemented.      However, the
           switchboard operator did not start on the first page since they
           knew that Accident and Emergency was aware, the senior nurses
           v.'ere aware and that the General Surgical Doctors were aware,
           since they had already called them.     However since starting
           at the second page, they did not call the Senior House Officer
           in Orthopaedic Surgery or the first on-call Anaesthetist.

15.45      Medical staff were arriving in numbers and this allowed the
           Accident and Emergency Consultant to concentrate on triage and
           in directing other medical staff.

           About this time a request was received to send a mobile team
           to the ground.   As soon as enough staff were in the department
           I despatched an Anaesthetic Registrar and an S.H.O. in Accident
           and Emergency, along with our Major Accident equipment and also
           our mobile team transferred equipment to the ground.     In the
           rush the team did not take their protective clothing and
           identification clothing.    No nurses were sent since experienced
           Accident and Emergency nurses were still essential in the
           department at that time.

1 5 .5 0   1'he department was becoming saturated with acutely ill patients.
           I therefore requested ambulance liaison and then the ambulance
           drivers themselves to make it known to SYMAS control that they
           should direct casualties to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.



During the first hour 87 patients were received from Hillsborough and by
1 7 . 3 0 the department had received 93 patients, 88 of these were from
Hillsborough and 5 of these were other casualties (one of these was a
cardiac arrest, and there was also one with a fractured dislocation of the
ankle).




                                                       ft   p
                              SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY - MEMORANDUM

From        Mr N S McKay                             To     See Distribution
            General Manager

Date        22 May 1989
Ref.        NSM/PP                                   Ref.                                   G.1779
Tel. Ext.
            4835




            I attach the latest version of our full report on the Hillsborough disaster.
            If you have any final corrections then please let me know as soon as possible
            for I will then submit it to the District General Manager.

            Meanwhile I should be grateful if|           ^nd Mr Wardrope would meet
            to begin to consider how best to modify our existing Major Accident Plan
            so that we can benefit from the lessons learnt from Hillsborough.  I would
            then intend for the recipients of this memorandum to meet to consider a
            review of the Plan which I hope we can conclude as quickly as possible.

            I am still awaiting notes of a meeting chaired by Mr Mapplebeck which took
            place on Friday 11 May 1989 which will provide some important information
            for our revised plan, but nonetheless I believe you can begin work on this
            important subject immediately.




             Distribution:          Members
                             u/Mr J Wardrope, Consultant in A & E
                               Mr I         General Services Manager




             Enc
                                      SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY                      V-   MEMORANDUM

From     J. WARDROPE                                                          .To           MR. N.S. McKAY


Date      2 6 T H MAY>    1989
Ref.
Tel. Ext.                                                                     Ref.                                               G .1779




         Thank you for the recent report on the response to the major disaster,
         there are only a couple of corrections I would like to make and these
         are really to the number, these have arisen since one of the patients
         transferred to the Hallamshire was not in fact ventilated or intensive
         care.   The appropriate paragraphs requiring alteration are:

         2.1             56 were admitted including 15 into Intensive Care
                          and 2 ventil .ated on the Ward, subsequently 7 patients
                         were transferred for CT Scans, etc.

         4.2             When sufficient doctors had arrived at .approximately
                          1545 hours a ftcgtslrar in Anaesthetics and SHO from
                         Accident and Emergency were released to attend the Stadium.

         7.2             Intensive Care Unit to Wards accommodate the overflow
                         from the General ITU.                       Initially 15 patients required
                         ventilation, one died and four were transferred to
                          the Hallamshire Hospital for CT Scanning.                                       Two- paLienLa
                         on-tho tmied were ventilatod ~ahd                                       of three patients
                         i f p r r I i i i r i H ' T P t I frn t i n H n l 1 n m n hi r r f n r - F T - flr -r m r r tftc from
                         fhe-ifert-ds.

         10.1            56 were admitted, including 15 to Intensive Care areas,
                          4 of whom were transferred to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital
                          Intensive Care Unit, 3 patients were transferreddirect from
                          the Wards to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

         On theFacts and Figures                    last page

         admitted (15 admitted to Intensive Care Wards and 2 ventilated on Wards
         7 subsequently transferred to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.


         Otherwise the document is fine.




         J.WARDROPE
DRAFT

SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY
NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989

1.   Introduction

     On 15th April 1989 the Northern General Hospital and the Royal Hallamshire
     Hospital, Sheffield were involved in receiving casualties from an incident
     at the Hillsborough Football Ground which resulted in a number of casualties
     and deaths.  This report describes the Northern General Hospital's response
     to the situation and in particular the role of certain key officers in
     managing the incident, treating the casualties and liaising with other
     departments both internal and external to the other hospital.



2.   Summary




3.   Alerting Procedure

     The Northern General Hospital Major Disaster Plan states that declaration of
     a major disaster will be made "by one or other of the emergency services,
     the most likely of these being the ambulance service. Notification will be
     made to the switchboards of the receiving hospitals. However, if large
     numbers of seriously injured casualties arrive without notice at the
     Accident and Emergency Department, the procedure may be put into action
     locally on the instructions of the senior doctor present in the Accident
     and Emergency Department."

     At approximately 1520 hours the Switchboard Operator received a call from
     the Police w h ich indicated that "we were on casualty stand-by".        The
     Switchboard Operator contacted the Assistant Matron on duty and advised her
     of the situation. At approximately 1520 hours a Staff Nurse in the Accident
     and E m ergency Department received a police message by the hospital
     Switchboard stating that there was "trouble at Hillsborough".   At about the
     same time two routine accidents were received in the Department w i t h the
     Ambulance men reporting that there was, what was thought to be either a
     road traffic accident or a problem at Hillsborough Football Stadium.

     At approximately 1520 hours the Assistant Matron contacted Admissions to
     ascertain the current bed state and then proceeded to the Accident and
     Emergency Department. At about 1520 hours the Charge Nurse on duty in the
     Accident and Emergency Department contacted the Consultant in Charge of the


                                          1
Department at home and asked him to come into the hospital. The Consultant
left home immediately, arriving at the hospital at approximately 1535 hours.yy**

After checking on the bed state Mrs         H went to the Switchboard and
telephoned the Royal Hallamshire Hospital to be informed that they were also
on standby. Knowing that both hospitals could not be on standby at the same
time Mrs           immediately declared the Major Disaster Procedure to be in
operation.

At approximately 1525 hours, SYMAS contacted Accident and Emergency
Department and told them to expect the admission of a child who had had a
cardiac arrest. No further details were received from SYMAS. Approximately^
two minutes later, the first casualty arrived from Hillsborough and the     /V*r
first patient was "the child", about whom a call had been received earlier.  f \ AM**
Precise accounts vary but the Assistant Matron remembers an ambulance man,        xA
she thinks who accompanied the child, stating that there was a major
accident at Hillsborough Football Stadium. At this point, the Charge Nurse
in the Accident and Emergency Department instructed a Staff Nurse to call
out Accident and Emergency Staff in line with the hospital's procedure.
Simultaneously, the Assistant Matron on duty returned immediately to the
Switchboard and it is believed she arrived there just after 1530 hours.

The Switchboard had still not received a call to "implement the Major
Disaster Plan". However, it was decided to begin to call out hospital
staff. A complete record of the staff called and the time they were called
is available from the Switchboard electronic call logging system.

At approximately 1543 hours, the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard was
contacted to ascertain whether they had received information about a Major
Disaster Plan, it appears that they also had received a call to be on "stand
by".

The Switchboard at Northern General Hospital therefore continued throughout
this time to contact hospital staff in line with the Major Disaster Plan.
During this time the Switchboard's electron record shows that an enormous
number of calls were being received particularly from hospital staff who had
heard of the events at the Football Stadium either by television or radio.
No evidence has so far emerged that the Switchboard or the Accident and
Emergency Department received an instruction from SYMAS or the Police to
implement the Major Disaster Plan other than a conversation betweem the
ambulance men and staff in the Accident and Emergency Department at
approximately 1527 hours referred to above.

It is interesting to note that the hospital Switchboard normally deals with
2,000 telephone calls at the weekend with these increasing to 7,000 over
this particular weekend.

Comment

There was certainly uncertainty amongst Switchboard, Accident and Emergency
and Senior Nursing Staff on duty as to whether the Major Disaster Plan had
acutally been called and it is to the credit of the Charge Nurse in the
Accident and Emergency Department and the Assistant Matron on duty that they
took the initiative in declaring the Major Accident Plan in operation.




                                   2
The length of time taken by the Switchboard Staff in operating the cascade
system is also of concern and the hospital will be investigating ways of
using modern technology to speed up this laborious task. This would also
save Switchboard Staff valuable time, which on such occasions is at a
premium.

Whilst the Switchboard do keep and check a list of staff who may be needed
during an on-call situation, it is apparent that a number of key staff had
had not yet been put onto the list and the ways of updating the list more
speedily will be investigated.

Despite all of the above, Switchboard Staff and Nursing Staff in the
Accident and Emergency Department behaved in an exemplary manner and the
cascade system was implemented.




                                  3
4.   R e c e iv in g   A rra n g e m e n ts

     The Hospital's Mahor Disaster Plan indicates that three areas should be set
     up to act as nerve centres for major diasters, these being a nursing base,
     hospital control and administrative base. The General Services Manager
     (Surgery and Accident and Emergency) had witnessed the incident on
     television and had rund the hospital at approximately 1515 hours and
     enquired of the Accident and Emergency Department whether the Major Disaster
     Procedure had been put into operation. At that time, the Procedure had not
     been implemented and he therefore took the decision to come into the
     hospital to set up the control centres. The General Services Manager
     (Surgery and Accident and Emergency) was met at the hospital by three
     Assistant Matrons and immediately went to the accident control cupboard with
     a view to setting up the three bases. Events, however overtook him and only
     the hospital control and the administrative base were actually set up. By
     this time, Police Officers had also arrived in the Department and their
     control centre was set up in the Sister's Office in the Orthopaedic Clinic,
     this being done by approximately 1605 hours. After setting up the control
     centres, the General Services Manager (Surgery and Accident and Emergency)
     confirmed with Switchboard that other Administrators had been called to be
     informed that contact had only been made possible with two of them, one
     being the Unit General Manager the other, the On-Call Administrator, both of
     whom were coming in.

     The Control Centres were in operation at approximately 1615-1620 hours when
     sufficent staff had arrived at the hospital.

     Comment

     Although the Major Disaster Plan clearly indicates that three hospital
     controls should be set up (ie. Nursing Base, Hospital Control and
     Administrative Base), with a fourth area being set up for the police, it is
     felt beneficial to have three hospital bases together with the police base
     or in the same area. This view is shared by the Police who attended the
     hospital to staff their control base.

5.   Hospital Call Out Procedures

      (a)     Preparations of Hospital and Cascade System

              The Hospital Disaster Plan clearly indicates a flow chart for immediate
              communication using a cascade system, thus relieving the Hospital Switchboard
              of the pressure of contacting many individuals. On this occasion the
              cascade system appears to have been circumvented by the fact that many
              of the staff heard of the incident via either the television or radio
              coverage resulting in many staff getting to the hospital before contact
              could be made by the Hospital Switchboard.

      (b)     Control Arrangements

              As indicated above, the Hospital's Control Centre was set up very
              quickly. Although information relevant to dealing with inquiries etc,
              was delayed owing to some of the early patients from the Disaster being
              initially documented on "ordinary" Accident and Emergency Records and
              there were some instances where patients not involved in the


                                              4
    Hillsborough Disaster and initiallly booked in as from that
    incident.  Throughout the disaster there appeared to be very good links
    maintained with the Ambulance and Police Services.

Accident and Emergency Response

The Accident and Emergency Department received the first patients from about
1527 hours and initially there were four SHOs from various areas of the
hospital and the Consultant in Charge of the Accident and Emergency
Department available to receive casualties. By 1545 hours, doctors were
arriving in sufficient numbers to have one doctor per patient and this
relieved the Consultant in Charge of the Accident and Emergency Department
to join the triage team.   It was at about this time that there was a request
from SYMAS for a site team to be sent from the hospital and when sufficent
doctors had arrived at approximately 1555 hours a Registrar in Anaesthetics
and SHO from Accident and Emergency were released to attend the Stadium.   It
was also at approximately 1555 hours that the Royal Hallamshire Hospital
received its first patient.

At 1545 hours the first patients were being admitted to Ward 60, which had,
by this time, been cleared to receive casualties.

The last patients were received in the Department at 1645 hours.

Comment

Being the first receiving Unit, the Northern General Hospital should not
have been asked to send out its mobile team and it is understood that when
the team did attend Hillsborough Stadium, they were turned away as there
were sufficient doctors in attendance although the equipment was retained on
site. The Major Disaster Plan clearly indicates that the second receiving
hospital should be the first one to be asked to send a mobile team.

X-Ray Department
8a.   R e c e iv in g   W a rd a n d O t h e r A d m i t t i n g   A rra n g e m e n ts

      The Receiving ward for casualties from Major Disaster is Ward 60 which is
      normally used for orthopaedic patients. The ward was cleared and patients
      admitted to it under the care of Mr J A R Smith, Consultant General
      Surgeon.

8b. Intensive Care/Intensive Treatment Units

      The Northern General Hospital has a General Intensive Treatment Unit which
      can accommodate 10 beds but is staffed for 6 and a Cardiac Intensive Care
      Unit which is normally used for the immediate post operative care of patients
      having undergone cardiac surgery.  Fortunately the General Intensive
      Treatment Unit was nearly empty and only a few patients had to be
      transferred from the Cadiac Intensive Care Unit to accommodate the overflow
      from the General ITU. Initially^)patients were admitted to the two Units
      but within five days this had reduced to only one continuing to occupy an
      Intensive Care Bed.                         .
                                      U v ^         '
9.    Patient Documentation

      As indicated above patient documentation was initially hampered by the fact
      that the early cases were not recognised as being from the Major Disaster
      as the plan at that time had not been fully implemented. This resulted
      in some patients being documented as ordinary accident cases. There were
      also some cases of patients not involved in the Hillsborough Disaster being
      documented as part of it but this was later rectified.

      Comment

      There was some difficulty in matching the paper work with the patients and
      the identification of patients with bodies which resulted in some
      difficulties of giving information to friends and relatives. Again this is
      one area for the hospital to investigate.

10. Operating Theatres




11. Patient Care/Treatment
                                                 <3 K&
       Patients arrived in large numbers in the-efrwtrhours from 3.30 pm resulting in
       a total of 88 patients being treated of which 56 were admitted, 7 were
       transferred to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Intensive Care Unit for
       Neuorological Trauma (6 from wards, 1 from A & E direct). 11 were dead on
       arrival and a further 2 deaths occurred on GITU.    In addition to being
       admitted to the General Intensive Treatment Unit, Cardiac Intensive Care


                                                                   6
   Unit and Ward 60 patients were also admitted to wards 65 and 66 with one
   patient being accommodated on ward 3A and one on Ward 63. In addition 5
   patients were treated who were not involved in the incident.

   Of the five patients admitted to the General Intensive Treatment Unit, three
   were subsequently discharged to Ward 66, one to Ward 2A and one to Ward 6A;
   the three patients admitted to Cardiac Intensive Care Unit, two were
   subsequently discharged to Ward 12 and one is currently still being nursed
   on that Ward; the twenty patients admitted to Ward 60 were subsequently
   discharged, thirteen to Ward 64, one to Ward 66, three to Ward 65 and three
   to Ward 63. None of the patients initially admitted to Ward 63, 65 or 66
   were subsequently transferred to other Wards within the hospital.

12.Support Departments

   It would appear that the majority of support departments responded extremely
   well. There was an initial problem with a shortage of oxygen flow meters
   but this was very quickly rectified by the Technical Equipment Department.

13. Communications and Access to Hospital Site

   The main problem with communications appears to have been that distraught
   relatives were ringing the hospitals for information which was not readily
   available particularly regarding the fatalities. When they were referred to
   the special telephone lines set up by the police the hospital was informed
   on many occasions that attempts had been made to ring that number but it was
   continually engaged. Relatives were therefore ringing the hospitals in
   desperation.

    Communications were however soon established between the Royal Hallamshire
    Hospital and the Northern General Hospital with a ready exchange of
    information between the two. Good access to the Accident and Emergency
    Department was maintained within the Hospital grounds although there was a
    query as to whether Herries Road became congested during the late afternoon.

    Comment

    There was a need to review the Reception arrangements for not only patients
    involved in the disaster but also others who will still continue to use the
    service of an Accident and Emergency Department with the possibility of
    setting up two reception desks needing to be considered. It would also be
    helpful if a member of staff could be deployed in front of the reception
    desk to deflect queries from the staff trying to gain information regarding
    the casualties which should then reduce the amount of queries being received
    by the reception staff.                                '

14. Inter Agency Liaison

    The Social Workers, Psychologists and Chaplains of all denominations
    responded to the incident and quickly set up a patients relatives centre in
    the hospital's dining room which is situated one level lower than the
    Accident and Emergency Department but owing to the sloping nature of the
    site also has ground floor access. The various voluntary organisations also
    responded with ther Hospital's League of Friends, Salvation Army, WRVS and
    Red Cross amongst others pacifying distressed relatives and friends.


                                       7
   Very soon after the commencement of the incident the Press started to
   contact the Hospital with many attending the Hospital with a view to
   obtaining information, and on many occasion tried to interview distressed
   visitors. A Press Conference was held by the Unit General Manager and
   Consultant in Charge of Accident and Emergency at about 1830 hours.   In
   addition Press enquiries were also dealt with by other
   Managers, mainly over the telephone but on some occasions face to face. A
   further Press Conference was held on the Sunday morning at approximately
   1000 hours involving Unit General Manager, Consultant General Surgeon and
   Consultant Anaesthetist.

15. Other Health Authorities

   It is understood that three patients were admitted to Barnsley District
   General Hospital and Rotherham and North Derbyshire Health Authorities both
   offered their services with the Chesterfield and North Derbyshire Hospital
   at Calow being put on standby. In the event neither of the Rotherham or
   Derbyshire Health Authorities offers were taken up.

16. Fact and Figures
                                                                   ill I
   Saturday 15th

   88 patients treated
   56 admitted
    7 transferred RHH        Adm+i Imi! in    - whiiT rmnrA & E)
   11 BID (ftiSo h \ £ -
    1 death - GITU
    7 discharged same day from wards
   21 discharged from A & E/Physio
   Sunday 16th

    17 discharged

   Monday 17th

    9 discharged

    Tuesday 18th

    1 discharged
    3 transferred to Liverpool
    1 death on GITU

    Wednesday 19th

    1 transferred to Liverpool
    1 discharged

    Thursday 20th

    1 discharged




                                       8
   F rid a y   21st


    2 discharged

17. Press Relations and Volunteers

   Press

   The Press Room was very quickly set up, this being in the Out Patients Area
   1 of level *C* adjacent to the main entrance of the hosptial.  Whilst the
   majority of the press acted with decorum whilst on the hospital site, there
   were a number who sought to gain interviews and would appear to go to any
   lengths to obtain them from patients, their friends or relatives and members
   of the hospital staff. This resulted in valuable managerial time being
   taken up with keeping the situation under control.

   Relatives and Friends

   As one would expect, with a crowd involving an estimated 54,000 people and
   especially as treatment was being given, not only at the Stadium but also at
   two hospitals, there were many visitors to the hospital very soon after the
   event who were anxious to have news of their colleagues. The patients'
   relatives base was very quickly set up within the Staff Dining Room on level
   'C' of the Out Patients Department, this being manned by members of staff
   and various voluntary agencies including the Salvation Army, League of
   Friends and Chaplains of all denominations. With the exception of one
   scirmish with a Reported, all of the visitors behaved in an exemplary manner
   considering the stress that they were under and the fact that information
   was initially difficult to come by.

   Volunteers, as indicated above, the hospital's Dining Room was set aside for
   the relatives base and was very quickly manned by a number of volunteers
   including staff volunteers. This does appear to have been one of the major
   successes of the whole operation in that relatives were able to congregate
   in one area resulting in information being more easily disseminated as it
   became available. All those who manned this area should be commended for
   their patience and fortitude under considerable pressure.

   Comment

   Whilst the Press Base and Relatives Rooms are at separate ends of the same
   floor level, they do share a common entrance and this would appear to have
   been the one area where geography dictates but there can be little
   alternative contemplated. It may however be worthwhile pursuing any
   alternatives that may become apparent over the next few months.

   Visits by VIPs

   After the event the hospital received a number of visits from celebrities
   and dignitaries, these including on the Sunday Mr David Blunkett MP, the
   Prime Minister and Home Secretary, the Arch Bishop of Liverpool and the
   Anglican Bishop of Liverpool. On Monday, Liverpool FC, the Lord Mayor of
   Sheffield, the Leader of Liverpool City Council and the Prince and Princess
   of Wales. On Tuesday, the Leader of the Opposition, the Duke of Kent, Bishop
   of Hallam and on Wednesday, Nottingham Forest FC. Whilst the vists were


                                     9
      appreciated by many of the staff and patients especially those of the two
      football clubs involved, they did cause additional workload on the staff and
      towards the end of the visits many of the staff especially ward based staff
      were feeling somewhat jaded at what was now becoming a long week.

18.    The Aftermath

      The Members of the Press continued to stay around the hospital for the next
      48 hours, with some still attempting to get interviews as late as 5 days
      after the event.a^tfaonch ovory aftpmpt hua been made t o -get t-h e hoopitnl
      warP ba^k-T 7r~l,nr‘r™a1" ag         s. nf .Purr h i m 1 m m lining r.ninnri -
      jtLstxess. Counselling sessions have been arranged for staff which take the
      form of group therapy and are being organised by Clinical Psychologists.
      Facilities are alsoavailable for staff to have individual counselling
      sessions should they wish to avail themselves of the facility.

19. Conclusion           (    fy-VKD

      As with every other Major Disaster there are undoubtedly lessons to be
      learned from this incidentv-and in particular the hospital and other agencies
      will need to confirm that they have sufficient understanding of the way in
      which a Major Disaster should be declared„-»«dA<he operation of the cascade
      procedures. On this occasion we are fortunate in that it happened on a
      Saturday afternoon and received much media attention which assisted in
      getting staff into the hospital. The- type of— j^yjiries^ sustained also made
      it relatively easy to treat them as decisions did notT~~Kave~bo bo made as to
      difXe-retrt— courses— of treatmpnt^_JLadj-cative of this is the fact that
      only o n e jp a i± & ftt~ T e q u i~ r e d surgery in the hoslffEgf^sr main operating theatres
      amt'T'patients who later died on GITU.
      The ,r°1 flt4 lfnynll,  t-V|- nf ■Jlhp majority nf^t.hp patients will undoubtedly help them in their
      recovery.




      EEE/NW/25.4.89




                                             10
jw/i>s




Accident and Emergency Department


kt h May 1989


M r . __________
Administration Assistant,
Northern General Hospital*



Dear Mr,


with reference to our discussion yesterday I enclose a draft report
regarding the Major Incident on the 15th April for distribution to the
medical staff for the Hospital Medical Staff Committee Meeting on
Tuesday.



Yours sincerely,




J. WARDROPE
Consultant in Accident and Emergency Medicine
                                                                    u w i " 3 ^j * a k L o ¥ \

j   MANAGEMENT IN CONFIDENCE


                     H I L L S B O R O U G H    E M E R G E N C Y


            BRIEF FACTUAL REPORT RELATING TO THE HOSPITALS RESPONSE TO THE
             HILLSBOROUGH EMERGENCY OF SATURDAY AFTERNOON. 15 APRIL 1989


     1   Activation of Maior Disaster Plan

         1.1 From approximately 15.15 hours on Saturday, 15 April, information
             regarding some form of incident began to reach the Hospitals in
             Sheffield through staff making enquiries following media reports, and
             through a police telephone message asking the Northern General and
             Royal Hallamshire Hospitals to ‘stand b y ’ to receive casualties from
             an incident at Hillsborough.

         1.2 Northern General Hospital

             At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone message was received at the
             Northern General Hospital switchboard from police asking the hospital
             to ‘stand b y ’ as there was an incident with casualties at
             Hillsborough.     A further message was received at approximately 15.25
             hours that a paediatric cardiac arrest was on route to the Northern
             General Hospital.     At approximately 15.27 hours the paediatric
             cardiac arrest arrived and proved to be the first casualty from
             Hillsborough.     The ambulance driver stated that there had been a
             major accident at the Football Ground.

         1.3 Charge Nurse       at the Northern General Accident and Emergency
             Department arranged for the Accident and Emergency Department to be
             prepared for receipt of a large number of casualties, having
             instructed his staff nurse to commence the Accident and Emergency
             call-out cascade for a major disaster.

         1.4 The Accident and Emergency Department contacted the switchboard at
             approximately 15.35 hours and asked for all available medical staff
             to be called to attend the Department.   This was done.

         1.5 Meanwhile, Mrs           |, Assistant Matron, went to the switchboard
             and, at approximately 15.43 hours, she and the telephonist
             implemented the call out of staff for a major disaster.    The Royal
             Hallamshire Hospital confirmed that it, too, had been asked to ‘stand
             b y ’ by the police.

         1.6 At approximately 16.00 hours, the Consultant in Accident and
             Emergency arranged with SYMAS for further cases to be taken to the
             Royal Hallamshire Hospital (which was, in fact, already receiving
             casualties.

         1.7 The Roval Hallamshire Hospital

             At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone call was received from a
             Police Inspector by the nurse in charge of the Accident and Emergency
             Department asking the Hospital to stand by and to expect casualties
             from an incident at Hillsborough.   The switchboard, which had been
             monitoring the call, immediately advised key members of staff of the


                                          1
            receipt of this message.   The key members of staff included the duty
            Administrator, Accident and Emergency staff and duty Assistant
            Matron.   Preparation of the Accident and Emergency Department, in
            anticipation of a possible major accident alert, commenced.    At
            approximately 15.30 hours, police arrived to set up a control room;
            this was interpreted as indicating a major accident alert was in
            being.   Police confirmed that a major alert was in being and the
            hospital duty Nursing officer notified switchboard which commenced
            cascade call out for staff in accordance with major disaster
            procedure.

    2   Accident and Emergency Department

        2.1 The first casualties arrived in the Northern General Hospital
            Accident and Emergency Department at approximately 15.27 hours and
            the last at approximately 16.45 hours.   The Department was cleared
            by approximately 17.30 hours.

        2.2 The first casualty arrived in the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Accident
            and Emergency Department at approximately 15.40 hours and the last at
            approximately 17.01 hours.   The Department was cleared by
            approximately 18.15 hours.

3       Site Medical Teams

        3.1 SYMAS called the Northern General Hospital for an emergency medical
            team to attend the site (contrary to the procedure since the Northern
            General Hospital was the initial receiving centre for casualties) at
            approximately 15.45 hours.   The team, comprising two doctors, was
            collected by ambulance from the Northern General Hospital at
            approximately 15.55 hours (earlier response was not possible because
            of the volume of casualties in the Accident and Emergency
            Department).   The team was sent back on arrival at the Ground but
            the equipment (resuscitation box etc) was retained for use at the
            Ground.

        3.2 There is no record of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital having received
            a request although, as the second receiving Hospital, it had put a
            team on stand by, ready to respond to any request to attend the site
            of the incident.   No ambulance reported to collect the team.

        3.3 It is understood that SYMAS collected a team from the Barnsley
            District General Hospital at approximately 16.00 hours but this was
            turned back upon arrival at Hillsborough.

4       Patients Statistics

        4.1 Brief statistics, concerning casualties received at the Sheffield
            Hospitals from the incident are as follows




                                       2
                                            NGH            RHH             TOTAL

    Casualties brought
    to Accident & Emergency                 88             71               159

    Dead on arrival or died in
    the Accident & Emergency                 11             1                12

    Treated and discharged                   21            45                66

    Admitted                                 56            25                81

    Admitted to ITUs (included      •
    in total admissions above)/             jMf ItT                         9 9
                              * “ >1*                            Ax-
    Subsequent transfers from 13V             7 to RHH      7                 7

    Subsequent deaths (to date)               2             -                 2

    4.2 The total number of casualties remaining in hospital at 09.00 hours
        on Wednesday, 26 April was 1 (in Intensive Care) at the Northern
        General Hospital and 4 (all in Intensive Care) at the Royal
        Hallamshire Hospital.

    4.3 It is understood that 3 minor casualties were also taken to Barnsley
        District General Hospital.

5   Hospital Responses

    5.1 Debriefing of personnel involved in the hospital response is
        proceeding, primarily aimed at identifying whether improvements in
        the procedures, either in the individual hospitals, across the
        District or in the inter-face with the other emergency services can
        be made for future planning.

    5.2 IT IS, HOWEVER, CLEAR THAT THE NORTHERN GENERAL AND ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE
        HOSPITALS RESPONSES WERE TIMELY, EFFICIENT AND EFFECTIVE, AND STAFF
        HAVE EVERY REASON TO BE SATISFIED AT THEIR RESPONSE AND OF THE
        QUALITY OF SERVICES PROVIDED AT THE HOSPITALS.

    5.3 Psychological support services have been provided to the hospital
        staff at the hospitals involved in the emergency, as well as to many
        others involved in the disaster.

    5.4 Other hospitals involved in support roles were:-

        5.4.1 King Edward VII Hospital to which transfers were made (19
              orthopaedic) early in the emergency to clear beds at Royal
              Hallamshire Hospital.

        5.4.2 Lodge Moor Hospital, which prepared (1 ward) ready to receive
              transfers to clear beds at the district general hospitals; no
              transfers were made, but see also note (5.4.6) below.

        5.4.3 Beds were cleared at the Jessop Hospital for Women, again ready
              for transfers to clear beds at the two district general
              hospitals and to release staff for the district general
              hospitals.   No transfers of patients were subsequently made.




                                        3
    n   v f   r K ^         M “ 's
'              — 7     L    "T*

                       C    H.U«
    *    f-wvj       ir-’




    Lederfen
        5.4.4 Children’s Hospital brought its state up to full alert ready to
              receive casualties if required.

        5.4.5 Staff from several hospitals and from District and Regional
              Headquarters departments went to and undertook duties at the
              two district general hospitals.

       5.4.6 The Bed Bureau, on hearing of the major emergency, arranged
             with Chesterfield and Rotherham Hospitals to take general
             practitioner emergency admissions if required and Lodge Moor
             Hospital to take medical emergencies.

        5.4.7 Barnsley District General Hospital received 3 casualties.
              Subsequently, at the request of the Sheffield Hospitals
              Control, Rotherham District General Hospital took on the
              ‘initial receiving centre’ for casualties for any further major
              emergency which might occur, and for which the Sheffield
              hospitals would normally have been selected for response, until
              9.00 am on Sunday, 16 April.   The Sheffield Hospitals Control
              confirmed with Barnsley that the Barnsley District General
              Hospital could stand down at 18.45 hours.

6   Communications

    6.1 Communications within and between the two district general hospitals
        were very effective.   The rapport between the emergency service
        representatives on the hospital sites was good. Many calls from the
        public came to the hospitals because of apparent difficulties in
        contacting the police emergency number.

7   Volunteers and Other Agencies

    7.1 Volunteers from organisations and individuals reported to hospitals
        to give assistance and made effective contributions, as did the
        social work staff of the Sheffield City Council.   Numerous offers of
        help, particularly to provide accommodation and transport, were
        received from Sheffield residents.

8   Conclusion

    8.1 Finally, the hospitals would wish to formally recognise the many
        offers of help, condolence and support which were received during and
        after the initial emergency, and the many visits (official and
        unofficial) which contributed significantly to the morale of
        patients, relatives and staff.

    8.2 Pre-arranged        visits were made to the Northern General and
        Royal Hallamshire Hospitals by the following:-




                                    4
          Sunday. 16 April :

          M r D B l u n k e t t MP ( t o   N o rth e rn   G e n e ra l H o s p ita l   o n ly )

          Archbishop Warlock of Liverpool, the
          Bishop of Warrington (representing the Bishop of Liverpool)
          and the Free Church Moderator of Liverpool

          Mrs M Thatcher, Prime Minister and Mr D Hurd, Home Secretary
          (accompanied by Mr I Patnich MP to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital
          only)

          Chair of Liverpool Council  )
          Lord Mayor of Sheffield and   )Sunday RoyalHallamshire Hospital only
          Councillor Clive Betts        )Monday Northern GeneralHospital only
          Lord Mayor of Nottingham    )

          Monday. 17 April:

          Liverpool Football Team

          TRHs Prince and Princess of Wales

          Tuesday. 18 April:

          HRH Duke of Kent (Northern General Hospital only)

          The Archbishop of York (Royal Hallamshire Hospital only)

          Mr N Kinnock, Leader of the Labour Party and
          Councillor Clive Betts

          Wednesday. 19 April:

          The Bishop of Hallam

          Nottingham Forrest Football Team

          Thursday. 20 April:

          Lord Justice Taylor

          Chief Constable Deer, West Midlands Police

          Tuesday. 25 April

          Mr T Clay, General Secretary, RCN




KT/LS
26 4 89




                                                     5
    jo
5              C P iL L                                   cC-   {/tA   $*o / T e n 6 * A t o


                                                     At                       H


    i- f
^                A   k    ^   u c   Am   c   ^
                                                                  ^ ' ♦ « K        <4*       ^7

                     9
                                                 ^                                 v<    -        N c/v>,n
    l o ' tv
                         c ( h                                                M5         *   #    . . .
                                                                                                  a

                           *                                                              -T W ' t 6 a    «■ A4/£-<~>4*a «'
                                                                                             <$««*„• C1*4.1 /i4 Ti>*<0
    »r




    \
                                            \S ~         b fa iL




P*LICC-          M S S H tf          U»A        Stri net*

               s ^ U o < U C-            ATT         M *6          * ** » < ; *   *


< K i . C M «              C * *                                      - 1 R t „             lilL c)i^          .



                           c«vv.                              fr        • H ,.         .
                                                                             •& ***>   3 + < * $ ty 0 t* , /V4««r
                                                                          c*,j«        ^


                                     1 & * ?* & * & o          *»J



7 Iovq.*          a-



                                                                     " ‘"■'        C A “ *«     ' « ! « * , «4 -
 Z. £f T          /*   m    :


  £            6 5 h «“*                             <JV/* /) ,>


         f* p t«            C »n^          C kIA * _          / W l/r         S   (« *                     H ^ o a . * , ')


         ^*440CAUC^»                   l \f J L lv £ 0


   C jt^                            A t ib r S * ?          A ./*     U / c i* 4 k j       T*   / M f L /** * + :

                  C 9 i< + h \iS       i^ ftS » * A fs i0 .



  I           bUktvt*                      3         fk T tt^ o          f   h    AS-S**
      c fh J                          'TMT            MAS'*- f**ct 0 ^ r % /*>-0                                    «


 S “ £«          S^A>m          l   c^o         h K k w fc ?

       f0 &       O ^ C v M J m H ^ / 4*0
       KJv         ^xTTM             <Kc    j   .


                            AM/*"***,                ■«*■<■
                        f*/k     j#tc    '? £ fa \




    *.                                                 "
      ^ T W k £t   ^


    'T*»> •        Q * c T*J^)     & h JT         **            AilSA*


                                            C £   t        <m   |£*      W .   )



i       a*
p r-      tf* -» s )
              PT       ^)UkjAA\         /L H u


             £A»4t4t     4 /#£VT            C   Aj*A.‘w>*<-           *^***^
C tH T T 0 -A L \ s o             I




 A   w   A c v )«           fhlf&l

            /KrmJK                    (L.'T.S.          (l£V(3$*                       Jc4*5.


(g                                                           tft                <3t4t^»                  ©vTc4«*s

^            /♦vtfi./K            '?*,*»•'>#•«** ,                                                  6 * T c <m *.* ,



^               (\ I S        I IJ l          (fM /+ M ($ £ £         9*4 r t * r * AM C«A?
                                                 ^                    fV    4 i / u N Ic , 4       [ j




M iJ i'^ s                /N ^ W * W                    -       fr>         'TjL^rJ^qcA^o                 A/4.H



/.        A*-           f M / 1 * cA-fu** 3




                0   /         -        *1 •*»**■*#       <i&«fiUK * > % *//^c At&tcA*- ** A ft

                                       fa m m m b * .       M** J     *sj                      ,
             THE SMART RESPONSE TO THE ARMENIAN EARTHQUAKE



RECOMMENDATIONS

1.   A medical       team at      such a disaster must be part of a larger

team of rescue workers including fire officers and dog teams - a

national / international disaster response team.


2.   A team       should    be    d espatched    to    the   incident       as    soon    as

possible.        A rapid assessment         of the scale of the disaster will

determine the nature of any further response.


3.   The team should already have met and trained                      together on a

regular     basis.         There    must be a clear          line of command            that

crosses the many disciplines involved.


4.   The    team     must   take    with    it and     never    be    separated         from

adequate supplies of food, water,               transport., rescue          medical and

communications        equipment.      The satellite dish used by                 the     Kent

Fire Brigade should be standard equipment for the team.


5.   A medical control centre must be established very early on at

the scene of a disaster.


6.   The S M A R T team should return to Yerevan in the near future to

cement     the   excellent       medical    relationships      we    have   established

and observe the relief operation that followed the rescue.


7.   The    US    national       disaster    team     is   relatively       recent       and

features    emergency       physicians      already    known    to some      members       of

SMART.       Information on how their team is run should be                            sought
and active dialogue encouraged.


8.    The       national      / international         disaster    team    must     have    a

permanent UK control and co-ordination centre.


9.     A controller at the centre could access                    computer files of

regional teams and'rescue workers to be mobilised as necessary.


10.        In    this   way     thete    will   be   minimum     extra    expense       and

efficient       use of existing facilities.              There is clearly no need

for   a team      to be    stood waiting for a disaster               tq occur.         The

core group will carry on with their respective occupations until

mobilised.            However    their    employing     authorities      must    give     an

undertaking to release them whenever necessary.


The   UK    international         /     national     disaster    team     should

therefore        be   a core    group     of experie nc ed      medical    and    rescue

workers who can respond               immediately.      The control centre could

access     all    the   other    e sta bl is he d    rescue   teams    in the     UK and

mobilise        them as and when necessary according to information

received from the core group.




                                                                                               j
