i       ■




                                                                           POLICY
                                             93


                           POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                                 30th November, 1993



             PRESENT: Councillor Dawn Booth, Chair;
                      Councillor Marie McGiveron, Deputy Chair;
                      Councillors M. Alderson, F. Anderson,
                      G. Ben-Tovim, M. Bolland, Margaret Clarke,
                      P. Clark, Flo Clucas, Rosemary Cooper,
                      Beatrice Fraenkel, A. Jennings, Lady Doreen Jones,
                      Ann Keenan, Frances Kidd, Elaine Kinahan,
                      G. Knibb, R. Lancaster, D. McKittrick, P. Millea,
                      F. Prendergast, N. Stanley, M. Storey, P. Tyrrell
                      and Cathy Wilson.



                       Councillor A. Dean.



                       Councillors Ann Gorton, Maggie McDaid and K. Noon
                       also attended.




    *M 165. Land Management Sub-Committee

              (a) Resolved that the proceedings of the Land Management
                  Sub-Committee of 22nd October and 12th November, be
                  approved; and

              (b) The proceedings of the Special Meetings of the Land
                  Management Sub-Committee of 4th and 12th November were
                  submitted for the information of the Committee.


     6 166. Community Services and Neighbourhood
    ft      Development Sub-Committee

    1        The Committee considered the proceedings of theCommunity
    I        Services and Neighbourhood DevelopmentSub-Committee  of 1st
              and 2 9th November.

             Resolved that -

              (a) the identification of £20,000 to fund the partial
                  demolition of the former Clubmoor Comprehensive School
                  (Minute No. 34) be referred to the Chair, Deputy Chair
                  and Opposition Spokespersons for determination and that



            al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A3 01193
   POLICY
                                  - 94


            meeting also be advised of consultations that have
            taken place with the local community; and

     (b) the proceedings be approved.

     (Note:      Councillor Marie McGiveron declared an interest in
                 respect of Minute 19 took no part in the
                 consideration and did not vote.)


167. Scheduling Sub-Committee

     The proceedings of the Scheduling Sub-Committee of 3rd
     November were submitted for the information of the
     Committee.


168. Corporate Policies and Programmes Sub-Committee

     (a) Resolved that the proceedings of the Corporate Policies
         and Programmes Sub-Committee of 9th November, be
         approved; and

     (b) the proceedings of the Chair, Deputy Chair and
         Opposition Spokespersons of that Sub-Committee of 5th
         and 22nd November were submitted for the information of
         the Committee.


169. Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons

    The proceedings of the Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition
    Spokespersons of 3rd, 19th and 23rd November were submitted
    for the information of the Committee.


170. Finance Sub-Committee

    Resolved that the proceedings of the Finance Sub-Committee
    of 24th November, be approved.


171. Performance Review Sub-Committee

     (a) Resolved that the proceedings of the Performance Review
         Sub-Committee of 25th November, be approved; and

     (b) The proceedings of the Performance Review Sub-Committee
         of 1st November were submitted for the information of
         the Committee.




  al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A301193
                                                                  POLICY
                               - 95 _


172. Special Sub-Committee - Appointment of
     Chief Officers

    The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee - Appointment
    of Chief Officers of 27th October were submitted for the
    information of the Committee.


173. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

     (a) Resolved that the proceedings of the Hillsborough
         Disaster Working Party of 19th October, be approved;
         and

     (b) Resolved that the action of the Chair in consultation
         with Councillors Jennings and Millea in granting
         authority, as a matter of urgency, for £75 0 to be made
         available in connection with expenses incurred by the
         bereaved families in respect of the judicial review of
         the Hillsborough Inquest verdicts held in London on 1st
         - 3rd November, be confirmed.


174. Council Motion
     Merseyside Development Corporation

     The Committee considered the following Motion which
     appeared in the name of Councillor R. Kemp at the meeting
     of the City Council held on 2 0th October:-

     Bearing in mind the comments made by the former City
     Planning Officer that there appeared to be a lack of
     synergy between the City Council and the Merseyside
     Development Corporation over land use, a meeting be
     convened between the MDC Board and the 3 Party
     Spokespersons on the Economic Development and Planning,
     Land and Transportation Committees to both review past
     failures to co-operate and to review the proposed Unitary
     Development Plan.

     Resolved that -

     (a) as a meeting has already been arranged with the M.D.C.
         for early January, no action be taken in this respect
         pending the outcome of that meeting; and

     (b) the Chief Executive be requested to liaise with the
         M.D.C. to ensure that the meeting in January is a
         constructive one and addresses issues raised by the
         City Council.




   al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A301193
  POLICY
                                - 96 -


175. Council Motion
     Photographs of Members and Senior Officers

    The Committee considered the following Motion which
    appeared in the name of Councillor P. Clein at the meeting
    of the City Council held on 20th October:-

    That, subject to any necessary expenditure being
    containable within the Public Relations budget, and in
    order to present an image of this City Council to the
    public which is more professional and accessible, this
    Council resolves to make available to local print and
    broadcasting media individual photographs of each current
    City Councillor and Senior Officer of the Council as soon
    as is practicable in this financial year, and undertakes to
    do so annually in the future, following the Annual Meeting
    of the City Council.

    Also, that consideration be given to including concise and
    relevant biographical details to accompany such
    photographic portfolios.

    Resolved that the terms of the Motion be supported.


176. Council Motion
     Merseyside Record Office

    Resolved that the following Motion which appeared in the
    name of Councillor Flo Clucas at the meeting of the City
    Council held on 20th October:-

    That the relevant Director report on the establishment of a
    purpose-built Merseyside Record Office to be funded under
    Objective 1, such report to indicate whether the Residuary
    Body has any resources which might be used to offset the
    local authority contribution to such a development,

     be referred to the Director of Leisure Services for a
     report.


177. Collection of Poll Tax etc.
     Notice of Motion by Councillor Cathv Wilson

     That given the recent suicide of a young man, jailed for
     £250 poll tax by Peterlee Magistrates and the jailing of a
     pregnant, ill, young woman in Liverpool, this Committee
     agrees the following -

     (1) the Director of Resources be requested urgently to
         report in detail on the collection of poll tax and
         rates in terms of -



   al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A301193
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
