                                                       POLICY
                           —   ibi   —


               POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                     3rd December, 1991



PRESENT: Councillor H. Rimmer, Deputy-Chair, in the Chair.
         Councillors J. Backhouse, G. Ben-Tovim,
         N. Cardwell, P. Clark, Flora Clucas, Rosemary
         Cooper, A. Dean, W. Edwards, Cathy Hancox, Susan
         Hogan, A. Jennings, R. Johnston, Lady Doreen Jones,
         Frances Kidd, G. Knibb, Lesley Mahmood,
         M. McCauley, Marie McGiveron, Sarah Norman,
         W. Owen, I. Scott, Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer,
         W. Snell and M. Storey.



         Councillors Vera Best, M. Bolland, H. Chase,
         N. Chinn, M.B.E., E. Clein, B. Fitzsimons and
         Ann Keenan also attended.



         Apologies for absence were submitted from the Chair
         (Councillor Vicky Roberts) and Councillor Dawn
         Booth.




Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

The Committee considered the proceedings of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party of the 15th November, 1991.



With the permission of the Committee, Mr. P. Scraton, Edge
Hill College, Mr. P. Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group and Councillor H. Chase addressed the
meeting on this matter.



Motion by the Chair, duly seconded -

That -

(a) the proposal in Minute 9 be deferred pending the
    submission of a report by the City Solicitor;




PR1AAF
    POLICY
                                -   162   -




     (b) the Chair be authorised to submit a recommendation to
         the Council in relation to Minute 10; and

     (c) the remainder of the proceedings be approved.


    Amendment by Councillor M. Storey,
      seconded by Councillor A. Jennings -

    That the proceedings of the Working Party including the
    recommendation that the application from Edge Hill College
    for further funding for a further 12 months be supported
    (Minute 10) be approved.

    During the course of the debate the Amendment was agreed to.
    And on being put as the Substantive Motion and carried it
    was resolved accordingly.


323. Financial Review
     (CT/188/91)

    The Committee considered a Financial Review of the Authority
    in the light of information contained in Report CT/188/91 of
    the City Treasurer.

    Resolved that -

     (1) the Assistant City Estates Surveyor be instructed to
         report to the Legal, Land and Transportation Committee
         on the issue of deemed planning consent for retail
         development on land at Mossway/Altcross Road and that
         Committee be asked to further consider the issue;

     (2) the City Council reaffirms its commitment to collect the
         community charge and rates using all lawful means at its
         disposal, including the controlled use of bailiffs and
         attachments from all income sources, and would draw to
         the attention of all interested parties, the City
         Council's detailed policy for the pursuance of arrears
         which was contained in report CT/108/90 and reported to
         committee in June 1990. This Committee acknowledges the
         serious consequences on future years' bills, and
         resources available for services, that result from both
         the non payment and late payment of community charge and
         rates; an unfair burden is placed upon future bills and
         vital services are denied scarce resources.  In turn,
         this places at risk both jobs and services. The City
         Treasurer is instructed to take action to pursue arrears
         as quickly as possible.




    PR1AAF
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
