                        CITY OF LIVERPOOL



                        13TH MARCH,   1991


    At a meeting of the City Council held on Wednesday,

13th March,   1991 at 1.45 p.m. in the Town Hall.




CC4AAE
                                          13th March,    1991

                            -491-

                           PRESENT

                       THE LORD MAYOR
                 (Councillor Dorothy Gavin)

COUNCILLORS: Allen, Backhouse, Ben-Tovim, Bermingham,
Bolland, Dawn Booth, Gary Booth, John Bradley,
Pamela Bradley, Brady, Brazier, Joan Brown, Bullock,
Gillian Bundred, Burke, Cannon, Cardwell, Chase, Clark,
Clein, Flora Clucas, Concepcion, Rosemary Cooper,
Cunningham, Curry, Dean, Doyle, Elizabeth Drysdale,
Duckworth, Edwards, Barry Fitzsimons, Stephen Fitzsimmons,
Hannah Folan, Beatrice Fraenkel, Anne Gorton, Hackett,
Susan Hogan, George Hughes, Leslie Hughes, Philip Hughes,
Hutchinson, Jennings, Roger Johnston, Lady Doreen Jones,
Sir Trevor Jones, Ann Keenan, Kendrick, Elaine Kinahan,
Knibb, Lafferty, Lane, Lang, Ledwich, Livingstone,
Margaret McDaid, Marie McGiveron, Pauline McKibbin,
McKittrick, McManus, Lesley Mahmood, Judith Nelson, Noon,
Sarah Norman, O'Donoghue, Linda O'Sullivan, Oldfield,
Orr, Owen, Prendergast, Radford, Ratcliffe, Rimmer,
Bill Roberts, Vicky Roberts, Edward Roderick,
Francis Roderick, Ruse, Ian Scott, Gerard Scott,
Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer, Jacqueline Smith, Trevor Smith,
Snell, Templeman, Vaudrey, Williams and Cathy Wilson.



Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors
Cathy Hancox, Juliet Herzog, Jean Newton, R. Quinn,
M. Storey and L. Tyrer.



                          PETITIONS

   (i) Petition signed by Liverpool Residents drawing the
       attention of the City Council to the provisions of
       paragraph 16 of the proposed guidelines to the 1989
       Children Act and requesting the Council to confirm
       its opposition to paragraph 16 and to state its
       belief that all applicants to be considered as foster
       parents should be assessed equally, and that if
       assessed as suitable, there is no reason why lesbians
       and gay men should not be able to foster children.



A representative of the petitioners then addressed the
Council.




CC4AAE
13th March,   1991

                              -492-

  (ii) Petition signed by Liverpool residents calling upon
       the City Council to continue to fund the post of
       Research Officer for the Hillsborough Disaster
       Working Party in view of the fact that declared
       commitments and pledges made to bereaved families and
       survivors on a range of issues, including the
       Hillsborough inquests, remain unfulfilled.



A representative of the petitioners then addressed the
Council.



(NOTE - The issue referred to in the above-mentioned
        petition was considered at this m e e t i n g . )


         VACANCIES ON COMMITTEES AND SUB-COMMITTEES

Resolved that -

(a) Councillor C. Curry be appointed to fill a vacancy for
    an alternate member on the Personnel and Equal
    Opportunities Policy Committee occasioned by the
    resignation of Councillor J. Lang; and                   i;:F

(b) Councillor N. Cardwell be appointed to fill a vacancy       ■               :

    for an alternate member on the Appeals Sub-Committee
    occasioned by the resignation of Councillor
                                                             "■■■■*■■   ' :.y
    Gillian Bundred.


                     FINANCE AND STRATEGY

The proceedings of the Finance and Strategy Committee of the
25th February, 1991 so far as they require confirmation by
the Council were submitted.
                                                             V 1:"..:


Merseyside Waste Disposal Authority

Resolved that the nomination of a Labour member to serve
upon the Merseyside Waste Disposal Authority be submitted t o ;v
the City Solicitor.

          (See Minute Book 31, page A700, Minute 521)




CC4AAE
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
        CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




            Sc<xv^   P,   o «ylu




Code: ZYZ
13th March,   1991

                                 -514-



 ITEM NO.       BOOK, PAGE AND                SUBJECT
                  MINUTE NO.


    1           3 1/A714/559         Site at Walton Community
                30/D1154/610         Comprehensive School,
                                     Arnot Wing, County Road


    2           31/A716/561          Transport Policies and
                30/Dl139/107         Programme Submission
                                     1991/92


    3           31/A724/578          Hillsborough Disaster
                                     Working Party


    4           31/A709/545          Local Management of schools
                    and
                31/E405/203


    5           31/A722/572          Draft Economic Development
                                     Plan 1991/92


    (b) the resolution (Minute 545) be varied to provide
        that the resolution of the Education Committee be
        approved and that the Director of Education be
        requested to monitor the workings of the scheme for
        Local Management in schools and, in particular, the
        revised formula and report back to the Education
        Committee on progress during the academic year
        1991/92.

(B) Motion by the Chair   (Councillor A. Dean)
    duly seconded -

    That in accordance with Standing Order No. 1 0 (iv) the
    following item opposed business be approved, viz:-




CC4AAE
                                                  13th March,   1991

                                 -515-



 ITEM NO.       BOOK, PAGE AND                   SUBJECT
                  MINUTE NO.


    1            31/B415/440         Hillsborough Research
                                     Officer




The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair which was taken by the
Deputy Lord Mayor.



Parts    (a) 3 of Motion   (A) and 1 of Motion    (B)

Amendments by Councillor H. Chase
 seconded by Councillor A. Jennings -

(1) That the resolution (Minute 578) of the Finance and
    Strategy Committee relating to the Hillsborough Disaster
    Working Party be not approved and that the Working Party
    continue its activities until it has fulfilled its terms
    of reference.

(2) That the resolution (Minute No. 440) of the Personnel
    and Equal Opportunities Policy Committee relating to the
    Hillsborough Research Officer be not approved and that
    the contract of the Research Officer be extended for a
    further six month period or until his active involvement
    in the determination of all the facts of the
    Hillsborough Disaster have been satisfactorily completed
    and that the matter be reviewed in 6 months time.

Personnel and Equal Opportunities Policy Committee

A vote was taken the Amendment was carried.  The Motion as
amended was carried and it was resolved accordingly.


Finance and Strategy Committee

A vote was takena the Amendment was carried.



The Lord Mayor resumed the Chair.




CC4AAE
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
