                                                             FINANCE

                                   -                  A725 -

                  FINANCE AND STRATEGY COMMITTEE

                              15th May, 1989



PRESENT:    Councillor K. Hackett, Chair;
            Councillor A. Jennings, Deputy Chair;
            Councillors J. Backhouse, D. Bermingham,
            M. Bolland, Dawn Booth, Pamela Bradley, J.
            Brazier, N. Chinn, M.B.E., K. Coombes, P.
            Clark, A. Dean, Beatrice Fraenkel, Juliet Herzog,
            philip Hughes, Mary Johnston, Roger Johnston, J.
            Kendrick, D. McKittrick, Marie McGiveron, Lesley
            Mahmood, W. Owen, K. Ratcliffe, F. Ruse, I.
            Scott and M. Storey.


            Councillors Flora Clucas, S. Fitzsimmons,
            L. Hughes and Richard Roberts also attended.



Money Advice Working Party
Resolved that the proceedings of the Money Advice Working
Party of the 7th, 14th and 28th April, 1989, be approved.


Special Sub-Committee
Re: Rating Matters
The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re: Rating
Matters of the 30th March, 1989 were submitted for the
information of the Committee.


Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
The Committee considered the proceedings of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party of the 26th April and 12th May, 1989.

Resolved that -

(a) the proceedings be approved;
(b) in order to provide administrative and clerical support
    to the Working Party, the following posts be created and
    filled immediately -
      (i)   s e c r e t a r y / t y p i s t - to be fil l e d by secondment; and




FSBAAB
    FINANCE


                               - A726 -
         (ii) two administrators/co-ordinators - one to be filled
              by secondment and one to be filled from outside the
              Authority; and

     (b ) the Chair be authorised to submit a recommendation to
          the next meeting of the Council upon the gradings of the
          staff and the Department to which they will be attached.


815. City Services Sub-Committee

    Resolved that the proceedings of the City Services
    Sub-Committee of the 24th April, 1989, be approved.


816. Hillsborough Disaster Sub-Committee

    The proceedings of the Hillsborough Disaster Sub-Committee
    of the 25th April, 1989 were submitted for the information
    of the Committee,


817. Urban Programme Sub-Committee

    Resolved that authority be granted for the proceedings of
    the Urban Programme Sub-Committee which is to be held on the
    16th May, 1989 to be submitted direct to the City Council
    meeting on the 24th May, 1989.

    (Councillors P. Clark and Mary and Roger Johnston declared
    an interest in the items appearing on the agenda of the
    Sub-Committee relating to the Shop Frontages Programme, took
    no part in the consideration thereof and did not vote).


818. Anti-Poverty Sub-Committee

    Resolved that authority be granted for the proceedings of
    the Anti-Poverty Sub-Committee which is to be held on the
    22nd May, 1989 to be submitted direct to the City Council
    meeting on the 24th May, 1989.




     FSBAAB
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
