                                                        FINANCE



                FINANCE AND STRATEGY COMMITTEE

                       26th June, 1989



PRESENT:   Councillor K. Hackett, Chair;
           Councillor A. Jennings, Deputy Chair;
           Councillors F. Anderson, M. Bolland, Dawn Booth,
           J. Brazier, N. Chinn M.B.E., P. Clark, K. Coombes,
           Rosemary Cooper, A. Dean, F. Doran, K. Feintuck,
           S. Fitzsimmons, Beatrice Fraenkel, H. Herrity,
           Juliet Herzog, P. Hughes, Mary Johnston, Roger
           Johnston, Sir Trevor Jones, G. Knibb, Marie
           McGiveron, Linda O ’Sullivan, K. Ratcliffe,
           H. Rimmer, E. Roderick, F. Ruse and I. Scott.



           Councillors G. Allen, J. Bradley, H. Chase,
           Flora Clucas, Frances Kidd, K. Noon, Vicky Roberts
           and Jacqueline Smith also attended.



Financial Review of the Authority
(CT/244/89)

The Committee considered a financial review of the Authority
as at 23rd June, 1989.

Motion by the Chair, duly seconded -

That -

1.   the financial review    be noted;

2.   every effort be made   to ensure Committee budgets are
      contained within the estimates approved in March and
      the City Treasurer report further on any additional
      steps required to be taken to ensure that Chief Officers
      exercise necessary financial control;

3.   work on the disposal of freehold interests to existing
      leaseholders be expedited and be made the subject of a
      special report by the City Estates Surveyor in the next
      cycle of meetings;

4.   the City Solicitor,     the City Treasurer and the City
      Estates Surveyor be    asked to report to the next meeting
      of the City Council    on any further ways in which the
      ownership of Council    property can, wherever possible, be



FSA AA I
FINANCE
                               p
     held centrally under the aegis of one single Committee
     and other examples of good practice indicated in the
     Audit Commission's documents can be implemented; and

5.   the Government be asked again to make a special
     financial allocation towards the additional expenses
     incurred as a consequence of the Hillsborough Disaster.

Amendment by Councillor P. Clark,
  seconded by Councillor Sir Trevor Jones,

That -

1.   the Government be asked again to make a special
     financial allocation towards the additional expenses
     incurred as a consequence of the Hillsborough Disaster;

2.   the Treasurer's Report showing a forecast deficit of
     £3.5 million at this stage of the financial year is an
     indictment of the way in which this Council is being run
     by the Labour Party.  After 6i years of Labour control
     the City Council is lurching from one crisis to another.
     The budget crisis is heightened by the Tory Government's
     underfunding of this City;

3.   it be noted that the year-to-year Council deficit has
     been fundamentally exacerbated by the massive loans
     taken out by the Labour Council over the last    years.
     In the current financial year, the payments of principle
     and interest to money lenders is estimated at £106
     million out of a net budget of £338 million.  Therefore,
     one third of the net budget goes direct to the money
     lenders and does not provide any services to the people
     of Liverpool;

4.   £500,000 of the £3.5 million deficit is made up of grant
     to the Mersey Trade Union Centre which is nothing but a
     front for the Labour Party and the exorbitant cost of
     the new public relations offices;

5.   an emergency meeting of this Committee be convened to
     consider the following:-

     (a)   methods to increase productivity in the Council
           workforce to provide better services for the people
           of Liverpool;

     (b)   priority for capital expenditure restricted to the
           committed programmes for Highways, Social Services
           and Education Committees, Improvement Grants,
           improvement and repairs to existing Council houses
           and to comply with the Council's legal obligation
           to the occupiers of "Boot” and "Boswell" houses;



PSAAAI
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE
                                            i - ^ a i '. . ; - : — - - -   .-?!_ 1 -rrn ' ^ n —
                                                                              .   -'              —   —




   FINANCE
                                       20


   The Amendment was carried.  And on being put as the
   Substantive Motion and carried, it was resolved accordingly.


46. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

    The Committee considered the proceedings of the Hillsborough
    Disaster Working Party of the 19th May and 7th June, 1989.

    Resolved that the proceedings be approved and that the Chair
    be authorised to submit a recommendation to the next meeting
    of the City Council in relation to an application for
    research funding from the Edge Hill College of Higher
    Education, following its consideration at the next meeting
    of the Working Party.


47. Merseyside Co-Ordinating Committee

    The Committee considered the proceedings of the Merseyside
    Co-Ordinating Committee of the 16th June, 1989.

    Resolved that -

     (i)        the question of whether the City Council should give a
                guarantee for the continuing pension liabilities of
                Airport employees (Minute 85) be deferred pending the
                outcome of the discussions with representatives of the
                Merseyside Superannuation Fund; and

    (ii)        the remainder of the proceedings be noted.


48. Leasing of Various Equipment
    (CT/2 32/89)            ~

    The Committee considered the outcome of negotiations
    undertaken by the City Treasurer for a leasing facility for
    the City Council in the light of information contained in
    Report CT/232/89 of the City Treasurer.

    Resolved that the City Treasurer be authorised to accept the
    quotation from Lessor B referred to in his report and to
    take the necessary action in advance of approval by the City
    Council.




    FSA A A I
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
