                                                                          W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                                                          City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                                          P.O. Box No. 88
                                                                          Municipal Buildings

   LIVERPOOL                                                              Dale Street
                                                                          LIVERPOOL L69 2DH

                                                                          Telephone: 051—227 3911 Ext:
                                                                                        0 5 1 -2 2 5 2 4 3 0 (Direct Line)
                                                                          Fax: 0 5 1 -2 3 6 2047
                                                                          DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                                          Your ref
                                                                          Our ref    P&F/AKC/LTN
                                                                          Date       24th        A n r i 1 . 1989
                                                                                     O A - t - h April,

  TO:       All Members of the
            Hillsborough Disaster
            Sub-Committee.




   Dear Sir/Madam,

   You are requested to attend a meeting of the HILLSBOROUGH

   DISASTER SUB-COMMITTEE to be held at 9.15 A.M. on TUESDAY next

   25TH APRIL, 1989 in a Committee Room in the Municipal Annexe,

   Dale Street.

   The agenda for the meeting is attached.

   Yours faithfully,




   City Solicitor,
   Secretary to the Council




' When   calling   of   telephoning   please   ask   fo r   j^r   Corns
                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER SUB-COMMITTEE

                          25TH APRIL, 1989



                             A G E N D A


APPOINTMENT OF CHAIR

To consider the appointment of a Chair for this Sub
Committee.



CONSTITUTION OF SUB-COMMITTEE

RECOMMENDATION

That the action of the Leader of the City Council i
appointing this Sub-Committee (comprising 4 Labour
and 2 SLD Members) with the following terms of
reference be confirmed, viz:-

      To co-ordinate the Council's activities in
      relation to fund-raising and other assistance
      in providing relief for victims of the
      Hillsborough Disaster, without further
      recourse to the Council.



ACTION TAKEN BY THE LEADER OF THE CITY COUNCIL

RECOMMENDATION

That the actions of the Leader of the Council in:-

(a)   authorising the City Treasurer to make a
      contribution of £25,000 to the Hillsborough
      Disaster Appeal;  and

(b)   nominating Mr. M. D. Blankstone, Liverpool to
      serve as a Trustee of the Appeal,

be confirmed.
                           HILLSECRQ-JGH DISASTER APPEAL


Liverpool Council!5 Formal Response to Fund Raising for the Appeal



                           Rsoort of The Citv Solicitor



Introduction

Since the Hillsborough tragedy, hundreds of offers of help and donations to
the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal have been flooding into Liverpool City Council.

When the appeal was launched, council staff in the Promotion & News Unit
swung into action in answer to the overwhelming public response to the
trag e dy .

Through the Unit, local and national businesses have offered their services
to promote the appeal free of charge and charity groups and individuals
wanting to organise fund raising events have contacted the Unit for assistance.

So far, staff working in the Unit have organised the free printing of nearly
325,000 leaflets, stickers and.posters by printers across the North West
keen to help publicise the mammoth fund-raising effort.

More than 30,000 City Council employees will receive letters from Council
Leader Keva Coombes and deputy leader Alan Dean calling for support for the
fu nd .

Council staff have been busy getting the appeal message across.

Five thousand buses across the North West will carry appeal posters as will
850 advertising hoardings in Liverpool, Nottingham, Sheffield and Newcastle
and all the major rail stations.

Radio and TV stations will be regularly broadcasting the appeal message
that  donations can be made at any bank or building society.

All appeal literature will be mailed free of charge and rapid delivery services
have  offered to make urgent dispatches of publicity material.

Fund  raisers everywhere have been drawing on c o u n c i l officers expertise in
organising charity events.

Workers have helped people to obtain the requested licences to hold these
events and council Chairman Dorothy Gavin has offered to attend charity
functions.

In the official week of mourning following the disaster, the Promtion and
News Unit was also heavily involved in handling the huge media response to
events in Sheffield and Liverpool.
At the same time, moves were made to begin the process of establishing a
considered response to the longer term demands of co-ordinated fund raising.

This report sets out the main aims and future role of Liverpool City Council
in the Disaster Appeal.

Aim

To maximise the amount of money raised for the Disaster Appeal and to enable
and encourage people and organisations to express their sympathy with dignity
to the appeal.

Fundraising

The key need in the fundraising is to act as the catalyst.There are three main
focuses to the fundraising:

      (1)   Liverpool
      (2)   Nationally
      (3)   Internationally.

The appeal in the short term will be overwhelmingly supported by local people.
There has to be a push from Liverpool to ensure that "fundraisers" in pubs,
clubs, football etc organise an event for the Appeal.

The Appeal will be run from- the Appeal Office.  Efforts are currently being
made^to find appropriate 'upfront' space.   It will have posters, press
information, stickers, leaflets etc and be the central point for information
about fundraising.

Everyday the cumulative appeal total will be publicly   announced from the
office.

Office Hours

The appeal office will be open Monday-Saturday. It will be available to the
public for the receipt of donations, for visiting celebrities and a focus
for the press.

Staffing

The Appeal office will be run by a nucleus of staff from the Promotion and
News Unit. Staff will be requested from other Council Departments to help
in the appeal when necessary.   It is recommended that the Assistant Chief
Public Relations Officer be given responsiblity for managing the office on
behalf of the Council.

The Appeal office will generate a great deal of press information and it is
vital that the office can send it out and speak with authority.

Database

As far as is possible there should exist:

      (1)   A computerised list of all donations.
     (2)  All conacicr.3    organised by groups,   firms etc should be receipted
     and thanked.

     (3)     The Appeal office should keep a diary of events for the appeal.
             This however can not in any way be comprehensive.

Phonelines

As soon as the phone numbers and fax number are known they should be included
on the poster.  There also should be an answer phone for out of hours ca l l s .

Collection of donations

Many people will request that someone from the Appeal comes to collect the
money.  As it is likely that money will from a very wide radius some thought
has to be given to this process.

One solution is to invite donors to Liverpool for a civic thank you in
September/October.

Links with Trustees

It is important that good links are kept with the Trustess and the Trust Fund
Manager so that information is passed on in both directions.

Technical Advice

Inevitably there will be questions about V.A.T. on large events, charity
vouchers and other legal questions.  There needs to be a point of contact
within the City Council that can answer these questions.

Duration of the Appeal

"High Profile" the work will need to go on for at least three months.  The
Appeal Office will be needed until the end of August 1989-  Collection of
individual monies will go on into late 1989 and money will still be received
in 1990.  In August 1989 a further committee report will be produced detailing
the Councils future involvement with the Appeal.

Budget

Staff costs will be met from within the existing budget, but a contingency
fund for special Appeal related expenditure needs to be established.  The
Assistant Chief Public Relations Officer  will be given responsibility for
managing the budget.
                                                      V'Ci:r. -r;.:.-:;.— -r---   --r ;■   - --y.




Reccommendation

That the Council agree the terms described in report C S /107/89 to establish
a Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Office in Liverpool.
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
