                                                          FINANCE

                                - 293 -
                     FINANCE AND STRATEGY COMMITTEE

                               8th April, 1991



     PRESENT:    Councillor Vicky Roberts, Chair;
                 Councillor I. Scott, Deputy Chair;
                 Councillors F. Anderson, G. Ben-Tovim, J. Brazier,
                 Dawn Booth, K. Cannon, P. Clark, E. Clein,
                 Flora Clucas, Rosemary Cooper, A. Dean,
                 W. Edwards, L. Hughes, A. Jennings,
                 Lady Doreen Jones, Sir Trevor Jones, R. Lafferty,
                 Marie McGiveron, Sarah Norman, W. Owen,
                 K. Ratcliffe, H. Rimmer, E. Roderick and
                •M. Storey.



                Councillors D. Bermingham, G. Booth, H. Chase,
                B. Fitzsimons, S. Fitzsimmons, Susan Hogan,
                Ann Keenan, Lesley Mahmood, F. Ruse and
                F. Vaudrey also attended.



592. Vacancies Sub-Committee

     The proceedings of the Vacancies Sub-Committee of the 15th
     and 21st February were submitted for the information of the
     Committee.


59 3. Special Sub-Committee re:
      Community Charge and Rating Matters

     The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re: Community
     Charge and Rating Matters of the 5th March were submitted
     for the information of the Committee.


594. Client Services Sub-Committee

     Motion -

     That the proceedings of the Client Services Sub-Committee of
     the 19th March, be approved.

     Amendment by Councillor Rosemary Cooper,
      duly seconded -




     FS3AAH
     FINANCE

                               - 294 -
     That the decision of the Sub-Committee approving a report
     upon a Motion relating to conditions in Springfield Park
     (Minute 53) be not approved and that the Director of
     Environmental Services and the Director of Sport and
     Recreation report further on the steps that can be taken in
     the short and long-term to improve this park.

     A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                       For the Amendment - 7
                       Against it        - 17

     The Amendment was lost.



     Second Amendment by Councillor Sir Trevor Jones,
      duly seconded -

     That the resolution of the Sub-Committee approving a
     recommendation of the Welfare Services Sub-Committee
     relating to the award of the contract for the supply of
     fresh fruit and vegetables (Minute 54) be not approved and
     the matter be referred to the Chief Executive for a detailed
     report on the circumstances which led to the contract being
     awarded to a particular firm.

     A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                         For the Amendment - 7
                         Against it        - 14

     The Second Amendment was lost.     The Motion was carried and
     it was resolved accordingly.


595. Corporate Programmes Sub-Committee

     Resolved that the proceedings of the Corporate Programmes
     Sub-Committee of the 25th March, be approved.


59 6. Financial Control Sub-Committee

     Motion -

     That the proceedings of the Financial Control Sub-Committee
     of the 27th March, be approved.

     Amendment by Councillor M. Storey,
      seconded by Councillor P. Clark -




     FS3AAH
                                                                    8
                                                          FINANCE

                                  - 295 -
     That, in view of the Chair's handling of the Financial
     Control Sub-Committee and its budget deliberations
     throughout the financial year, a vote of no confidence be
     recorded.

     A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                        For the Amendment      - 5
                        Against it             - 16

     The Amendment was lost.      The Motion was carried and it was
     resolved accordingly.


59 7. Special Sub-Committee re:
      Local Government and
      Housing Act 1989

     The Committee considered the proceedings of the Special
     Sub-Committee re: Local Government and Housing Act 1989 of
     the 27th March.

     Resolved that the recommendation of the Sub-Committee that
     the Lord Mayors Allowance be £7,000 for 1991/92 be approved.


59 8. Corporate Policy and Performance
      Review Sub-Committee

     Resolved that the proceedings of the Corporate Policy and
     Performance Review Sub-Committee of the 28th March 1991, be
     approved.


59 9. Anti-Litter Patrol - Council Motion

     Resolved that the Motion which appeared in the name of
     Councillor G.P.  Scott at the meeting of the City Council
     held on 13th March 1991, relating to the formation of an
     Anti-Litter Patrol be referred to the Acting Director of
     Cleansing for a report to the Client Services Sub-Committee.


600. Housing Benefit Office -
     Council Motion

     Resolved that the following Report upon the undermentioned
     Motion which appeared in the name of Councillor J. Kendrick
     at the meeting of the City Council held on 13th March, 1991,
     viz:-




     FS3AAH
    FINANCE

                               - 296 -
    That in view of the length of the queues and the time it
    takes to be able to get an interview at the Housing Benefit
    Office in Victoria Street which are longer than the food
    queues in Moscow, the City Treasurer report on the action
    the Council can take to reduce the waiting time in this
    office,

    be approved, viz:-

                                Report

    The Committee has been informed by the City Treasurer that,
    when the Motion was placed before the Council in March, the
    office was under heavy pressure and long queues did form.
    There is no queuing problem at the present time. Efforts
    are being made to eliminate the backlog of cases awaiting
    consideration and, if these efforts are successful, the City
    Treasurer believes that lengthy queues will not form in the
    future.  The Committee has approved the report of the City
    Treasurer.


601. Poll Tax Summonses - Petition

    The Committee considered the following petition which was
    presented to the City Council on the 6th March 1991, viz:-

       "We the undersigned hereby petition Liverpool City Council
        to withdraw the summonses served to non-payers of the
        poll tax and to refuse to issue any further summonses
        in view of the fact that the Poll Tax is unfair,
        unworkable and uncollectable".

    Resolved that the terms of the petition be not approved.


602. Interregnum Powers

    Resolved that the Chair and Deputy Chair, the Leader and
    Deputy Leader and the Leader and Deputy Leader of the
    Liberal Democrats be empowered to deal with matters of
    urgency during the interregnum period.


603. Matters of Urgency Dealt with
     By Chair and/or Deputy-Chair

    Resolved that the action of the Chair and/or Deputy-Chair in
    dealing with the following items as a matter of urgency be
    confirmed -




    FS3AAH
                                                                 8 APR 1991
                                                   FINANCE

                                 - 297 -
       (i) granted authority for the period of training for MST
           trainees to be extended until 22nd March 1991.

      (ii) authorised the Director of Personnel and Management
           Services, in consultation with the appropriate Chief
           Officers, to process applications received from
           employees for early retirement or severance payments
           under the Council's approved schemes including the
           issuing of letters of termination, in advance of
           formal approval by the City Council of Minute 152 of
           the Financial Control Sub-Committee in this respect.


604. Merseyside Valuation and
     Community Charge Tribunal
    Resolved that the Labour Party nominate a person at the next
    meeting of the City Council to serve upon the Merseyside
    Valuation and Community Charge Tribunal consequent upon the
    resignation of Mr. E. Morgan.


605. Hillsborough Working Party
     Resolved that the proceedings of the Hillsborough Working
     Party of the 22nd March, be approved.


606. Additions to Lists of Approved Contractors
     (CS/7 9/81)
     Resolved that in accordance with Standing Order No. 64 the
     companies listed in the Appendix to Report CS/7 9/91 of the
     City Solicitor be approved for inclusion in the Selective
     Tendering Lists shown, within the financial ranges
     indicated.


607. Traffic and Transportation Division -
     Urban Traffic Control Group -
     Annual Service Contracts
     (CE/70/91)
     Resolved that the City Engineer be given authority to accept
     tenders for the supply of the following equipment and
     services for the 1991/92 financial year:-

      (i) traffic signal lamps - as detailed in Report No.
          CE/70/91 of the City Engineer; and

     (ii) slot cutting and sealing - Detector Cutters (1984)
          Limited.



     FS3AAH
    FINANCE

                                - 298 -
608. Inward Investment from Hong Kong
     (ACE/25/91)

    The Committee considered further information in relation to
    the promotion of Liverpool in Hong Kong in the light of
    information contained in Report ACE/25/91 of the Assistant
    Chief Executive.

    Resolved that -

     (a) the Assistant Chief Executive, in conjunction with the
         Community Liaison Officer -

             (i) request the Invest in Britain Bureau, through
                 INWARD, to assist in the distribution of
                 promotional material in Hong Kong and in
                 following up potential investors;

          (ii) seek financial support from the other Merseyside
               districts and the Merseyside Image Campaign
               towards the costs of providing a follow-up
               service to potential investors, bearing in mind
               that the promotional material produced will
               feature the strengths and attractions of
               Merseyside generally;

         (iii) approach the private sector to invite them to
               contribute to the initiative on either a financial
               and/or promotional basis;

          (iv) invite the Merseyside Development Corporation to
               participate in the initiative;

             (v) discuss with the management committee at the
                 Pagoda Centre the possibility of contracting a
                 business person from the local Chinese Community
                 to act on a consultancy basis for the City
                 Council;

     (b) if the outcome of the above proposals is favourable, the
         Assistant Chief Executive and the Community Liaison
         Officer be requested to:-

             (i) commission the production of a video promoting
                 Liverpool by Watermark at a cost of £11,885, to
                 be met from the budget of the Promotion and News
                 Unit; and

          (ii) produce written promotional material at a cost of
               no more than £3,000, to be met from the budget of
               the Promotion and News Unit.




    FS3AAH
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
        CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




Code: ZYZ
                                                                   8
                                                         FINANCE

                                  - 315 -

     (c) subject to the approval of this Committee -

              (i) the Chair and Deputy Chair of the Community
                  Services and Neighbourhood Development Committee,
                  together with the Opposition Spokesperson, be
                  granted delegated powers to approve the final
                  contract documentation; and

          (ii) authority be granted to lease the computer
               hardware and software equipment, following
               consultation with the Department of Information
               Technology, in order to develop a comprehensive
               monitoring system for Leisure Management.

    Resolved that the proposal be approved in principle and a
    further report be submitted upon the financial implications


637. Tuebrook Ward
     Ozanam House
     (Green Lane, Direct Access Centre)
     Refurbishment and Adaptation of Hostel
     (CA/12/91)

    Resolved that -
     (a) the Acting City Architect be authorised to accept the
         lowest tender received from T. Sloyan and Sons Ltd., in
         the sum of £319,951 for the refurbishment and
         adaptations to Ozanam House (Green Lane Direct Access
         Centre) and the total cost of £361,774.87 including
         emergency repairs and design and supervision costs be
         approved; and

     (b) the Acting City Architect be authorised to issue a
         letter of contractual commitment to the contractor in
         advance of the completion of contract formalities to
         enable the scheme to start on site immediately.


638. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

     Resolved that the proceedings of the Hillsborough Disaster
     Working Party of the 3rd April, 1991, be approved.


639. Netherley/Belle Vale Area

     Motion by Councillor J. Brazier, duly seconded -

     That the Finance and Strategy Committee instruct the




     FS3AAH
    FINANCE


                                 - 316 -
    Vacancies    Sub-Committee to take immediate action to
    authorise    the filling of vacant posts associated with the
    Netherley    Estate Action project to enable the officers to
    proceed to   regenerate the Netherley and Belle Vale areas.

    Amendment by the Chair,
     duly seconded -

    That the Director of Housing be instructed to progress the
    resolution of the Vacancies Sub-Committee and the Budget
    Meeting of the City Council in this matter and to keep
    Ward Councillors fully informed.

    During the course of the debate the Amendment was agreed to.
    And on being put as the Substantive Motion and carried it
    was resolved accordingly.


640. Estate Action Programme Netherley "Flagship" Scheme
     (ACX/28/91)

    RECOMMENDATION

    The Committee considered a recommendation that -

     1.   the Assistant Chief Executive counter-signs the
          Netherley Estate Action Memorandum and submits it to the
          Merseyside Task Force; and

    2.    the Assistant Chief Executive and the Director of
          Housing prepare a progress report to the appropriate
          committees on the overall Estate Action Programme for
          1991/92 onwards.

    Resolved that the recommendation be approved and the
    proposal be included in the 3 year Capital Programme.


641. Sale of Council Dwellings
     Payments Eguivalent to Home Loss Payments
     (CES/119/91)

    The Committee considered Minute 221 of the Housing Committee
    recommending that -

     (a) payments equivalent to Home Loss Payments be made under
         Section 32(7B) of the Land Compensation Act 1973 (as
         appropriate) in all cases where tenants are displaced by
         the City Council from dwellings due to be sold
         (including all properties in the Private Initiatives
         Programme); and



    FS3AAH
Placeholder Code: ZXY
