                                                               - J J V H 1939




                        SPECIAL SUB-COMMITTEE

                 TO APPOINT A RESEARCH OFFICER TO THE
                       HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY -

                            8TH JUNE 19 89




      PRESENT:    Councillor Harry Chase (in the Chair)
                  Councillors I. Templeman and F. Roderick.




                  Advisory Representative: Ms. M. Plumpton
                  (NALGO)




*1.   Appointment of Research Officer

      The Sub-Committee considered applications for the post
      of Research Officer to the Hillsborough Working Party,
      Scale 6, which is a temporary post to operate for a
      period of six months.

      Resolved that -

       (i)   the following candidates be selected for interview
             viz :-

                            Ms. A .C . Jemphrey
                            Mr. N.G. Penny
                            Mr. T. Smith; and

      (ii)   the interviews be held on Friday, 16th June 1989.
                                                        16 i U N 1880

                       5

                  SPECIAL SUB-COMMITTEE

           TO APPOINT A RESEARCH OFFICER TO THE
                HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY



                      16TH JUNE 1989




PRESENT:    Councillor Harry Chase (in the Chair)
            Councillors I. Templeman and F. Roderick.




            Advisory Representative: Ms. M. Plumpton
            (NALGO).




Appointment of Research Officer

The Sub-Committee interviewed the following candidates
for the post of Research Officer, Hillsborough Working
Party, viz :-

Candidates Name            Present Position

Ms. A.C. Jemphrey          Administrator
                           (Merseyside Welfare Rights
                            Resource Centre)

Mr. N.G. Penny             DATA - Cleanse Officer,
                           British Telecom.

Mr. T. Smith               Unemployed.




During the interviews it was stated that Mr. T. Smith
was known to Councillors Chase and Templeman and had
been involved with the Hillsborough Working Party on a
Voluntary basis.
Councillor Roderick stated that in his view, those
Members should have made this known at the Shortlising
Meeting and, in view of the non-disclosure, asked the
two Members to withdraw from the Sub-Committee.
Councillors Chase and Templeman gave assurances that
all candidates would be judged impartially.  The
interviews continued.

At the conclusion of the interviews, the Sub-Committee
considered the appointment to be made.  Councillor
Roderick expressed the opinion that the interviews had
not been fair and impartial.  Councillor Templeman
stated that he had tried to be as objective as possible
in assessing all of the candidates and reaching his
decision.  Councillor Roderick proposed that Mr. Penny
should be appointed to the post.

Motion by Councillor Templeman,   seconded by
Councillor Chase,

That

   Mr. T. Smith, aged 33 years, be appointed to the
   post of Research Officer at a salary of £10,473
   (the bottom of Scale 6), the appointment to be
   for a fixed term of six months, subject to the
   Standing Orders of the City Council together with
   the Scheme of Conditions of Service of the National
   Joint Council for Local Authorities Administrative
   etc. Services, and to be effective from a date to
   be arranged.

A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                 For the Motion       2
                 Against it           1

The Motion was carried and it was resolved accordingly.
                                                   HILLSBOROUGH

                             5

             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER SUB-COMMITTEE
                           of the
               Finance and Strategy Committee
                       6th October,   1989


PRESENT:   Councillor Keva Coombes, Chair
           Councillor A. Jennings




The Hillsborough Disaster and
the work of the Promotion and
News Unit
(CS/210/89)

The Sub-Committee considered a recommendation that -

(a)   the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Shop be closed with
       effect from the 6th October, 1989 and its future use
      be determined; and

(b)   report CT/210/89 of the City Solicitor be circulated
       to all members of the City Council and all Chief
       Officers for information.

Resolved that -

(a)   the report be noted;

(b)   the shop be closed with effect from 13th October,   1989

(c)   the Chief Public Relations Officer report, following
       consultation with appropriate Chief Officers, upon
       possible alternative uses for the premises; and

(d)   the Chief Public Relations Officer collate, Department
       by Department, reports relating to the involvement of
       those Departments with the aftermath of the disaster
       with a view to being able to inform other local
       authorities and other agencies about the practical
       steps that may be necessary to deal with similar
       horrendous incidents should they unfortunately occur.
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
