                                                                  POLICY
                                  _   7


                    POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                            6th July, 1993


      PRESENT:   Councillor Dawn Booth, Chair;
                 Councillors F. Anderson, M. Bolland,
                 N. Cardwell, E. Clein, Margaret Clarke,
                 Flo Clucas, A. Concepcion, Eileen Devaney,
                 F. Doran, Beatrice Fraenkel, A. Jennings,
                 Roger Johnston, Lady Doreen Jones, Ann Keenan,
                 Frances Kidd, Elaine Kinahan, G. Knibb,
                 J. Lang, Maggie McDaid, P. Millea,
                 Sarah Norman, J. Rossington, W. Snell,
                 N. Stanley and Cathy Wilson.


                 Councillors Vera Best and I. Scott also attended.


      Apologies for absence were received from the Deputy Chair
      (Councillor Marie McGiveron), Councillors P. Clark and M.
      Storey.



7.    Request to Record Proceedings

      Resolved that a request on behalf of a student at Liverpool
      University to record these proceedings be approved.


 8. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

       (a) Resolved that the proceedings of the Hillsborough
           Disaster Working Party of 26th April be approved; and

       (b) the proceedings of a meeting of the Chairs, Deputy
           Chairs and Opposition Spokespersons of that Working
           Party and this Committee of 26th April were submitted
           for the information of the Committee.



 9. Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons

      The proceedings of the meetings of the Chair, Deputy Chair
      and Opposition Spokespersons of 4th, 7th, 11th, 24th and
      28th June were submitted for the information of the
      Committee.




     al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A060793
 POLICY
                                "   8   -   "




10. Special Sub-Committee - Appointment of
    Chief Officers

   The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee - Appointment
   of Chief Officer of 10th and 11th May, 14th, 22nd and 23rd
   June were submitted for the information of the Committee.


11. Working Party - Use of Official Cars

   The Committee considered -

    (a) the proceedings of the Working Party - Use of Official
        Cars of 21st June; and

    (b) Minute 13 of the Personnel Committee recommending that
        consideration of paragraph (a) (i) and (ii) of Minute 1
        together with the previous decision of the Working
        Party to create a fifth post of Chauffeur be deferred
        and the Head of Management Support submit a further
        report on the proposals in line with the agreed terms
        of reference of the Working Party, on the flexibility
        of the proposed working arrangements and details of the
        shift pattern submitted by the Chauffeurs, to be
        considered by the Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition
        spokespersons of the Personnel and Policy and Resources
        Committees during the next cycle.


   Resolved that -

     (i) paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of the proceedings be
         approved; and

    (ii) paragraph (a) of the proceedings be deferred in line
         with the decision of the Personnel Committee in this
         respect and if possible the meeting called for be held
         during the current cycle.


12. Land Management Sub-Committee
    and LIPA Working Party
    (DRES/185/93)

   The Committee considered -

    (a) the proceedings of the Land Management Sub-Committee of
        15th June and 1st July; and

    (b) a decision of the L.I.P.A. Working Group of 28th June
        (upon consideration of a recommendation of the Head of
        Estates and the Head of Legal Services that -




 al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A060793
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
