            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                           of the

              Policy and Resources Committee

                    15th November, 1991



PRESENT:   Councillor K. Chase, Chair;
           Councillors N. Chinn, E. Clein,
           A. Jennings, S. Ledwich and
           W. Roberts.



           Apologies for absence were received from
           Councillor W. Edwards.



           Ms. S. Coleman from the "Hillsborough Project"
           at Edgehill College and representatives of
           the Hillsborough Families Support Group were
           also in attendance.



           An apology for absence was also received
           from Mr. A. Doswell of the Liverpool
           Trades Council.




Minutes of Last Meeting

The proceedings of the last meeting of the Working Party
held on 23rd September, 1991 were submitted for the
information of Members.


Meeting of Members of Bereaved Families
with Members of Parliament

Resolved that the verbal Report of Ms. S. Coleman of
Edge Hill College concerning a meeting held between
members of bereaved families and Mr. G. Howarth, M.P.
and Mr. P. Kilfoyle, M.P., be noted.
 8.   Meeting of Members of Bereaved Families
      and Counsel held in London on 5th November, 1991

      Resolved that the verbal Report of M s . S. Coleman of
      Edge Hill College concerning a meeting held in London on
      5th November, 1991 between the Members of bereaved
      Families and Counsel, be noted.


 9.   Request from Bereaved Families
      for Further Assistance

      The Working Party considered the matter of continuing
      requests being received by the City Council from
      Members of Bereaved Families and Survivors far advice,
      assistance and support.

      Resolved that in the light of the continuing requests
      for assistance being received,the Chair of the Working
      Party be authorised to meet with the Acting Director of
      Personnel and the Chair of the Personnel Committee with
      a view to investigating a method for the Authority to
      provide an Officer, preferably with some legal knowledge,
      to act on behalf of the Working Party as a point of
      contact with bereaved families and survivors and to
      report back to the Working Party on any matters which
      arise from such meetings.

10.   Edge Hill College - The Hillsborough Project

      The Working Party considered an application received
      from Edge Hill College for funding for a further
      12 months of the "Hillsborough Project" which is currently
      being researched at the College.

      Resolved that -

      (a)   the recommendation of this Working Party to the
            Policy and Resources Committee be that the
            application for further funding, be approved;
            and

      (b)   in its determination of this matter the Policy
            and Resources Committee also be requested to
            consider as appropriate responses received in
            respect of the request of the Working Party that
            the City Solicitor write to all the relevant
            Members of Parliament and Chief Executives of
            District Councils within the Mersey Region
            seeking contributions to assist this additional
            funding from the other District Councils affected
            by the Disaster.
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
