                   POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                        15th September, 1992



    PRESENT: Councillor Dawn Booth, Chair;
             Councillor Marie McGiveron, Deputy Chair;
             Councillors F. Anderson, G. Ben-Tovim,
             J. Brazier, Joan Brown, N. Chinn, MBE,
             Margaret Clarke, Paul Clark, E. Clein, C. Curry,
             W. Edwards, Beatrice Fraenkel, A. Jennings,
             Lady Doreen Jones, Ann Keenan, Frances Kidd,
             R. Lancaster, P. Millea, J. Rossington, I. Scott,
             N. Stanley, M. Storey and Cathy Wilson.



              Councillors Joe Devaney, D. Hanratty,
              Maggie McDaid, P. McGrath and F. Prendergast also
              attended.




122. Financial Review
     (CT/182 /92)

    The Committee considered a financial review of the
    Authority in the light of information contained in Report
    CT/182/92 of the Director of Resources.

    Motion by the Chair,
     duly seconded,

    That -

    (a)    Report CT/182/92 be noted;

     (b)   this Committee expresses grave concern at the apparent
           overspendings in those areas identified in the
           Financial Review and the detrimental effect this could
           have on the Council's desire to allocate monies from
           the refinancing of mortgages to key areas such as
           housing, education and social services;

     (c)   the Director of Resources be requested to submit a
           detailed report on the accounts for 1991/92 to the
           Finance Sub-Committee prior to the next Policy ajid
           Resources Committee, by which time the accounts should
           be finalised, such report also to identify all
           significant budget variances;




  al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/Al50992
POLICY

                              - 60
  (d)    the Director of Resources be requested to report upon
         the steps being taken by CSL to ensure that the
         maximum amount of residual rates due to the authority
         are collected and not written off;

  (e)    the Chief Executive be requested to undertake, and
         report upon, a detailed examination of the 1991/92
         variances of £7.3 million identified in the Financial
         Review (and relating to the client/contractor services
         department) to determine detailed explanations for
         their causes, and steps to be taken to ensure that
         similar variances do not occur in 1992/93 or future
         years. Any further action on this issue to be taken
         in the light of this report;

  (f)    the Officers' attention be drawn to the responsibility
         placed upon them in the Budget Resolution and
         Financial Regulations to take action to ensure that
         expenditure is contained within the approved budget.
         This Committee would again point out to all Directors
         and Chief Officers the requirement of the Budget
         Resolution to contain spending within approved budget
         levels and would take the view that any serious breach
         of this requirement could render senior officers
         liable to the appropriate disciplinary action;

  (g)    Corporate and departmental financial control
         mechanisms be reviewed by the Chief Executive and
         Directors, and a report be prepared with
         recommendations for any action required;

  (h)    the City Council make renewed representations to the
         appropriate Secretary of State regarding the
         outstanding application for SCA's and the failure by
         the DSS to positively respond on the extension of time
         required to deal with 'Benefit Over-runs'; and

  (i)    no new additional expenditure be approved for the time
         being until specific and available finance can be
         identified to support it.

  A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                       For the Motion - 18
                       Against it        0

  The Motion was carried and it was resolved accordingly.




al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/Al50992
123. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

           Resolved that -

           (a)   the proceedings of the Hillsborough Disaster Working
                 Party of the 5th May, 1992, be approved; and

           (b)   arrangements be made for a further meeting of the
                 Working Party to be held as soon as possible.
.•/ ’




124. Capital Programme Working Party
-V '

           Resolved that the proceedings of the Capital Programme
           Working Party of the 10th August, 1992, be approved.


    25. Restructuring Working Party

           Resolved that authority be granted for the proceedings of
           the Restructuring Working Party of 18th September to be
           submitted direct to the City Council on 23rd September.


        ’6. Scheduling Sub-Committee

           (A)   The proceedings of the Scheduling Sub-Committee of the
                 29th July and 5th, 13th, 19th and 26th August, 1992
                 were submitted for the information of the Committee;
                 and

           (B)   Resolved that consideration be given to the
                 introduction of a more cost-effective method of
                 managing these issues.


    27. Special Sub-Committee re:
        Community Charge and
        Non-Domestic Rates - Publicity         Campaign

           The proceedings of the Special     Sub-Committee reCommunity
           Charge and Non-Domestic Rates - Publicity Campaign of the
           11th and 20th August were submitted for the information of
           the Committee.


    28. Special Sub-Committee re:
        London Road Development Agency

           The proceedings of the Special      Sub-Committee reLondon Road
           Development Agency of the 11th      August were submitted for
           the information of the Committee.



         al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A150992
  POLICY

                               -   62

129. Special Sub-Committee re:
     Housing Association Programme -
     Shaw Street/Haigh Street

    The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re Housing
    Association Programme - Shaw Street/Haigh Street of the
    24th August were submitted for the information of the
    Committee.


130. Restructuring Sub-Committee

    Resolved that the proceedings of the Restructuring Sub-
    Committee of the 21st August, 1992, be approved.


131. Corporate Policies and Programmes Sub-Committee

    Resolved that the proceedings of the Corporate Policies and
    Programmes Sub-Committee of the 3rd and 10th September,
    1992, be approved.


132. Performance Review Sub-Committee

     The Committee considered the proceedings of the Performance
     Review Sub-Committee of the 4th September, 1992.

     Motion by the Chair,
      duly seconded,

     That the proceedings be approved.

     Amendment by Councillor Cathy Wilson,
      seconded by Councillor A. Jennings,

     That Minute 8(c) be varied by the addition of the
     following

     The Council Officers

       (i) accept all reasonable offers to pay and withdraw the
           committal summonses;

      (ii) immediately adjourn any case where a person is on
           income support to allow such situation to be
           confirmed and if confirmed the committal summons be
           withdrawn;

     (iii) those cases already on Income Support, and future
           cases, take priority if any 80% benefit claim has not
           been dealt with; and



   al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/Al50992
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
