 I



                                       CITY OF LIVERPOOL



                                      12TH DECEMBER, 1990



                      At a meeting of the city Council held on Wednesday,
                 12th December, 1990 at 1.30 p.*. in the Town Hall




         V-'




     ii:

     ■ ... ■ .




     : CC2AAA
«■
                                                                  12th December, 1990

                                                  -271-

                                                 PRESENT

                                            THE LORD MAYOR
                                      (Councillor Dorothy Gavin)

                   COUNCILLORS: Allen, Backhouse, Ben-Tovim, Bermingham,
                   Bolland, Dawn Booth, Gary Booth, John Bradley,
                   Pamela Bradley, Brady, Brazier, Joan Brown, Bullock,
                   Gillian Bundred, Burke, Cannon, Cardwell, Clein,
                   Flora Clucas, Concepcion, Rosemary Cooper, Coventry,
                   Cunningham, Curry, Dean, Doyle, Elizabeth Drysdale,
                   Edwards, Barry Fitzsimons, Stephen Fitzsimmons,
                   Hannah Folan, Beatrice Fraenkel, Ann Gorton, Hackett,
                   Juliet Herzog, Susan Hogan, George Hughes, Leslie Hughes,
                   Philip Hughes, Hutchinson, Jennings, Roger Johnson,
                   Lady Doreen Jones, Sir Trevor Jones, Ann Keenan, Kendrick,
                   Lafferty, Lane, Lang, Ledwich, Livingstone, Margaret McDaid,
                   Marie McGiveron, Pauline McKibbin, McKittrick, McManus,
                   Lesley Mahmood, Judith Nelson, Noon, Sarah Norman,
                   O'Donoghue, Linda O'Sullivan, Oldfield, Orr, Owen,
                   Prendergast, Quinn, Radford, Ratcliffe, Rimmer,
                   Bill Roberts, Vicky Roberts, Edward Roderick,
                   Frances Roderick, Ian Scott, Gerard Scott,
                   Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer, Jacqueline Smith, Trevor Smith,
                   Snell, Storey, Templeman, Tyrer, Vaudrey and Williams.



                   Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors
                   N. Chinn, MBE, P. Clark, A. Duckworth, Cathy Hancox,
                   Elaine Kinahan, G. Knibb, Jean Newton, F. Ruse and
                   Cathy Wilson.



                                             COUNCIL MINUTES

                   The Minutes of the Extraordinary Meeting of the City Council
      S-V;/:
                   held on the 21st November, 1990 were submitted and signed by
                   the Lord Mayor.

M :         'V     ••
                               VACANCY ON COMMITTEE AND SUB-COMMITTEES
                               ----------------------------------------------

                   Resolved that -
      .    '• ••

                    (a)   Councillor Sir Trevor Jones be appointed to fill a
                          vacancy for an alternate member of the Financial
                          Control Sub-Committee for Councillors Flora Clucas and
                          M. Storey occasioned by the resignation of Councillor
                          J. Lang;
          V:


                   CC2AAA
12th December, 1990

                             -272-

(b)   Councillor N. Cardwell be appointed to fill a vacancy
      upon the Community Care Sub-Committee occasioned by the
      resignation of Councillor J. Kendrick;

(c)   Councillor N. Cardwell be appointed to fill a vacancy
      for an alternate member of the Staff Appointments
      Sub-Committee for Councillors N. Chinn, MBE and
      D. McKittrick occasioned by the resignation of
      Councillor J. Kendrick; and
                              »
(d)   Councillor N. Cardwell be appointed to fill a vacancy
      upon the Personnel and Equal Opportunities Policy
      Committee consequent upon the resignation of Councillor
      Jean Newton.


                           PETITIONS

      The Council received a petition signed by 1670
      Liverpool Residents requesting the City Council to take
      action:-
                                                                           '
      (1) Because of obscene and pornographic material,
          produced in Britain and abroad is available and on
          open display (not only on the top shelf) in many,
          if not most, of Liverpool's newsagents.

      (2) Because sex crime escalates and children are
          increasingly at risk of being sexually abused and
          even murdered, not to mention also the risks to
          women.

      the Petitioners believe that the circulation of obscene
      and pornographic material is harmful to all members of
      society, especially to women and children, and calls
      upon the Council to request the Trading Standards
      Department to contact each and every known newsagent
      within the City boundary with a request that they cease
      to display or stock such material prior to any
      legislation by national government, and as soon as
      possible.
                                                              ■ ■■   , .




Mr. Jonathon Leakey representing the petitioners addressed
the Council on the terms of the petition.



      The Council received a petition signed by 960 Liverpool
      Residents protesting at the proposed closure of the
      Oakfield Centre for students with severe learning



CC2AAA
                                             12th December, 1990

                             -273-

      difficulties as part of the Councils ongoing review of
      special needs provision in the City.



A representative of the parents of pupils attending the
Oakfield Centre addressed the Council on the terms of the
petition.


            LIVERPOOL UNITED RESIDENTS ASSOCIATION

Motion by Councillor H. Rimmer,
 duly seconded and resolved -

That a representative of the Liverpool United Residents
Association be permitted to address the Council upon a
petition relating to the sale of public open space and
parkland throughout the City.



Mr. D. Howard then addressed the Council on the terms of the
petition.



                      FINANCE AND STRATEGY

The proceedings of the Finance and Strategy Committee of the
3rd December and the Corporate Programmes Sub-Committee of
the 5th December, 1990, so far as they require confirmation
by the Council, were submitted.

Hunts Cross Primary
School/Library

The Chair (Councillor Vicky Roberts) referred to the
resolution of the Corporate Programmes Sub-Committee
referring, for consideration in conjunction with the
Council's three year Capital Programme, the financial
implications in 1991/92 of providing library facilities in
Hunts Cross Primary School and recommended that -

(a)   the scheme for the provision of library facilities at
      Hunts Cross Primary School proceed within the sum
      allocated within the current capital programme;

(b)   the allocation of capital resources for the provision
      of a car park etc., be considered in conjunction with
      the three year Capital Programme; and




CC2AAA
12th December, 1990

                               -274-

(c)   the revenue costs of operating the library be
      considered in conjunction with the budget for 1991/92.

This item then stood opposed

          (See Minute Book 21, page A4 71, Minute 66)


Future Use of Gregson Memorial Institute,
Garmoyle Road

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Finance and
Strategy Committee authorising the submission of a
recommendation in relation to the tenancy of the Gregson
Memorial Institute, Garmoyle Road and recommended that
consideration of this matter be deferred pending a further
report by the City Estates Surveyor following an examination
of relocation opportunities in the area for the Scout Group
and other users of the Institute.

Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

          (See Minute Book 21, page A495, Minute 368)


Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Finance and
Strategy Committee authorising the submission of a
recommendation in relation to the proceedings of the
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party of the 24th October and
23rd November, 1990 and recommended that the proceedings be
approved subject to no additional expenditure arising from
any of the proposals contained therein, provided that, in
the case of the extension of the appointment of the Research
Officer, appropriate financial provision be made to extend
the appointment for the remainder of the current financial
year.

Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

          (See Minute Book 21, page A496, Minute 369)


Charges for Services and
Use of Private Contractors

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Finance and
Strategy Committee authorising the submission of a
recommendation in relation to proposed increases in charges
and the introduction of new charges and proposals for
terminating or reducing the services of private contractors



CC2AAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
        CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




Code: ZYZ
                                           12th December, 1990

                              -283-

Resolved that the remainder of the proceedings of the
Community Services and Neighbourhood Development Committee
of the 28th November, 1990 be approved, except the following
items to which notice of opposition was given, viz:-



 ITEM NO.    BOOK, PAGE AND             SUBJECT
             MINUTE NO.


    1        20/J118/47       Hunts Cross School - Dual Use
             and              Library
             21/A471/66


    2        20/J104/30       Harold Davies Swimming Pool
                              (Dovecot Baths)



            PERSONNEL AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES POLICY

The proceedings of the Personnel and Equal Opportunities
Policy Committee of the 29th November, 1990, so far as they
require confirmation by the Council, were submitted.

Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
- Research Officer

The Chair (Councillor A. Dean) referred to the resolution of
the Personnel and Equal Opportunities Policy Committee
authorising the submission of a recommendation in relation
to the contract of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
Research Officer and recommended that, in order to allow the
work of the Working Party to be progressed for the remainder
of the Municipal Year, the contract of the Research Officer
be extended until 31st March, 1991.

Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

            (See Minute Book 21, page B299, Minute 271)


City Cleansing Department
Grievance Procedure -
Environmental Cleansing Operative

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Personnel and
Equal Opportunities Policy Committee authorising the
submission of a recommendation in relation to an appeal
submitted by an Environmental Cleansing Operative against a



CC2AAA
12th December, 1990

                            -284-

decision to remove him from driving duties and recommended
that the recommendation of the Chair of the Direct Services
Committee and the Deputy Chair's representative in this
matter be approved.

Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

         (See Minute Book 21, page B303, Minute 283)


Legal Staff - City Solicitors Department

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Personnel and
Equal Opportunities Policy Committee authorising the
submission of a recommendation in relation to a revised
structure for the legal staff in the City Solicitors
Department and recommended that consideration of this matter
be deferred.

Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

         (See Minute Book 21, page B309, Minute 296)


Adult Education Service
Development Plan

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Personnel and
Eqaul Opportunities Policy Committee authorising the
submission of a recommendation in relation to a development
plan for the Adult Education Service and recommended that
the decision of the Education Committee in this matter be
                                                                    PS
approved.

Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

         (See Minute Book 21, page B313, Minute 309)


City Cleansing Department
Review of Establishment

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Personnel and
Equal Opportunities Policy Committee authorising the         V.'#
submission of a recommendation in relation to a review of
the establishment of the City Cleansing Department and
recommended that the proposals submitted to the Committee be
approved.

Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

         (See Minute Book 21, page B314, Minute 312)



CC2AAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
