                                                   POLICY

                            - 11 -

                  POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                         18th June, 1991



PRESENT: Councillor Vicky Roberts, Chair;
         Councillor H. Riminer, Deputy Chair;
         Councillors J. Backhouse, G. Ben-Tovim,
         D. Bermingham, Dawn Booth, J. Brazier, N. Cardwell,
         Rosemary Cooper, A. Dean, Cathy Hancox,
         Susan Hogan, A. Jennings, Lady Doreen Jones,
         Frances Kidd, G. Knibb, J. Lang, Lesley Mahmood,
         M. McCauley, W. Owen, I. Scott and M. Storey.



         Councillor Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer also attended.



         An apology for absence was submitted by Councillor
         Flora Clucas.



Possible Closure of Childwall Community Centre

The Committee considered Minute 13 of the Education
Committee recommending that the proposed closure of
Childwall Community Centre, Hartsbourne Avenue, be not
approved having regard to the detrimental effects that the
loss of this Centre would have on the local community and
user groups and that future funding for this Centre be
secured in conjunction with regular consultations between
the Local Authority and Centre staff and user groups.



With the permission of the Committee, Mrs. Hanley and
Councillor Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer addressed the meeting on
this matter.



Resolved that -

(a) a Working Party be appointed to review youth and
    community provision in the City and report in the next
    cycle of meetings; and




FS4ACV
   POLICY

                                -   12 -                           |
    (b) the Chair be authorised to submit a recommendation upon    |
        the composition and membership of the Working Party
        direct to the meeting of the City Council.


10. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

   Resolved that the proceedings of the Hillsborough Disaster
   Working Party of the 19th and 27th April, 1991, be
   approved.


11. Sub-Committee re
                                                                       I
    Printing of Croxteth                                            >
    Hall Publicity Material                                       "f

   The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re: Printing of
   Croxteth Hall Publicity Material of the 11th April, 1991
   were submitted for the information of the Committee.


12. Sub-Committee re
    Compulsory Competitive Tendering
    for Refuse Collection Service

   The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re: Refuse
   Collection - Compulsory Competitive Tendering of the 15th
   April, 1991 were submitted for the information of the
   Committee.


13. Interregnum Sub-Committee

   The proceedings of the Interregnum Sub-Committee of the 1st
   and 9th May, 1991 were submitted for the information of the
   Committee.


14. Private Sector Development Sub-Committee

   The proceedings of the Private Sector Development
   Sub-Committee of the 7th June, 1991 were submitted for the
   information of the Committee.


15. Client Services Sub-Committee

   Resolved that the proceedings of the Client Services
   Sub-Committee of the 10th June, 1991, be approved.




   FS4ACV
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
        CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




Code: ZYZ
                                                                   POLICY

                                 - 21 -

           City Council strategies, policies and service delivery
           mechanisms.


33.   Amendment to Standing Order    86
      (CE/6/91)

      Resolved that Standing Order    86   be amended to read as
      follows -

      "No employee shall, unless authorised by the Chief Executive
       or appropriate Chief Officer, enter into any communication
       with the media with reference to the business of the
       Council otherwise than through the Promotion and News Unit
       of the Chief Executive's Department."


34. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

      The Committee considered the re-appointment of the
      Hillsborough Disaster Working Party for the current
      Municipal Year.

      Resolved that the Working Party be re-appointed comprising
      4 Labour, 3 Liberal Democrat and 3 Liverpool Labour
      Councillors and that nominations be submitted to the City
      Council.


35. Smithdown Road Shop Frontages Scheme
    6 8 Smithdown Road, Liverpool, 7


      Resolved that -

      (a) the freehold interest in No.   6 8 Smithdown Road,
          Liverpool, 8 , shown verged on plan no.   8:48 be acquired
          from Mr.   D. Murphy for the sum of £32,000 with a
          redundancy payment yet to be agreed but otherwise in
          full and final settlement, the City Council to be
          responsible for the payment of the vendors proper legal
          costs, and otherwise on terms agreed by the Assistant
          City Estates Surveyor; and

      (b) the expenditure be met from the Urban Programme
          allocation for the Shop Frontage Scheme.




      FS4ACV
POLICY


                           - 22 -
Granby Ward
Urban Regeneration Strategy
Priority Area 12 - Northumberland
95-97 Park Road, Liverpool 8

Resolved that further to the City Council's acquisition of
95/97 Park Road, Liverpool 8 -

(a) a final payment be made to Industrial Cooling Equipment
    Limited, in respect of the loss of profits resulting
    from displacement from the premises 95/97 Park Road,
    Liverpool 8 (shown verged on Plan No. 14/7.5) in the sum
    of £7,000 plus appropriate solicitors costs and
    surveyors fees on Ryde's Scale (1984); and

(b) the expenditure be met from the Capital Programme.


The Management Agenda -
Progress Report
(CE/8/91)

The Committee considered the progress made to date on the
Management Agenda in the light of information contained in
Report CE/8/91 of the Chief Executive.

Resolved that the report of the Chief Executive be noted.
                                                               '■S '



Local Government Review
(CE/10/91)

Resolved that the contents of two consultation papers issued
by the Department of the Environment relating to the finance
and structure of local government and the response thereto
be noted.


Site Investigation
(CA/17/91)

Resolved that the tender for the sub-soil investigations and
trial borings on the sites of building and civil engineering
projects proposed to be undertaken by the City Council
during the twelve months commencing 1st August, 19 91 be
accepted, viz:-

                     Strata Surveys Ltd.,
                     Holmes Chapel Road,
                     Middlewich,
                     Cheshire.




FS4ACV
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
