                                                                                           ^(Jq   3 1- MAR 199
                              The City of Liverpool
                               P erso n n el   <fc   A d m in istra tio n D irecto ra te
                              Head o f Committee & Member Services
                               Ken Corns
                              PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                              Tel: 051-225 2 4 3 # ax: 051-225 2427


                                                                            Your ref:
                                                                              Our ref: SS/GPD
                                                         Date:       26th March, 1993
To:     (a) All Members of the Social
            Services Committee; and

        (b) certain Chief Officers.

                          PLEASE NOTE TIME OF MEETING
                       SMOKING AT MEETINGS IS PROHIBITED

My dear Sir/Madam,


        Further to my letter of 19th March, I now write to request

your attendance at a meeting of the SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE to

be held at 3.00 P.M. on WEDNESDAY, 31ST MARCH 1993 in Committee

Room VA' in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street, Liverpool 2.

        The Agenda for the meeting is attached.


                                                     Yours faithfully,



                              Head of Committee and Member Services,


Note:     Caucus meetings as follows, viz:-

                 Labour                    2.15pm                       Labour Offices,
                                                                        Municipal Buildings.
                 Lib/Dem                   2.30pm                       LD Group Meeting Room,
                                                                        Municipal Annexe.

                 L 7pool Labour            2.30pm                       Room 17,
                 Councillors                                            Municipal Buildings.


           When calling please ask for Mr. G. Davey




                      Director o f Personnel & Administration: Derek Griffin
               Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resources;
          Information Technology; Legal Services; Management Support; Public Relations.
                  S O C IA L S E R V IC E S COMMITTEE

                       31ST MARCH, 1993

               AGENDA AND RECOMMENDATIONS

 Time of Meeting

 Recommendation

 That the action of the Chair in convening this meeting at
 3.00 p.m. on 31st March, 1993, instead of at the time
 selected by the City Council, be confirmed.


 Petition: Fairfield Adult Training Centre

 To consider, in accordance with Standing Order No. 8, a
 petition containing 105 signatures, in the following terms,
 viz

    "We the members of the Parent Action Group, representing
     parents, students and friends of Fairfield Adult
     Training Centre, Sheil Road, Liverpool, 6, were gravely
     concerned at the recent allegations, publicly made,
     against the Centre, including the latest stigma of
     racism. Because we believe Fairfield management and
     staff to be innocent of such charges and because of the
     damage already done to the good name of the Centre, we
     call upon Liverpool City Council to investigate the
     matter and see that justice is done, that the Manager
     and Deputy return to their work and that order and
     security are restored to one hundred and twenty
     students who are the innocent victims of a very unjust
     campaign".

  (NOTE:   In accordance with Standing Order No. 8, a
           deputation has been invited to the meeting to
           support the petition.)


 Representatives of the Social Services
 Committee: Proceedings

 To consider the proceedings of the Chair, Deputy Chair and
 Opposition Spokespersons of this Committee of 22nd
 February, 1993.

                    (See Agenda Item A.3.)




al/cttee/soc.serv/agenda/F310393
A. 4.    Registration, Inspection and Complaints
         Sub-Committee: Proceedings

         To consider the proceedings of the Registration, Inspection
         and Complaints Sub-Committee of 12th, 19th and 26th March,
         1993, so far as they require confirmation by this
         Committee.

         (NOTE: (a) See Agenda Item A.4.; and

                (b) the Minutes of the 26th March meeting will
                    follow later.)


A.5.     Children and Families Sub-Committee:
         Proceedings


         To consider the proceedings of the Children and Families
         Sub-Committee of 15th March, 1993, so far as they require
         confirmation by this Committee.

                        (See Agenda Item A.5.)


A.6.     Community and Health Care Services
         Sub-Committee: Proceedings

         To consider the proceedings of the Community and Health
         Care Services Sub-Committee of 16th and 24th March, 1993.

                         (See Agenda Item A.6.)


A. 7.    Grants and Contracts Sub-Committee:
         Proceedings

         To consider the proceedings of the Grants and Contracts
         Sub-Committee of 17th March, 1993, so far as they require
         confirmation by this Committee.

                         (See Agenda Item A.7.)


A. 8.    Service Review and Egual Opportunities
         Sub-Committee: Proceedings

         To consider the proceedings of the Service Review and Equal
         Opportunities Sub-Committee of 22nd March, 1993.

                         (See Agenda Item A.8.)




        al/cttee/soc.serv/agenda/F310393
9.   Early Years Joint Sub-Committee:
     Proceedings

     To consider the proceedings of the Early Years Joint Sub­
     committee of 23rd March, 1993, so far as this Committee is
     concerned.

                       (See Agenda Item A.9.)


10. Representatives of the Grants and Contracts
    Sub-Committee: Proceedings

      To consider the proceedings of the Chair, Deputy Chair and
      Opposition Spokespersons of the Grants and Contracts Sub­
      committee of 25th March, 1993.
                       (See Agenda Item A.10.)


11. Representatives of the Social Services
    Committee and the General Purposes Sub-Committee:
    Proceedings

      To consider the proceedings of the Chair, Deputy Chair and
      Opposition Spokespersons of this Committee and the General
      Purposes Sub-Committee (of the Housing Committee) of 30th
      March, 1993.

               (Note: The Minutes will be tabled).


12. Proceedings Direct to City Council

      Recommendation
      That authority be granted for the proceedings of -

      (a) the Children and Families Sub-Committee
          (Special Meeting) of 1st April;

      (b) the Early Years Joint Sub-Committee
          (Special Meeting) of 15th April;

      (c) the Grants and Contracts Sub-Committee
          (Special Meeting) of 19th April; and
       (d) any other meetings of Sub-Committees convened for
           reasons of urgency before the date of the next ordinary
           meeting of the City Council,

      to be submitted direct to that meeting for confirmation
      where appropriate.



     al/cttee/soc.serv/agenda/F310393
13. April/May Cycle of Meetings

   Recommendation

   That bearing in mind the next scheduled date for a meeting
   of the Social Services Committee is 5th May, 1993 and in
   order to facilitate a full range of meetings of Sub­
   committees in the April/May Committee cycle, meetings as
   indicated below be convened and where necessary, the
   Officers be empowered to act in advance of approval by the
   City Council, viz:-

          Sub-Committee             Date             Time

    (a)    Children and         19th April, 1993   10.00 a.m.
          Families

    (b)   Grants and Contracts 22nd April, 1993    10.00 a.m.

    (c)    Registration,        23rd April, 1993   10.30 a.m.
          Inspection and
          Complaints

    (d)    Service Review and   26th April, 1993   10.00 a.m.
          Equal Opportunities

    (e) Community and Health 28th April, 1993      10.30 a.m.
        Care Services


14. Association of Directors of Social
    Services - Meeting in Liverpool

    Rec ommendation

    That authority be granted for a meeting of the Association
    of Directors of Social Services to be held in Liverpool on
    Friday, 10th September, 1993, and for any incidental
    expenditure arising to be met from within the existing
    Budget of this Committee.

    (NOTE: It would be the intention of the Director of Social
           Services to acquaint the Chair, Deputy Chair and
           Opposition Spokespersons of the detailed
           arrangements nearer the date.)




  al/cttee/soc.serv/agenda/F310393
15. Council Motion
    Disabled People: Structural Adaptations to Homes

   Recommendation

   That, in accordance with Standing Order No. 17, the City
   Council approve an extension of the period of time within
   which a report should be submitted on the following Motion
   which appeared in the name of Councillor Paul Clein at the
   meeting of the City Council held on 27th January, 1993,
   viz:-

       "That the Social Services Committee produce a
        comprehensive report detailing the workings of the
        "system" currently used to provide structural
        adaptations for the disabled such as stair lifts, step
        lifts, bathing facilities etc., with particular
        emphasis on the efficiency or otherwise of this
        "system", details of criteria used in determining,
        granting and processing of applications for such
        facilities and bringing forward suggestions for
        bringing about improvements to the "systems" such that
        a larger number of facilities are installed bearing in
        mind that anything up to 25% of applicants die before
        processing is completed."


16. Council Motion
    Short Term Care/Rehabilitation Centres

    Recommendation

    That, in accordance with Standing Order No. 17, the City
    Council approve an extension of the period of time within
    which a report should be submitted on the following Motion
    which appeared in the name of Councillor Elaine Kinahan at
    the meeting of the City Council held on 27th January, 1993,
    viz:-                                              :



       "That, in the light of community care legislation which
        moves the emphasis, philosophically and practically,
        away from local authority provided residential care for
        elderly people, and as part of the consequential
        rationalisation of residential accommodation, Short
        Term Care/Rehabilitation Centres be created, where
        respite care, full and residential assessments, and
        intensive rehabilitation training and therapy could
        take place."




  al/cttee/soc.serv/agenda/F310393
A.17. Social Services Committee Meetings:
      Venue: Access for Disabled People
      (DRES/95/93)

      Recommendation

      That -
      (a) the Head of Estates, in his report to the Planning,
          Land and Transportation Committee on "access for the
          disabled to City Centre Administration Buildings", be
          requested to draw attention to the wishes of this
          Committee that high priority be given to making
          budgetary provision available to enable detailed design
          work to be commissioned to make the Municipal Annexe
          accessible to disabled people;

      (b) until such time as the Municipal Annexe is made
          suitable, meetings of this Committee be held in the
          Town Hall following completion of the refurbishment
          works currently taking place (anticipated completion
          date being Summer 1994); and

      (c) until Summer 1994, consideration be given to the other
          venues within the City Centre identified in the
          Appendix to Report DRES/95/93.

                       (See Agenda Item A.17.)


A.18. Hillsborough Disaster Advice Centre

      To consider, at the request (Minute No. 7) of the
      Hillsborough Disaster Working Party of 25th February,
      1993 -

       (a) a copy of a statement issued by a meeting of bereaved
           families, survivors and other users of the Hillsborough
           Disaster Advice Centre held on 17th February, 1993,
           expressing concern regarding proposals being considered
           by the City Council which question the future use and
           role of the Centre; and

       (b) a recommendation of the Working Party that all methods
           possible be examined to ensure that the Hillsborough
           Centre and the services provided at the Centre, are
           retained.
                       (See Agenda Item A.18.)




    al/cttee/soc.serv/agenda/F310393
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
        CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




Code: ZYZ
                                                       AGENDA                A
                                                      IT E M N o .          A       18
                       FUTURE OF THE HILLSBOROUGH CEffTRE




  At a meeting of bereaved families, survivors, eye witnesses and interested
. parties on 17th February 1993 at the Hillsborough Centre it was agreed that
  the City Council proposal to close the Hillsborough Centre be challenged on the
  basis that:

      a) Contrary to the statement by the Deputy Director of Social Services
      bereaved families and survivors still use the Centre and see a
      proven and ongoing need for the service it provides.


      b) There is a need for a trauma related service for the people of
      Liverpool.


      c) There is a need for others in the coamunity to be allowed access to
      the facility.




 As a result we demand the following:

      i) That the relationship between the City Council and service users be
      re-negotiated.


       ii) In consequence of the above and in the spirit of the Community Care
       Act, we demand the instatement of a genuine user-led service based on
       provable need.


       iii) That the City Council continue its provision of a trauma intervention
       service based at the Hillsborough Centre under the principles identified
       above.


       iv) That any grievances still felt by service users be investigated and
       properly redressed.


       v) That full negotiations be opened forthwith to identify appropriate
       funding and mechanisms for extending community access and facilitation.
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
