                                                     FINANCE
                            - 189 -
                FINANCE AND STRATEGY COMMITTEE

                      3rd December, 1990



PRESENT:   Councillor Vicky Roberts, Chair;
           Councillor I. Scott, Deputy Chair;
           Councillors G. Ben-Tovim, Dawn Booth, J.Brazier,
           E. Clein, Flora Clucas, A. Dean,
           Beatrice Fraenkel, Cathy Hancox, L. Hughes,
           P. Hughes, A. Jennings, R. Johnston,
           Sir Trevor Jones, Marie McGiveron, D. McKittrick,
           Sarah Norman, W. Owen and H. Rimmer.


           Councillors D. Bermingham, M. Bolland, J. Doyle,
           B. Fitzsimons, Susan Hogan, Margaret McDaid,
           Lesley Mahmood, F. O'Donoghue and Sylvia
           Sharpey-Scafer also attended.



Financial Review
(CT/232/90)

The Committee considered a Financial Review of the
Authority.

Resolved that the Review be noted and a copy be sent to all
members of the City Council.


Future Use of Greqson Memorial
Institute, Garmoyle Road
(CES/434/90)

The Committee considered Minute 29 of the Community
Education Sub-Committee recommending that -

(a)   the City Council grant a periodic tenancy, with no rent
      payable, of the Gregson Memorial Institute, Garmoyle
      Road, Liverpool 15, to the 13th Picton Scout Group,
      with the City Council taking responsibility for
      external repairs to the building;

(b)   the City Estates Surveyor be requested to -

         (i) arrange regular inspections of the Gregson
             Memorial Institute in order to monitor the




FS1AAD
     FINANCE
                                 - 190 -
                 condition of the building and to submit further
                 reports to Committee as necessary; and

             (ii) investigate whether any other suitable premises
                  in the area could be used by the Scout Group and
                  other users of the Gregson Memorial Institute and
                  submit further reports to Committee in due
                  course.



     With the permission of the Committee, Councillor Susan Hogan
     addressed the meeting on this matter.



     Resolved that the Chair be authorised to submit a
     recommendation to the next meeting of the Council on this
     issue.


369. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

     The Committee considered the proceedings of the Hillsborough
     Disaster Working Party of the 24th October and 23rd
     November, 1990.

     Resolved that the Chair be authorised to submit a
     recommendation on this matter to the next meeting of the
     City Council.


37 0. Capital Receipts Working Party

    Resolved that the proceedings of the Capital Receipts
    Working Party of the 30th October, 1990, be approved.


371. Corporate Programmes Sub-Committee

    The Committee considered the proceedings of the Coporate
    Programmes Sub-Committee of the 5th November, 1990.

    Resolved that -

     (a) the proceedings be approved; and

     (b) authority be granted for the proceedings of the meeting
         of the Sub-Committee to be held on the 5th December to
         be submitted direct to the City Council meeting on the
         12th December, 1990.




    FS1AAD
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
