                                                            ; 4 JUN1989

                                                    SOCIAL SERVICES

                              -             F15 -

                    SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE

                          14th June, 1989



   PRESENT: Councillor Dawn Booth, Chair;
            Councillor E. Roderick, Deputy Chair;
            Councillors G. Allen, Vera Best, J. Brady, M.
            Burke, P. Coventry, J. Cunningham, E. Drysdale,
            Steve Fitzsimmons, Cathy Hancox, H. Herrity, Les
            Hughes, Mary Johnston, Elaine Kinahan, J. Lang, D.
            McKittrick, Judith Nelson, S. Radford, Vicky
            Roberts and I. Templeman.



            Advisory Representatives

            Mr. I. B. Browne, Mr. R. Currie, Ms. E. Evans,
            Mr. J. Hamilton, Mr. Walter da costa Miller, Mr. H.
            Quilliam and Mrs. J. Roberts.



            Councillor P. Clark.



            Councillors F. Doran and J. Kendrick also attended.



            Apologies for absence were submitted from
            Councillor Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer and Mr. F. Rose.



1. Residential and Community Services
   Sub-Committee: Proceedings

   The proceedings of the Residential and Community Services
   Sub-Committee of 2nd June, 1989, were submitted.

2. Special Sub-Committee
   Assistant Director (Operations)

   The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re: Appointment
   of Assistant Director (Operations) of 6th June, 1989, were
   submitted.




   SSGAAJ
   SOCIAL SERVICES

                                - F16 -

3. Development Review Sub-Committee:
   Proceedings

  Resolved that the proceedings of the Development Review
  Sub-Committee of 13th June, 1989, be approved.

4. Time of Meetings of the Committee

  Resolved that -

   (a)   the action of the Chair and Deputy Chair in convening
         this meeting of the Committee at 10.30 a.m. on the date
         selected by the City Council, be confirmed; and

   (b)   future meetings of the Committee be convened at
         10.30 a.m. on the dates selected by the Council, viz:-

                1989                        1990

         26th July                        10th January
         6th September                    21st February
         18th October                      4th April
         29th November

5. Meetings of Sub-Committees

  Resolved that -

   (a)   meetings of the Children's Sub-Committee be held at
         2.0 0 p.m. on the following dates, viz:-

                1989                        1990

            10th July                      5th February
            21st August                   19th March
            2nd October
            13th November
            22nd December


   (b)   meetings of the Residential and Community Services
         Sub-Committee be held at 10.30 a.m. on the following
         dates, viz:-

                1989                        1990

         14th   July                       9th February
         25th   August                    23rd March
          6th   October
         17th   November
         29th   December




   SSGAAJ
                                                             i 4 JUN \9m

                                                     SOCIAL SERVICES

                               - F17 -
   (c)   meetings of the Development Review Sub-Committee be
         held at 11.00 a.m. on the following dates, viz:-

                  1989                       1990

         17th     July                      3rd January
         30th     August                   12th February
          9th     October                  26th March
         20th     November

   (d)   it be recommended to the Education and Housing
         Committees that meetings of the Under 5's Joint
         Sub-Committee and the Homelessness and Sheltered
         Housing Joint Sub-Committee be held at 10.00 a.m. on
         dates to be selected by those Committees; and

   (e)   meetings of the Child Care Panel and the Mental Health
         Panel be convened as and when necessary.

6. Registered Homes Act 1984
   Authorisation Passes

  Resolved that -

   (a)   authority be granted for all Members of the Residential
         and Community Services Sub-Committee to be empowered to
         undertake inspections of -

            (i)    any premises in the City which are being used for
                   the purposes of the Registered Homes Act, 1984;
                   and

         (ii)      any premises in respect of which there is
                   reasonable cause for belief that they are being
                   used for those purposes; and

   (b)   the City Solicitor be requested to issue appropriate
         authorisation passes forthwith to the Members
         concerned.

7. Adoption Panel

   The Committee considered the appointment of two Members to
   serve on the Adoption Panel for the Municipal Year,
   1989/90.

   Motion by the Chair, duly seconded,

   That Councillors Les Hughes and E. Drysdale be appointed to
   serve on the Panel.

   Amendment by Councillor J. Cunningham,
     seconded by Councillor Vera Best,



   SSGAAJ
  SOCIAL SERVICES

                               - F18 -

  That representation on the Panel be on the basis of one
  Labour Member and one Liberal Democrat Member, the names to
  be submitted to the City Solicitor.

  A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                     For the Amendment      10
                     Against it             11

  The Amendment was lost. The Motion was    carried (11 Members
  voting infavour and 10 against) and    it wasresolved
  accordingly.

8. Statutory and Special Sub-Committee:
   Appointment of Member

  Resolved that the Deputy Chair be appointed as the Co-opted
  Member of this Committee, to serve on the Statutory and
  Special Sub-Committee of the Education Committee for the
  Municipal Year, 1989/90.

9. Joint Consultative Committee -
   Appointment of Members

  The Committee considered the appointment of seven Members
  to serve on the Liverpool City Council/Liverpool Health
  Authority Joint Consultative Committee for the Municipal
  Year 1989/90.

  Motion by the Chair, duly seconded,

  That -

   (a)   two vacancies be filled by the Liberal Democrats the
         names to be submitted to the City Solicitor; and

   (b)   the remaining vacancies be filled by the Chair and
         Deputy Chair of this Committee and Councillors Les
         Hughes, Vicky Roberts and Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer.

  Amendment by Councillor Steve Fitzsimmons,
    seconded by Councillor Cathy Hancox,

  That representation on the Joint Consultative Committee be
  on the basis of four Labour Members, two Liberal Democrats
  Members and one Conservative Member, the names to be
  submitted to the City Solicitor.

  During the course of the debate the Amendment was accepted.
  And on being put as the Substantive Motion and carried, it
  was resolved accordingly.




   SSGAAJ
                                                           1 4 JUN1989

                                                  SOCIAL SERVICES

                                - F19 -

10. Health Promotion

   The Committee considered a resolution (Minute No.   58) of
   the Health Care Strategy Sub-Committee of 28th March, 1989,
   requesting all Committees of the City Council, when
   considering the introduction of new policies or the
   modification of existing ones, to take into account the
   possible effects that the decision could have on health.

   Motion by the Chair, duly seconded,

   That the terms of the resolution be noted.

   Amendment by Councillor Mary Johnston,
     seconded by Councillor J. Cunningham,

    That the Motion be approved and in addition, the Direct
    Services Committee be reminded that the first step towards a
    healthy City is a clean one and that a concerted effort must
    be made by that Committee to clean the streets, back entries
    and open spaces throughout the City as well as removing dog
    dirt from the pavements and tackling the problem of rat
    infestation in the City.

   A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                       For the Amendment     10
                       Against it            11

    The Amendment was lost. The Motion was carried (11 Members
    voting infavour and 10 against) and it wasresolved
    accordingly.

11. 3rd National Special Olympic Games

    The Committee considered the terms of a letter of 23rd May
    from the Management Office of Special Olympics UK to the
    Director of Social Services seeking financial assistance, on
    behalf of the Liverpool Special Olympics Committee in
    connection with the 3rd National Special Olympic Games in
    Leicester during August, 1989.

    Resolved that -

    (a)   the request for financial assistance be granted and a
          sum of £1,660 be made available for the purchase of
          tracksuits for the Liverpool team, the cost involved to
          be contained within the existing Budget of this
          Committee in respect of discretionary grants for
          voluntary organisations;  and




    SSGAAJ
    SOCIAL SERVICES

                                 - F20 -

    (b)   the Liverpool contingent be wished every success in the
          forthcoming event.


12. Ujamaa House

   Motion by Councillor Mary Johnston, seconded by Councillor
   D. McKittrick,

   That, the Director of Social Services be requested to submit
   a report to the next meeting of this Committee (26th July)
   in respect of Ujamaa House, Liverpool, 8, such report to
   include the state of the building, condition of furnishings
   and decoration, together with details of the function of
   Ujamaa House in relation to the City Council's Equal
   Opportunities Policy, and that this Committee resolves to
   meet the costs of any refurbishment/re-decoration necessary,
   as matter of urgency.

   Amendment by the Chair, duly seconded,

   That the Motion be approved subject to the deletion of all
   words following the reference therein to the 'Equal
   Opportunities Policy' and the substituion therefore of the
   following words, viz:-

          "and that a visit by the Chair, Deputy Chair and
           Councillors Mary Johnston and Vicky Roberts be
           arranged and a further report on the financial
           implications be submitted as soon as possible."

   During the course of the debate the Amendment was accepted.
   And on being put as the Substantive Motion and carried, it
   was resolved accordingly. .    .....


13. Access to Personal Files
    Creation of Posts
    (DSS/198/89)

   The Committee considered a recommendation of the Director of
   Social Services that, subject to the approval of the
   Personnel and Equal Opportunities Policy Committee, nine
   posts of Typist, Scale 1, £3,966 to £6,918 and a post of
   Training Officer, Grade P01 £13,497 to £14,559 be created
   within the establishment of the Social Services Department,
   in relation to the implementation of the Access to Personal
   Files Act 1987, the costs involved to be contained within
   the financial provision already approved by the Finance and
   Strategy Committee.




    SSGAAJ
                                                              i 4 jUN 1989

                                                  SOCIAL SERVICES

                                   F21

   Motion by the Chair, duly seconded,

    That the recommendation be approved.

    Amendment by Councillor Mary Johnston,
      seconded by Councillor Cathy Hancox,

   That the Motion be approved and that, in addition, in regard
   to retrospective access, any person who asks for his/her
   files be granted access to them, within the terms of the
   Act.

   A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                       For the Amendment      9
                       Against it            11

   The Amendment was lost. The Motion was carried (11 Members
   voting in favour and 9 against) and it was resolved
   accordingly.

14. Community Parenting
    (DSS/201/89)

   Resolved that, subject to the approval of the Personnel and
   Equal Opportunities Policy Committee, two posts of Family
   Placement Officer (Community Parent Scheme) Grade Social
   Worker, Level 3, £11,475 to £13,497 be created within the
   establishment of the Social Services Department, the cost
   involved to be contained within monies already approved by
   the City Council in May, 1989 for child development work.

15. Budget 1989/90 - Virement
    (DSS/179/89)

    Resolved that a one-off virement of £53,500 be agreed from
    the monies remaining in the current financial year from the
    resources made available from the Voluntary Homes for'
    Children Budget, to finance the items listed below:-

                                                        £

    C.R.I.S.S.P.   (Software Licence)                30,000

    C.R.I.S.S.P.   (Maintenance Agreements            8,000
                    - March 1991)

    Black-in-care group                               6,000

    Child Care publications                           5,000

    Boarding Out Equipment                            4,500



    SSGAAJ
   SOCIAL SERVICES

                                - F22 -

16. Support Grant for Social Services
    for People with AIDS and Related Expenditure
    (DSS/192/89)

    Resolved that -

    (a)   the proposals of the Director of Social Services, as
          described in Report DSS/192/89, for utilising the
          resources available under Circular LAC 89(1) for Social
          Services H.I.V. Support Grant and related expenditure,
          be approved for implementation; and

    (b)   subject to the approval of the Personnel and Equal
          Opportunities Policy Committee, the establishment of
          the Social Services Department be varied by the
          creation of the various posts detailed in the Report
          submitted, such posts to be offered on an annual
          renewable contract and to be not renewed for 1990/91
          until such time as the continuation of the Support
          Grant has been confirmed.

17. Joint Financing Programme 1989/90
    (DSS/191/89)

    Resolved that -

    (a)   the schedule of schemes, as contained in Appendix I to
          Report DSS/191/89 of the Director of Social Services be
          approved for funding and implementation from the Joint
          Financing Programme, with effect from the financial
          year 1989/90; and

    (b)   the Director's intention to draw up proposals in
          relation to New Hall, for the 1990/91 Programme, be
          noted.

18. The Social Fund
    (DSS/188/89)

    The Committee considered a recommendation of the Director of
    Social Services that -

    (a)   the contents of Report DSS/188/89 of the Director of
          Social Services in relation to the Social Fund be noted
          and a copy be referred to the Anti-Poverty
          Sub-Committee for information;

    (b)   the Director of Social Services be requested to submit
          a further report when full quantitative data is
          available, including that to be produced by the
          specific monitoring by the University of Lancaster; and




    SSGAAJ
                                                             1 4 J U N 1989

                                                   SOCIAL SERVICES

                                 - F23 -

    (c)   the agreed non-co-operation stance in respect of the
          Social Fund, which includes Budgeting and Crisis Loans
          and Community Care Grants, be re-affirmed by the City
          Council.

   Resolved that -

    (a)   the recommendation be approved;   and

    (b)   this Committee expresses its disappointment that there
          has been a delay on the part of the University of
          Lancaster in producing a monitoring report and calls
          for the information to be provided expeditiously.

19. Social Care Association
    Code of Practice for Social Care
    (DSS/180/89)

   Resolved that copies of the Code of Practice for Social Care
   produced by the Social Care Association, be circulated to
   all staff engaged on caring duties and that they be advised
   that the Committee would expect all staff to adhere to the
   principles of the Code.

20. Liverpool Community Care Trust
    "Haven Community" Proposal
    (DSS/190/89)

   The Committee considered the proposal of Liverpool Community
   Care Trust Ltd., for a "Haven Community", with a view to
   forwarding its observations to the Joint Consultative
   Committee for its July meeting.



   With the permission of the Sub-Committee, the Acting Chief
   Executive of Liverpool Community Care Trust Limited and the
   Acting Care in the Community Co-ordinator (Liverpool Health
   Authority), addressed the meeting in connection with the
   proposal.



    Resolved that -

    (a)   the comments of the Director of Social Services, as
          detailed in Report DSS/190/89, be endorsed;

    (b)      (i) this Committee expresses its extreme concern at
                 the lack of consultation and co-operation over
                 the development of Care in the Community Schemes
                 and at the perceived role of the Joint



    SSGAAJ
   SOCIAL SERVICES

                                 - F24 -

                 Consultative Committee as a 'rubber-stamp1 for
                 ill-prepared proposals;

             (ii) the Committee believes that a real partnership
                  between the City Council, the voluntary sector
                  and the Health Authority must be predicated by a
                  commitment to consultation and sharing of
                  information which will allow the best proposals
                  for accommodating ex-long-stay patients to come
                  forward from a variety of agencies;  and

    (c)   the participation of the City Council in Liverpool
          Community Care Trust Limited be reconsidered.

21. Council Motion
    Social Facilities for Old Age Pensioners -
    West Derby Road and Farnworth Street
    (DSS/178/89)

   The Committee considered further the following Motion which
   appeared in the names of Councillors F. Doran and J.
   Kendrick at the meeting of the City Council held on 25th
   January, 1989, viz:-

    "That the Director of Social Services report -

    (a)   upon the social facilities for old aged pensioners in
          the area bounded by Farnworth Street, West Derby Road;
          and

    (b)   how existing facilities can be improved for the
          benefit of the old aged pensioners in the area".



   With the permission of the Committee, Councillor F. Doran
   addressed the meeting in connection with this matter. ;



   Resolved that the following Report upon the Council Motion
   be approved, viz:-

                                 REPORT

    1.    The Social Services Committee reports that it has
          considered the terms of the Motion in conjunction with
          a report of the Director of Social Services indicating
          all the facilities available in the area and the days
          on which they can be utilised.




    SSGAAJ
                                                                t 4 JUN 1989


                                                      SOCIAL SERVICES
                                  - F2 5 -

    2.   The Committee considers that the social facilities
         available to older people residing in this area are
         extensive and comprehensive.  The main need is to
         publicise the facilities so that -

         (a)     they are fully utilised;    and

         (b)     people are aware of their existance.

    3.   Accordingly, the Committee has requested the Director
         of Social Services, in conjunction with Age Concern, to
         arrange for the facilities available in this area to be
         adequately publicised.




22. Hillsborough - Creation of Post of
    Training Officer (N.W.A.S.S .A * )
    (DSS/200/89)

   Resolved that, subject to the approval of thePersonnel and
   Equal Opportunities Policy Committee, a post of Training
   Officer (Crisis Psychology), Grade P.0.1., £13,497 to
   £14,559 be created for a fixed term contract of one year,
   the costs involved to be met from funding provided by the
   North West Association of Social Services Authorities.

23. New Hall Replacement Strategy -
    Creation of Posts
    (DSS/197/89)

   Resolved that, subject to the approval of the Personnel and
   Equal Opportunities Policy Committee, the following posts be
   created as part of the New Hall replacement strategy, viz:-

   Designation            Grade        Salary ■

   Team Manager           P02/3        £14,178 to   £16,782

   Training Officer       P01          £13,497 to £14,559

   Day Centre Officer      Ll/2        £7,890 to £10,743.......
   (two posts)

   Houseparent            NJC3         £8,256 to £9,756
   (two posts)




    SSGAAJ
             SM BsSZSM aZ




   SOCIAL SERVICES

                                   - F26 -

24. Day Centres for the
    Physically Handicapped -
    Budget Variations
    (DSS/181/89)

    The Committee considered a recommendation of the Director of
    Social Services that the provision of £8,500 in the Budget
    of the Committee in respect of Handicapped Persons Centres
    for Handicrafts (Page 26/11) be deleted and vired as
    follows, viz:-

          £2000 to tools and equipment (Page 26/9)
          £6500 to Other S & S (Page 26/12)

    Resolved that the recommendation be approved and that in
    addition, a sum of £4,500 be vired from Social Workers
    Salaries etc.  (Page 47/1-3) to District Offices - Furniture
    and Fittings (Page 52/7) to meet the cost of furniture
    required for staff to be appointed to implement sections 5
    and 6 of the Disabled Persons Act, 1986.

25. Subscriptions 1989/90
    New Requests
    (DSS/182/89)

    Resolved that, subject to the costs involved being contained
    within the existing Budget of this Committee, authority be
    granted to -

    (a)   pay subscription charges -

             (i)   to the National Organisation for the Counselling
                    of Adoptees and Parents, at a cost of £50 per
                    annum; and

          (ii)     to the Association of Officers for Family Care
                    and Pre-School Care, at a cost of £25 per annum;
                    and

    (b)   make a donation on a one-off basis to the U.K. Special
          Olympics Fund, at a cost of £60.

26. Overtime Review
    (DSS/196/89)

    Resolved that a review of overtime worked by monthly and
    weekly paid employees of the Social Services Department in
    February and March 1989, be noted and referred to the
    Personnel and Equal Opportunities Policy Committee for
    consideration.




    SSGAAJ
