                                                              POLICY
                              -   9   -

                POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE
                        23rd June, 1992


PRESENT:   Councillor Dawn Booth, Chair;
           Councillor Marie McGiveron, Deputy-Chair;
           Councillors M. Alderson, G. Ben Tovim, N. Cardwell,
           E. Clein, Flora Clucas, F. Doran, W. Edwards,
           Marilyn Fielding, Beatrice Fraenkel, A. Jennings,
           Ann Keenan, R. Kemp, J. Kendrick, Frances Kidd,
           G. Knibb, P. Millea, I. Scott, W. Snell,
           N. Stanley, M. Storey and Cathy Wilson.



           Councillors M. Bolland, Susan Hogan, Maggie McDaid,
           F. Ruse and K. Williams also attended.


Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

Resolved that the proceedings of the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party of the 1st April 1992, be approved.


Restructuring Working Party

The Committee considered the proceedings of the Restructuring
Working Party of the 11th and 17th June 1992.


The Chair informed members that the Environmental Services
and Consumer Protection Committee had re-affirmed its
decision to appoint a Health Care Strategy Sub-Committee and
had requested this Committee to vary the decision of the
Restructuring Working Party accordingly.



Resolved that -

(a) the decision of the Environmental Services and Consumer
    Protection Committee relating to the establishment of a
    Health Care Strategy Sub-Committee be approved and the
    proceedings of the Restructuring Working Party, as
    amended, be approved;

(b) authority be granted for the proceedings of the meeting
    of the Working Party to be held on 24th June to be
    submitted direct to the City Council on the 1st July; and


al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A230692
   POLICY
                                   -   10   -




    (c) the Director of Housing and Community Services report to
        the Working Party on the reporting arrangements which
        will affect the Race Equality Unit of the Housing
        Department.

15. Special Sub-Committee - Appointment
    of Chief Officers
   The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee - Appointment of
   Chief Officers of the 2nd, 3rd, 22nd and 30th April, 1st, 6th
   and 11th May, and 9th, 10th, 15th and 16th June 1992, were
   submitted for the information of the Committee.    :r


16. City Challenge Sub-Committee
    Resolved that the proceedings of the City Challenge Sub­
    committee of the 16th April 1992, be approved.


17. Meetings Scheduling Sub-Committee
    The proceedings of the Meetings Scheduling Sub-Committee of
    the 5th May were submitted for the information of the
    Committee.

18. Finance Sub-Committee
    Resolved that the proceedings of the Finance Sub-Committee
    the 17th June 1992, be approved.

19. Corporate Policies and Programmes Sub-Committee
    Resolved that authority be granted for the proceedings of a
    meeting of the Corporate Policies and Programmes Sub­
    committee to be held on 29th June to be submitted direct to
    the City Council meeting on 1st July 1992.


20. Economic Development Sub-Committee
    Resolved that authority be granted for the proceedings of a
    meeting of the Economic Development Sub-Committee to be held
    on 30th June to be submitted direct to the City Council
    meeting on the 1st July 1992.




    al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A2 30692
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
