                                                                                                      zr 4 DEC 1989

                                                                                          HU
                                                        W.     I. Murray,      LL.B.
                                                        C ity S olicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                        P.O.    Box    No. 88
                                                        Municipal Buildings

LIVERPOOL                                               Dale Street
                                                        L IV E R P O O L     L69 2DH


Cvty                                                    Telephone:         051-225 3911       E xt:
                                                                        051 —225 2 4 3 6 ( D i r e c t   Line)
                                                        Fax: 0 5 1 - 2 3 6      2047
                                                        DX     14206       L IV E R P O O L


                                                        Y o u r ref

                                                        Our ref
                                                                       SS/GPD/GS

TO:             All Members of the                      Date           29th November,                    1989
         (i
                Social Services
                Committee; and

      (ii)          certain Chief Officers.


                              PLEASE NOTE VENUE OF MEETING
                            SMOKING AT MEETINGS IS PROHIBITED

My dear Sir/Madam,
      Further to my letter of 17th November,                 I now write to
request your attendance at a meeting of the SOCIAL SERVICES
COMMITTEE to be held at 10.30 A.M. on MONDAY, 4TH DECEMBER/                                     1989
in Committee Room 'A' in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street,
Liverpool,          2.


      The Chair            (Councillor Dawn Booth) has asked me to apologise
for the fact that because this meeting has been rearranged,
the Committee will not be able to meet in the usual venue in
the City Library.




      The Agenda for the meeting is attached.

                                    Yours faithfully,




                                     City Solicitor,
                                Secretary to the Council.



(NOTE:        (a)        The Labour Caucus is to be held at 9.45 a.m. on
                         Monday, 4th December in the Members' Restroom
                         in the Municipal Annexe; and

              (b)        the Liberal Democrat Caucus is to be held at
                         10.00 a.m. on Monday, 4th December in the Liberal
                         Democrat Group Meeting Room in the Municipal Annexe.)
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
        CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




Code: ZYZ
                                                           - 4 DEC 1989




Nurses Pay - Implementation of the 1988 Agreement              B.9.
Dvson Hall Observation and Assessment Centre
(DSS/285/89)

RECOMMENDATION'

That -

(a)   subject to the approval of the Personnel and Equal
      Opportunities Policy Committee, the two posts of Nurse
      located at the Dyson Hall Observation and Assessment
      Centre, be graded Scale D, £8,855 to £9,815 of the
      N.H.S. Nursing and Midwifery Staffs new clinical
      grading structure, and the post occupants be
      assimilated to the new scale in accordance with the
      specified procedure with effect from 1st April, 1988;
      and

(b)   the Finance and Strategy Committee be advised
      accordingly.

          (See enclosed report - Appendix to Item B.9.)


Hillsborough Team                                              B.10.
(DSS/345/89)

To consider Report DSS/345/89 of the Director of Social
Services outlining the work of the Hillsborough Team to
date,

         (See enclosed report - Appendix to Item B.10.)


Counselling and Mental Health Centre                           B.ll.
(DSS/355/89)

RECOMMENDATION

That, in respect of the financial year 1989/90 only,
authority be granted for a payment totalling £8,223 to be
made to Cruse (Bereavement Care) and COMPASS (Counselling on
Merseyside - Pastoral and Supporting Services) in connection
with the conversion of two part-time posts of Secretary to
full-time posts, the cost involved to be contained within
slippage in the existing Budget in respect of Social Work
staffing at the Hillsborough Centre.


         (See enclosed report - Appendix to Item B.ll.)




AALAAC
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code; ZXY
        CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




Code: ZYZ
                                                           APPENDIX TO ITEM NO.


        Spre HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE
        jg / 3 4 5 / 8 9)


                            REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES

             background

             The Hillsborough Team was formed in July of this year and moved
             into the Hillsborough Centre in mid August. Its work began
             gradually to reflect the building up of the team membership
             - social workers and support team. This report sets out in
             brief the work of the team todate.

             STAFFING

             Social Work

             The original establishment of the team was 2 team leaders/Senior
             Social Workers and 12 Social Work staff. One post was then
             allotted to the Education Department as an Education Welfare Officer
             post. Two of the social work posts are yet to be filled. The
             Education Welfare Officer post was important in responding to the
             needs of children and young people and to the work from the schools.

             Staff have joined the team at various times since July. It was
             only from the week commencing 13th November, that all appointments
             were in post.

             In addition to the above staff, who are City Council employees,
             there are two non-Council employees working as members of the
             team. A clinical psychologist, employed by Liverpool Health
             Authority, works with the team on a sessional basis. A worker
             is also seconded to the Team from the Children's Society.
             This has proved invaluable in developing links with the Voluntary
             Sector and in establishing work with young people.

             Negotiations are also underway to involve the Youth Service.
    ■   a
Vi:;/..3.    CLERICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF

             The role of the Administrative and   Clerical Team is of importance
             to the Centre. Initially the team    was reliant upon seconded and
             temporary help. The secondment of    an efficient and sympathetic
             Administrative Officer has greatly   assisted the Team in its
             early weeks of setting up systems.    Unfortunately his ill-health
             has interrupted this process.

              The Team are aware that the Social Services Committee has given
              approval for the establishment of a permanent Administrative/Clerical
              Team. They are hopeful that with! the availability of permanent
              administrative support their needs will be met and an improved
              service offered to users.

              REFERRALS

              As of 31st October, the Team had dealt with 122 referrals. In many
              cases the individual referral was for a larger family group of
              4 or 5 people.



                                                                                      Cont/d.
                                  -2 -


     Of these referrals, 2 are of children under 15 years, 8
     aged between 15 and 18, 108 aged between 18 and 59, and
     4 are aged 60+

     Two known referrals concern members of the black community.

5.   THE TEAM'S WORK

     Individual Work

     The majority of the team's work has been involved with individual
     counselling of both survivors and bereaved families.

     Given the nature of the feelings and emotions emanating from
     this group, this task has been very demanding on workers
     emotions.

     The use of media and video material is of particular benefit to
     users. The Centre has recently acquired its own video equipment,
     and is trying to build up a library of resource material both
     for its own use, and that of the wider Social Services Department.

     Group Work

     From an early stage in the team's life, it became clear that groups
     would be of great value in the Centre's work. Users were demanding
     such groups and experience from other disasters indicated their
     value.

     The Centre now runs several groups on a regular basis:

         Tuesday afternoons - a self help survivors group. This
         is partly facilitated by 2 staff. It meets weekly
         with approximately 20 participants.

          Tuesday evening - a group for widows and partners.
          This is totally facilitated by 2 staff. It meets
          fortnightly with 12 participants.

         Wednesday evening - a group for carers of injured
         survivors. Facilitated by 2 staff. Meets monthly.
         It includes 12 participants from different parts of
         the Region.

         Thursday evening — a group for bereaved parents.
         Facilitated by 4 staff. Meets fortnightly.
         There are 14 participants.

          Thursday evening — 2 survivors groups (one a young
          persons' group). Each group facilitated by 2 staff.
          These groups alternate with the bereaved parents group
          and involve 20 people.

          In addition to client based groups, there is a monthly
          support group for professional staff working with children.
          This group is co-ordinated by staff from the Centre.
          It averages around 15 attenders.



                                                                          Cont/
    It is anticipated that further groups will be starting
    in the near future. There is a need for more survivors
    groups. A group or groups will be starting for young
    people in the near future. Partners of survivors are
    also requesting a group.

    As many of the Centre's users are in full-time employment,
    many of the groups have to be held at night. This
    is very demanding upon staff's time and personal
    resources.

Other Work

During the Team's short existence they have had several requests
to undertake work not related to Hillsborough; a fatal
shooting outside one of the Department's Residential Homes,
to support a family bereaved by the Marchioness sinking and
the relative of a social worker who suffered a double
bereavement earlier this year.

The Team are aware that such requests go beyond the team's
brief, but feel they have the skills and resources to undertake
such work. The City's response to Hillsborough has enabled
many people to see social work in a new light. The Team
are keen to continue with this work.

In addition to work associated with violent death, the Team
have been requested to take on work associated with trauma
generally. The team recognise that this area of preventive
mental health work is rarely touched by statutory agencies.

As the Team are new and have a high profile locally and
nationally, they are receiving numerous requests for teaching
and to provide information to a wide range of professionals.

The high profile of the Team has resulted in great interest from
both local and national press and media; this includes social
work journals.

USE OF THE CENTRE

The building has provided a much needed physical resource for
Social Services staff. There are few such resources in the
North of the City, to date, the Centre has been used for
regular access visits, a course of group work, and a
District's Training Day.

The Centre has attracted interest from the local community.
The Team see themselves as being important in establishing
links with the community. A local community group have
expressed interest in using the Centre for their regular
meetings.

The Team are keen that the Centre be used by the City Council
and wider community at large. They recognise that this will
necessitate it being open in the evenings and perhaps at weekends.
This has clear implications for both staffing and security.



                                                                Cont/d.
     This wider usage is important to counter criticisms that only
     'Hillsborough' gets resources or its the only trauma that matters.

7.   THE FUTURE

     Hillsborough Work

     To date the Team have merely reacted to people's request for
     help, and have awaited people to contact them.

     The Team have just embarked on a more pro-active phase of
     their work. Advertising their presence and leafleting key
     groups - G.P.'s, other Council Departments' and Schools.

     Mindful of the newness of their work, the Team are in the process
     of setting up a Users Advisory Group which will enable the
     Team to take their work forward, and to provide much needed
     feedback.

     Staff Support

     Staff in the Centre are mindful that undertaking this work is
     demanding and that it makes great demands upon their emotions
     and that of their families.

     Whilst there is normal line management supervision and support
     available, they feel that the issue of staff support both for
     the Hillsborough Team and staff generally,needs to be addressed.

     Future Work

     The Team are aware that their existence is only planned to be
     for 2 years, but are already conscious that there is a great
     need for trauma and crisis work generally.

     The Team are also aware that there is a huge amount of preventive
     mental health work that needs to be done.

     The Team have to a small extent, been drawn into doing this
     work. They recognise that the approach they have adopted
     has made the services provided by this Department available
     to a wider range of users than has been the case hitherto.

     Staff and the Team feel that their work and their Centre
     provides much needed resources and services for the people
     of Liverpool.

     The Team is also keen to develop links with the Voluntary
     Sector and colleagues in the Region to ensure good liaison
     and the provision of a good quality service to those in need
     of help and advice.




SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE                   CONTACT PERSON: MS. CAROLE W
4TH DECEMBER   -   1989                      TEL. NO. 225 3777.
                                                                   APPENDIX TO ITEM NO.     611
             Counselling & Mental Health Centre
             DSS/355 /89

             Report of the Director of Social Services

             Introduction

             1. Two of the organisations based in the Counselling & Mental Health
             Centre, 25 Hope St, Liverpool - CRUSE, BEREAVEMENT CARE and
             COMPASS (Counselling on Merseyside - Pastoral and Supporting Services)
             applied that two part time posts of Secretary be varied to full time posts.

             Recommendation

             2. The Director seeks authority to make a payment off £8,223 in 1989/90
             only, by virement from slippage in financial allocation for the staffing of the
             Hillsborough Centre.

             Background

             3. The applications were made in the early part of this year, and were under
             consideration at the time of the Hillsborough Disaster.

             4. Both organisations were immediately involved in counselling people af­
             fected by the disaster.

             5. Both posts were filled following a commitment made by the Leader of the
             Council, at a meeting of voluntary organisations on the Monday following
             Hillsborough.

             6. Costs for this financial year are estimated at £8,223 including on costs.




INSOK
        Social Services Committee
        4th December 1989
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
