                                                   FINANCE
                              9
                FINANCE AND STRATEGY COMMITTEE

                       14th June, 1990


PRESENT:   Councillor Vicky Roberts, Chair;
           Councillor I. Scott, Deputy Chair;
           Councillors F. Anderson, G. Ben-Tovim, Dawn Booth,
           J. Brazier, P. Clark, Flora Clucas,
           Rosemary Cooper, P. Coventry, A. Dean,
           Cathy Hancox, L. Hughes, P. Hughes, A. Jennings,
           R. Johnston, J. Kendrick, Marie McGiveron,
           Sarah Norman, W. Owen, K. Ratcliffe and
           E. Roderick.



           Councillors G. Allen, D. Bermingham, M. Bolland,
           Joan Brown, N. Chinn, M.B.E., E. Clein,
           A. Duckworth, S. Fitzsimmons, Beatrice Fraenkel,
           Susan Hogan, Lesley Mahmood, D. McKittrick,
           Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer, Linda O'Sullivan, F. Ruse
           and Cathy Wilson also attended.




Facilities for Deaf People within
the City Council
(CS/88/90)

The Committee considered Minute 23 of the Special Needs
Sub-Committee (upon consideration of the provision of
interpreting facilities and training courses to improve the
ability of Council staff to communicate effectively with
deaf people) recommending that -

(a) the proposals to provide facilities for the deaf as
    detailed in Report CS/88/90 be approved; and

(b) Mr. K. Hartley, Merseyside Society for the Deaf, be
    invited to address members of the Finance and Strategy
    Committee when this issue is considered by them.



With the permission of the Committee, Mr. K. Hartley
addressed the meeting on this matter.



Resolved that the proposals be considered alongside bids
submitted for revenue allocations from the Urban Programme.



ABPAAN
  FINANCE

                                10
5. Financial Review
   (CT/127/90)

  The Committee considered a Financial Review of the
  Authority.

  Motion by the Chair, duly seconded -

  That the appropriate officers report further to the
  Financial Control Sub-Committee upon the six options
  contained in the Financial Review with a view to that
  Sub-Committee making recommendations direct to the City
  Council.

  Amendment by Councillor P. Clark,
     seconded by Councillor Flora Clucas -

   The Financial Review shows, once again, that the Labour
   Party is not able to run Liverpool City Council. The report
   of the City Treasurer reveals, amongst other things:-

     (i) a 1000 cut in jobs in 12 months;

    (ii) an allocation of £12 million for Council house repairs
         compared to an allocation of £27 million last year;

   (iii) £16 million to be repaid to Swiss and Japanese money
         lenders this year alone;

    (iv) the disgraceful sale of green assets has not provided
         a solution to the Council's problems but instead has
         made property speculators rich whilst depriving
         Liverpool citizens and future generations of
         irreplaceable parks and playing fields.

  A vote was taken when there appeared -

           For the Amendment   - 6
           Against it          - 12

   The Amendment was lost.     The Motion was carried and it was
   resolved accordingly.


6. Welfare Benefits - War Widows
   and War Disablement Pensions
   (CT/122/90)

   The Committee considered the feasibility of the Council
   ignoring War Disablement Pensions when calculating Housing
   Benefit and Community Charge Benefit in the light of
   information contained in Report CT/122/90 of the City
   Treasurer.



  ABPAAN
                                                               14 JUf? 1990
                                                        FINANCE
                                 11

   Resolved that this Committee agrees, in principle, that, for
   the purposes of Housing Benefit and Community Charge
   Benefit, War Widows and War Disablement pensions should be
   disregarded and refers the matter to the Financial Control
   Sub-Committee with a view to that Sub-Committee making
   recommendations direct to the City Council.

   (Councillors S. Fitzsimmons and E. Roderick declared an
   interest in this matter, took no part in the consideration
   thereof and did not vote.)


7 . Money Advice Working Party

   Resolved that the proceedings of the Money Advice Working
   Party of the 5th, 12th and 27th April, 1990, be approved.


8. Capital Receipts Working Party

   Resolved that the proceedings of the Capital Receipts
   Working Party of the 24th May, 1990, be approved.


9. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

   The Committee considered the proceedings of the Hillsborough
   Disaster Working Party of the 14th and 24th May, 1990.

   Resolved that -

   (a)   the proposal contained in Minute 59 of the Working
         Party relating to a request for financial assistance by
         the Football Supporters Association be referred to the
         Financial Control Sub-Committee for consideration; and

   (b)   the remainder of the proceedings of the Working Party
         be approved.


10- Private Sector Development Sub-Committee

   The proceedings of the Private Sector Development
   Sub-Committee of the 30th April and 1st June, 1990 were
   submitted for the information of the Committee.


II* Sub-Committee Re: Capital
    Schemes for D .S .0.'s

   The proceedings of the Sub-Committee Re: Capital Schemes for
   D.S.O.'s of the 18th and 25th April, 1990 were submitted for
   the information of the Committee.



   ABPAAN
FINANCE


City Services Sub-Committee

Resolved that the proceedings of the City Services
Sub-Committee of the 27th April, 1990, be approved.


Capital Monitoring Sub-Committee

The proceedings of the Capital Monitoring Sub-Committee of
the 18th April and 2nd May, 1990 were submitted for the
information of the Committee.


Interregnum Sub-Committee

The proceedings of the Interregnum Sub-Committee of the 30th
April, 1st May, 8th May, 11th May, 14th May, 15th May, 21st
May and 25th May, 1990 were submitted for the information of
the Committee.

Resolved that -

(a)   with reference to the decisions of the Sub-Committee
      contained in Minute Nos. *35 and *39 relating to the
      Drugs Liaison Unit, the organisation of work with
      respect to drug abuse be the subject of review by an
      officers Working Party comprising the Assistant Chief
      Executive, the Director of Social Services, the
      Director of Education, the Acting Director of Housing,
      (or their representatives) and a representative of the
      Drugs Liaison Unit and that any decisions of the
      Interregnum Sub-Committee which have not yet been
      implemented be deferred pending the outcome of this
      review which, if possible, should be received in the
      next Committee cycle; and

(b)   the remainder of the proceedings be noted.


Special Sub-Committee Re;
North Wales Mayor's Flood Disaster Fund

Resolved that the proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee
re: North Wales Mayor's Flood Disaster Fund of the 22nd May,
1990, be approved.


Client Services Sub-Committee

Resolved that the proceedings of the Client Services
Sub-Committee of the 1st June, 1990, be approved.




ABPAAN
                        DOCUM ENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
