The Bishop's Chaplain             Bishop's Lodge Woolton Park Liverpool L25 6DT

The Rev, Paul Dawson                                               0151-708 9480
                                                       Direct Line 0151-421 0831
                                                              Fax 0151-428 3055
                                                           Home 0151-722 9543

■■y
      * 17th December 1996



       HILLSBOROUGH


       Following the television drama/document-ary about Hillsborough the
       Rt Fevd David Sheppard, Bishop of L _verpool« has written to the
       Home Secretary supporting calls for a further enquiry. Having taken
       advice from a senior lawyer,      &c. id there appeared to be two
       grounds for believing thsie might have been negligence by public
       bodies. The first concetTi^d the closed circuit television, with the
       affidavit from the technicic^ that t,:i£ systein was in good working
       order. The second wris the i.Allure to bring ambulances on to the
       ground.



       The Revd Paul Dawson
       Bishop's Chaplain
29th July 1997


The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
The Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT




I very much appreciated your writing to me and enclosing a
copy of your Statement in the House of Commons about a
further public Inqury into the Hillsborough disaster.

I appreciate the care with which you have considered this.

It has seemed to me that there were at least two points
where negligence could have been seriously alleged against
public bodies.

The first of these concerns 'the missing tapes' referred to
in the drama documentary.  If they simply showed a brick
wall, or something indecipharable, why were they not
produced to prove they were not effectively operative?   If
they were indeed showing what the film claimed they showed,
it does seem to me to be a case about negligence.

The other area concerns the claim in the Coroner's Court
that death must have been instantaneous., It is clearly
alleged that at least one young man was still alive at
3.30 p.m. - more recently I heard of a doctor saying that
wanother was alive at 4 p.m.  - When the Coronor said he
would not take evidence of anything that followed 3.15 p.m.
Failure to send in ambulances does also seem to raise the
possibility of negligence.
The Right Reverend David Sheppard
                                                                       50 J U H 1 m
The Bishop of Liverpool
Church House
1 Hanover Street
Liverpool
LI 3DW




                         /

As you know, I have been considering whether there is a case for a further public inquiry
into the Hillsborough disaster in the light of the many representations which have been
received. Concerns that a number of issues relating to the disaster remain unresolved '
received renewed attention following the Granada television documentary drama
“Hillsborough” last December.

I have had the opportunity to consider fully the material which has been put forward,
calling for a new public inquiry. I have decided, in all the circumstances, that there should
be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked before a
final decision is taken. I have, therefore, announced in the House today that there will be
an independent scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of
Appeal. I enclose for your information a copy of my statement to the House, which
includes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference. You will see that I have
undertaken to make public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith gives me.

I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively whether or not
material evidence about the causes of that terrible afternoon at Hillsborough has been
overlooked, and to take action if it has.




                                      JACK STRAW
Hillsborough
