                                                               30   :t 1989
                                                  FINANCE
                                  165
                      FINANCE AND ox'RATEGY COMMITTEE

                            3 0th October, 1989



    PRESENT:   Councillor K. Hackett, Chair;
               Councillor A. Jennings, Deputy Chair;
               Councillors J. Backhouse, D. Bermingham,
               Dawn Booth, W.M. Bullock, J. Brazier,
               P. Clark, E. Clein, Keva Coombes,
               Rosemary Cooper, A. Dean, Beatrice Fraenkel,
               Juliet Herzog, Mary Johnston, J. Lang,
               J. Kendrick, G. Knibb, Marie McGiveron,
               Lesley Mahmood, Linda O 'Sullivan,
               K. Ratcliffe, H. Rimmer, E. Roderick,
               F. Ruse, I. Scott and Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer.


               Councillors Flora Clucas, P. Hughes, Frances Kidd,
               Roger Lafferty, K. Noon, F. O'Donoghue,
               W. Owen, Vicky Roberts and L. Tyrer also attended.




346. Financial Review of the Authority
     (CT/417/89)

    The Committee considered -

     (i) a Financial Review of the Authority as at 24th October,
         1989; and

    (ii) a report of the District Auditor on the City Council's
         financial position which has been submitted to the City
         Council in accordance with Section 8 of the Local
         Government Finance Act 1982.


    Motion by the Chair, duly seconded,

    That -

    (a) the City Treasurer's Financial Review and the District
        Auditor's Report be noted and that the Chair be
        authorised to bring forward proposals to the meeting of
        the City Council on the 8th November to address the
        financial problems facing the City Council;




    AAJAAA
FINANCE


                           ^66
(b) this Committee is confident that, notwithstanding the
    policy of this Tory Government to starve the local
    government service of financial resources whilst
    expecting it to carry an increasingly heavy burden, the
    Labour Administration of this Council can and will
    address the current financial problems;

(c) representations again be made to the Secretary of State
    for the Environment to allocate additional resources to
    Liverpool to enable the Council to deal effectively with
    the many problems facing the City;

(d) the action of the Chair in establishing a series of
    Budget Working Parties comprising Labour members of the
    Council be confirmed and a similar facility be made
    available to opposition parties if they so wish and that
    these meetings be made an approved duty;

(e) the action of the Leader of the Council in instructing
    all officers not to sign any new capital contracts or
    enter into any new legally binding commitments pending a
    review of all contracts by the Capital Monitoring
    Sub-Committee be confirmed;

(f) all officers be instructed to undertake all printing
    work "in-house" unless there are urgent and over-riding
    reasons to do otherwise and that the Director of
    Information Technology report to the Chair and Deputy
    Chair upon the means of achieving revised arrangements
    in respect of the use of telephones; and

(g) in order to ensure that revenue budgets are not
    overspent, with immediate effect, the general authority
    for Chief Officers to place orders for supplies and
    services be withdrawn; that the Chair and Deputy Chair
    of this Committee be empowered to approve all orders for
    supplies and services and that the City Treasurer
    establish a procedure for processing such orders and
    monitoring expenditure.

Amendment by Councillor P. Clark,
     seconded by Councillor Rosemary Cooper,

That the Motion be approved as the reports of the City
Treasurer and the District Auditor show that this Council is
once again experiencing an economic crisis.  The reports
highlight the incompetence of the Labour Administration.
Despite selling off vital City assets of playing fields and
open lands and privatising two Council car parks, the
Council is out of control.  From the passing of the budget
and throughout the Financial Year, the Liberal Democrat
group has been demanding that the Council strive to avoid an



AAJAAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
        CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




                     Y \ i©   u ~ c\   ^   o a J L \^




Code: ZYZ
    FINANCE
                                 196

414. Rent Arrears - Case CWO/1/89

    Resolved that Minute *24 of the Rent Arrears Pursuance
    Sub-Committee (upon consideration of Case CWO/1/89 involving
    Council tenants in arrears with rent who have serious
    medical problems and who would have qualified for enhanced
    Housing Benefit from 1982 but because of the medical factors
    involved application for enhanced benefit was not made until
    January 1988 and payment could only be made retrospective to
    January 1987) recommending that, having regard to the
    special and exceptional circumstances in this case and
    without creating a precedent, authority be granted for rent
    arrears amounting to £1,373 (equivalent to the amount of
    additional housing benefit the tenants would have received
    for the period 1982-1987) to be written off the tenant's
    rent account, be approved.


415. Hillsborough Disaster
     Regional Unit
     (DSS/323/89)

     The Committee considered Minute 96 of the Social Services
     Committee recommending that -

     (a)   the City Council underwrite its proportion of the cost
           of the Hillsborough Regional Unit, up to a maximum of
           £12,500 in 1989/90 and £25,000 in 1990/91; and

     (b)   the Director of Social Services be requested to
           continue to seek funding towards the total cost of
           the Regional Unit and report the outcome in due
           course.

     Resolved that the Chair be authorised to submit a
     recommendation on this matter to the next meeting of the
     City Council.


416. Hillsborough Disaster
     Staffing of the Hillsborough Centre
     (DSS/324/89)

     The Committee considered Minute 97 of the Social Services
     Committee recommending that -

     (a)   subject to the approval of the Personnel and Equal
           Opportunities Policy Committee the establishment of the
           Social Services Department be varied by the creation of




     AAJAAA
                                                                                          Ubi |Qge
                                                                        FINANCE


                         the following posts at the Hillsborough Centre, viz:-

                         Post No.        Designation                              Grade

-VI
       n9                SS/83D/1         Senior Assistant (Administration)       Scale 5

e<a                      SS/83D/2         Clerical Officer                        Scale 2
tors
ntii                     SS/83D/3         Clerk/Typist                            Scale 1
e to
                         SS/83D/4,5      Receptionist (part-time - 20             Scale 2
                                         hours per week) 2 posts
ant
                   (b)   the Director be requested to make every effort to
sd                       ensure that the posts of receptionist are filled by
                         redeployment within the service.



                   The Chair informed the Committee that the Personnel and
                   Equal Opportunities Policy Committee approved the proposal
                   subject to the posts being filled by redeployment.



                   Resolved that the decision of the Personnel and Equal
                   Opportunities Policy Committee be approved.


               417. Mental Health Day Centre -
                    Staffing
                    (DSS/326/89)

                   Resolved that Minute 99 of the Social Services Committee
                   recommending that, in connection with the staffing of Mental
                   Health Day Centres and subject to the approval of the
                   Personnel and Equal Opportunities Policy Committee, and to
                   additional financial arrangements being confirmed through
                   Urban Programme arrangements or other sources, the
                   establishment of the Social Services Department be varied by
                   the creation of the following posts

                   Post No.         Designation                         Grade

                   SS/63D/3         Officer-in-Charge, Mental Health    Scale 6
                                    Day Centre

                   SS/63D/6         Deputy Officer in Charge            Scale 5

                   SS/63D/13 to     Support Workers (6 posts)           Scale 3
                   18

                   be approved.
      v-.'./




      :r'i

                   AAJAAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
