                                                         FINANCE

                                     -             A607 -
                         FINANCE AND STRATEGY COMMITTEE

                               22nd January, 1990


1,
         PRESENT:   Councillor K. Hackett, Chair;
                    Councillor A. Jennings, Deputy Chair;
                    Councillors F. Anderson, D. Bermingham,
                    M. Bolland, Dawn Booth, Pamela Bradley,
                    J. Brazier, P. Clark, Flora Clucas, K. Coombes,
                    S. Fitzsimmons, Beatrice Fraenkel, Juliet Herzog,
                    Mary Johnston, Roger Johnston, Lady Doreen Jones,
                    J. Kendrick, Marie McGiveron, Lesley Mahmood,
                    Linda O'Sullivan, K. Ratcliffe, H. Rimmer,
                    F. Ruse, I. Scott, Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer and
                    M . Storey.


                    Councillors Vera Best, H. Chase, E. Clein,
                    Cathy Hancox, P. Hughes, Frances Kidd, W. Lane and
                    K. Noon also attended.


     581. Money Advice Working Party

          Resolved that the proceedings of the Money Advice Working
          Party of the 8th December, 1989, be approved.


     582. Capital Receipts Working Party

          Resolved that the proceedings of the Capital Receipts
          Working Party of the 18th December, 1989, be approved,


     583, Budget Monitoring Sub-Committee            ?

          The proceedings of the Budget Monitoring Sub-Committee of
          the 6th, 8th, 13th, 15th, 18th, 21st and 28th December, 1989
          and 3rd, 5th, 8th, 10th and 12th January, 1990 were
          submitted for the information of the Committee.


     584. Restructuring Sub-Committee                                   I

          The proceedings of the Restructuring Sub-Committee of the
          7th December, 1989 were submitted for the information of the
          Committee.




          AAWAAC
                                                                              ’If;
                                                                                        s? *
                                                                               i
    FINANCE                                                                    1

                                 - A608 -
                                                                               j
                                                                               «        ■


                                                                                        b ’~   "
585. Private Sector Development Sub-Committee

    The proceedings of the Private Sector Development
                                                                               j   jPi

                                                                                   1
                                                                                   J.                  ;
    Sub-Committee of the 12th December, 198S were submitted for
    the information of the Committee.                                              J
                                                                                   1
                                                                                   {
                                                                                   I
586. Environmental Services Sub-Committee                                          I
                                                                                   1
                                                                                        /


    The proceedings of the Environmental Services Sub-Committee                    I
                                                                                   1
    of the 18th and 22nd December were submitted for the                                §§;■
    information of the Committee.                                                                  -


                                                                                   [
                                                                      :'y .   ;|p
587. Contract Control Sub-Committee                                             j
                                                                                I1 !
    Resolved that the proceedings of the Contract Control
    Sub-Committee of the 19th December, 1989 and 16th January,                                 JJX ■

    1990, be approved.


588. City Services Sub-Committee

    The proceedings of the City Services Sub-Committee of the
    29th December, 1989 were submitted for the information of
    the Committee.


589. Capital Monitoring aub-Committee                                                           if
     Resolved that the proceedings of the Capital Monitoring
     Sub-Committee of the 10th January, 1990 so far as they
     require confirmation by the Committee, be approved.


590. Special Sub-Committee -
     Banking Services

     The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re Banking
     Services of the 10th January, 1990 were submitted for the
     information of the Committee.

     Resolved that the proceedings be noted and the City
     Treasurer be requested to explore possible arrangements wi1 ;
     the Midland Bank that would be of benefit to City Council
     employees.
                                                                 ■P

                                                                  i




    AAWAAC
                                                FINANCE

                           -                              A609 -
Cutting-off of Gas Supplies -
Council Motion                                               I

Resolved that the Motion which appeared in the name of
Councillor Rosemary Cooper at the meeting of the Council
held on the 20th December, 1989, relating to the cutting-off
of gas supplies be referred to the Community Liaison Officer
for a report to the Anti-Poverty Sub-Committee and that such
report include the comments of the Chief Welfare Rights
Officer.


Oil Collection Points -
Council Motion

Resolved that the Motion which appeared in the name of
Councillor Beatrice Fraenkel at the meeting of the Council
held on the 20th December, 1989, relating to the disposal by
car owners of their used oil be referred to the officers for
a report to the Environmental Services Sub-Committee.


Aluminium Can Collecting Sites -
Council Motion                                               f
Resolved that the Motion which appeared in the name of
Councillor Beatrice Franekel at the meeting of the Council
held on the 20th December, 1989, relating to the provision |
of aluminium can collection points at suitable locations,
possibly in conjunction with the bottle banks, be referred |
to the officers for a report to the Environmental Services f
Sub-Committee.


Paper and Cardboard Collection Points -
Council Motion

Resolved that the Motion which appeared in the name of
Councillor Beatrice Franekel at the meeting of the Council I
held on the 20th December, 1989, relating to the provision f
of paper or cardboard collection points across the City, be;
referred to the officers for a report to the Environmental I
Services Sub-Committee.                                     f




AAWAAC
FINANCE

                           - A610 -
Municipal Year 1990/9L

The Committee considered a recommendation that -

(a)   the Annual Meeting of the City Council be held at 1.30
      p.m. on Tuesday, 15th May, 1990;

(b)   a Committee of Selection be appointed and be held at
      10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, 9th May, 1990; and

(c)   nominations for the office of Chairman of the Council
      for the Municipal Year 1990/91 be submitted to the
      Committee of Selection.

Resolved that the proposal be approved and the Committee of
Selection comprise 7 Labour, 1 Conservative and 4 Liberal
Democrat members and that nominations for membership be
submitted to the City Solicitor.


Local Government and Housing Act, 1989

Resolved that a Sub-Committee comprising the Leader and
Deputy Leader, the Chair and Deputy Chair of this Committee )
the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Liberal Democrats and
the chief whips of the major Parties be appointed to
consider and determine -

(a)   arrangements for the allocation of the expenditure
       permitted under the Local Government and Housing Act,‘
       1989 for the payment of allowances to members; and

(b)   the adoption of certain procedural Standing Orders
       which may be imposed by the Secretary of State under
       Regulations issued pursuant to the provisions of the ,
       1989 Act.                                            I


Councillor Jean Newton

Resolved that -

(a) pursuant to Section 85 of the Local Government Act, 1972
    the reason (namely illness) for the non-attendance of
    Councillor Jean Newton at meetings of the City Council
    and its Committees, be approved; and
                                                            |
(b) the best wishes of the Committee be extended to
    Councillor Newton for a speedy recovery from her presei
    indisposition.




                                                              ::v

AAWAAC
                                                      FINANCE

                                   - A611 -
   598. Local Government Boundary Commission
        Review of the Metropolitan County of
        Merseyside and its Metropolitan Districts
        (CS/19/90)

        The Committee considered the arrangements to be made in
        order for the Council to respond to the preliminary
        proposals for changes to the City boundary made by the Local
        Government Boundary Commission, contained in report
        CS/19/90 of the City Solicitor.

        Resolved that the Chair be authorised to submit a
        recommendation on this matter to the next meeting of the
        City Council.


   599. Merseyside Valuation and
        Community Charge Tribunal

        Resolved that Mrs. Eileen Henry, 15 Crossways, Gateacre,
        Liverpool, 25, be appointed to serve upon the Merseyside
        Valuation and Community Charge Tribunal in place of Mr. P.
        Kellett who is past the retirement age for membership of the
        Tribunal.


    600. Hillsborough Disaster - Hire of
         Camera Crew and Photographer

        Resolved that authority be granted for a payment of £728.41
        to be made to the University of Liverpool in respect of the
        cost of hiring a camera crew and photographer on 19th May,
        1989 in connection with a visit to Hillsborough by the
        Hillsborough Disaster Working Party.


    601. Civic Delegations to
         Cologne and Odessa

        The Committee considered whether to accept invitations to
..S'    send civic delegations to Cologne and Odessa and, if so, to
        determine the composition of the delegations.

         Resolved that the Chair be authorised to submit a
         recommendation on this matter to the next meeting of the
         City Council.




s;y:'

         AAWAAC
    FINANCE

                                 - A612 -
602. University of Liverpool -
     University Court

    The Committee considered the appointment of six members to
    serve upon the University Court for the period 1st January,
    1990 to 31st December, 1992.

    Resolved that nominations be submitted to the next meeting
    of the City Council.


603. Environmental Services Sub-Committee

    Resolved that authority be granted for the proceedings of a    ".wa             ■
    meeting of the Environmental Services Sub-Committee to be      '      its - :   -
    held on 29th January to be submitted direct to the next
    meeting of the City Council.


604. Energy Surveys
     (CA/5/90)

    The Committee considered a recommendation that the sum of
    £747,376 for the purpose of carrying out energy conservatio:
    measures identified in the Energy Surveys carried out by
    Acting City Architect be approved and funded from the
    Capital Programme.

    Resolved that the Chair be authorised to submit a
    recommendation on this matter to the next meeting of the
    City Council and that the City Architect and the Director oJ
    Maintenance and Building Works, in consultation with other
    appropriate chief Officers examine the report and indentify
    those projects which could be undertaken early in the next
    financial year and which would produce immediate revenue
    savings.


605. British Nuclear Tests Veterans' Association
     (CS/18/90)

    Resolved that a donation of £100 be made to the British
    Nuclear Tests Veterans' Association towards the expenses of
    the Association.




    AAWAAC
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code; ZXY
