                     CITY OF LIVERPOOL


                   19TH SEPTEMBER, 1990


    At a meeting of the City Council held on Wednesday,

19th September, 1990 at 1.30 p.m. in the Town Hall.




 CCIAAA
                                      - 147 -
                                                              19th September,


                                      PRESENT
                                THE LORD MAYOR
                          (Councillor Dorothy Gavin)

   BerainJjteSf’Bo 11 and' ^ ^ B o S t h ^ G ^ 011*0 ' ®en~Tovim'
   Brady, Brazier, Joan S ,         w     i     ^     th' / 0ht Bradley,
   Cardwell, chas4, C h i n n T b b                      Cannon,
   Concepcion, Rosemary Cooper! CoventS' ft ™"' k                ® Clucas,
          EJizabeth Drysdale, Duckworth^'Edwards               '      '
   Barry Fitzsimons, Hannah Folan, Beatrice Prapntoi
   Susan^oganl


  Margaret HBoSd! Ma?!e                             ' ^ iVin9St0ne'

  Prendergast, O u i m      RadfnrH    p f iSullivan, Oldfield, Owen,


 , Jacqueline Smith ^re^or                   S ™       Sharpey Schaf« ,
 ; Vaudrey, W i l l i a m s and Cathy W i l s o n ? ^ ' TempleInan' Tyrer,



i ^ e J f B r a d ^ I y f c enc « ^ reSSU^ tt?d £“ » Councillors
' Ann Keenan, « £ £ S ^ a n d ^ H ^ n ’ ''                     -



                               COUNCIL MINUTES


 j & S S S E !    ? » S bS B ^ ^ S L 5 ^   a    [   a S 3 ^ t l S 12 0S    the


                          ELECTION OF COUNC.TT.T.nt?

 S u n c U l o r ° e i e c t I 5 ^o’T h r f ? “          9 r e tu r n of a
 viz:-                                     uebrook Ward on 9th August, 1990,
5 No    /ur      — 4.        M r * Nei1 Cardwell
j wo     Mr.     Peter Michael Aldcroft
i ot    (Mr.     Neil Cardwell ........                                   ..88
   ®^es (Mr.     Richard Jaxnes Morris                                    1545
        {JP*     ^ lla?1 White ------ ...I                                . 91
        (Ms.     Hazel Lee Williams ....                                  1305
                                                                          1481




 CCIAAA
19th September, 1990        - 148 -



          VACANCIES ON COMMITTEES AND SUB-COMMITTEES
Resolved that -

(a)   Councillor N. Cardwell be appointed to fill a vacancy
      that has arisen in the membership of the following
      Committees and Sub-Committees, occasioned by the
      resignation of Councillor J. Lang, viz:-
      Community Services and Neighbourhood Development
       Committee
      Libraries and Arts Sub-Committee
      Service Audit Sub-Committee
      Voluntary Sector and Neighbourhood Development
       Sub-Committee
      Direct Services Committee
      Cleansing and Vehicles Sub-Committee
      Environmental Maintenance Sub-Committee

(b)   Councillor Beatrice Fraenkel be appointed to fill a
      vacancy in the membership of the Corporate Policy and
      Performance Review Sub-Committee occasioned by the
      resignation of Councillor M.J. Storey.
                                                         ■


                           PETITION                      8
Petition signed by 100 Liverpool residents urging the
Council to reconsider its decision in relation to the
funding of "Drug Free".



A representative of the petitioners then addressed the
Council.
(NOTE -   The issue referred to in the petition was
          considered at this meeting.)

                   TELEVISING OF PROCEEDINGS
Resolved that authority be granted for BBC television to
televise the proceedings of the Council.                 'S':

               SHERWOODS LANE RECREATION GROUND
                                                              v ;T .’

Motion by Councillor F. Vaudrey; duly seconded and
resolved -

That the Standing Orders relating to the Order of Debate be
suspended to allow a representative of petitioners from the
Fazakerley area to address the Council in relation to the
disposal of land at Sherwoods Lane.



CCIAAA
                             - 149 -       19th September, 1990




Mr. Horne of the Fazakerley Residents Association then
addressed the meeting.

                 NETHERLEY AND VALLEY AREAS

Motion by Councillor F. Vaudrey duly seconded and
resolved -

That the Standing Orders relating to the Order of Debate be
suspended to allow a representative of petitioners from the
Netherley and Valley areas to address the Council in
relation to the Estates Action programmes in those areas.


Mr. McLoughlin of the Netherley/Belle Vale Tenants
Association then addressed the meeting.



                    FINANCE AND STRATEGY
The proceedings of the Finance and Strategy Committee of the
10th September, the Special Sub-Committee re: Upper
Parliament Street/Falkner Estate of 17th September, the
Corporate Programmes Sub-Committee of 17th September and the
Financial Control Sub-Committee of 18th September, 1990 so
far as they require confirmation by the Council, were
submitted.

Hillsborough Working Party
The Chair (Councillor Vicky Roberts) referred to the
resolution of the Finance and Strategy Committee authorising
the submission of a recommendation in relation to the
proceedings and composition of the Hillsborough Working
Party and recommended that the proceedings of the Working
Party meeting of the 31st August be approved subject, where
appropriate, to the approval of the Financial Control
Sub-Committee and the Working Party be reconstituted on the
following basis for the remainder of the present Municipal
Year.




CCIAAA
19th September, 1990           - 150 -



- Chairs and Deputy Chairs of the Community Services and
  Neighbourhood Development and Health and Consumer Services
  Committees, Councillors H. Chase and Jackie Smith and one
  member of the Liberal Democrat Party.
This item then stood opposed

         (See Minute No. Book 12, page A294, Minute 224)
Applications for NHS Trust Status

By permission of the Council, the resolution of the Finance
and Strategy Committee relating to the application submitted
by a number of Liverpool hospitals for NHS Trust Status was
varied by the addition of the following words at the end of
part (a) of the resolution, viz:-
"on the basis that the City Council is opposed in principle
 to the opting out of NHS hospitals from state provision."

           (See Minute Book 12, page A300, Minute 236)

Emergency Planning College - Courses
The Chair referred to the resolution of the Finance and
Strategy Committee authorising the submission of a
recommendation in relation to the attendance at courses
organised by the Emergency Planning College and recommended
that the Leader of the Council and the Chair of the Finance
and Strategy Committee be authorised to approve the
attendance of Officers at courses in appropriate cases.
Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

           (See Minute Book 12, page A308, Minute 250)
Merseytravel - Revision of Tunnel Tolls
The Chair referred to the resolution of the Finance and
Strategy Committee authorising the submission of a
recommendation in relation to the Council's response to
documentation prepared by Merseytravel on the revision of
tunnel tolls and recommended that the response be determined
by the Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokesperson on
the Finance and Strategy Committee following the
consideration of further information to be provided by the
City Treasurer.

Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

           (See Minute Book 12, page A321, Minute 278)




CCIAAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
       CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




Code: ZYZ
                                  - 175 -      19th September, 1990




 ITEM NO.         BOOK PAGE AND              SUBJECT
                   MINUTE NO.

      6           12/A318/270     Allmey and Layfield Ltd. Land
                                  and buildings at Pine Grove

      7           12/A294/224     Hillsborough Working Party

      8           12/A299/234     Council Motion - Service
                                  provided by North West Water

       9          12/A303/243     Cable T.V. Contract


      10          12/A304/245     Netherley Estate Action Glebe
                                  Hey

      11           12/A305/246    Netherley Estate Action 1990/91
                                  Galescroft

Parts 2 , 3, 4, 5 and 7 of the Motion

Amendment by Councillor P. Clark,
 seconded by Councillor Rosemary Cooper -
(A)        That the resolution of the Finance and Strategy
           Committee (Minute 217) relating to the Financial
           Review be not approved as the Review reveals a lack of
           urgency and incompetence on behalf of the Labour
           Administration and its Chief Officers leaving the City
           Council to drift towards an unlawful deficit. Despite
           previous initiatives from the Liberal Democrat
           opposition, suggesting co-operation and partnership in
           order to solve this problem having been defeated, this
           Council agrees to ensure that an unlawful deficit does
           not occur by:-

           (a)   approving recommendations 1 and 2 in Report
                 CT/168/90 of the City Treasurer;

           (b)   agreeing in principle recommendations 3, 4 and 5
                 and establishing a Budget Crisis Sub-Committee
                 comprising the Leader of the Council, the Chair of
                 the Finance and Strategy Committee and the Leader
                 and Deputy Leader of the Opposition to receive a



CCIAAA
19th September, 1990          - 176 -


                                                                                      ‘

            report from the appropriate officers on
            recommendations 3, 4 and 5 in Report CT/168/90 and
            the implications of the contents of that report
            and the Sub-Committee be given delegated powers to
            take action to ensure that an unlawful deficit
            does not occur; and
         (c) if a commitment has not then been entered into
             recommending the Finance and Strategy Committee at
             its next meeting not to enter into a legal                               I
             commitment with the contractor for the Capital
             Works on the Epsom/Goodwood Estate and a full
             report be prepared for the Committee outlining
             which officers have placed the Council into a
             contractually invidious position by allowing the
             work to proceed prior to the contract being
             signed.

(B)   That the resolution of the Finance and Strategy
      Committee (Minute 237) appointing the City Treasurer to; :
      attend the CIPFA Annual Conference be not approved and
      no representatives be appointed to attend this
      Conference.
                                                                         S ilt
(C)   That the resolution of the Finance and Strategy                                         • ..


      Committee (Minute 242) re-affirming a previous decision
      not to make a grant to Drug Free be not approved; that      i ' - . -v-'-vvf-
      a grant be made and financed from the profits and
      savings received from the Cable T.V. contract.

(D)   That the resolution of the Finance and Strategy
      Committee (Minute 263) granting authority for Whitbread
      Limited to supply the Neptune Theatre Bar with all bar                              IK
      supplies be not approved and that -                                                 ■
                                                                                          .   .      .




          (i) the Officers concerned be requested to seek                    is
              tenders from other suppliers in addition to
              Whitbreads in view of the fact that Messrs.
              Whitbreads have systematically destroyed jobs and
              stripped assets from this and other cities in
              pursuit of their monopolistic aims; and                                         II
                                                                r
         (ii) a copy of this amendment be sent to the A.M.A.
              with the request that other local authorities be f
              asked to take similar action in order to
              demonstrate that local government will not
              tolerate the destruction of jobs and then provide
              a source of revenue for the culprits.
(E)   That the resolution of the Finance and Strategy
      Committee (Minute 270) approving the "City of Liverpool;
                                                                    ;i   ■


                                                                  ;h
CCIAAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
