                              - A23 -

                        SPECIAL SUB-COMMITTEE

                 TO APPOINT A RESEARCH OFFICER TO THE
                      HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY



                            16TH JUNE 1989




      PRESENT:     Councillor Harry Chase (in the Chair)
                   Councillors I. Templeman and F. Roderick.




                   Advisory Representative: Ms. M. Plumpton
                   (NALGO).




*2.   Appointment of Research Officer

      The Sub-Committee interviewed the following candidates
      for the post of Research Officer, Hillsborough Working
      Party, viz:-

      Candidates Name             Present Position

      Ms. A .C . Jemphrey         Administrator
                                  (Merseyside Welfare Rights
                                   Resource Centre)

      Mr. N.G. Penny              DATA - Cleanse Officer,
                                  British Telecom.

      Mr. T. Smith                Unemployed.




       During the interviews it was stated that Mr. T. Smith
       was known to Councillors Chase and T®mP eman ^
       been involved with the Hillsborough Working Party on a
       Voluntary basis.
                          - A2k -

Councillor Roderick stated that in his view, those
Members should have made this known at the Shortlising
Meeting and, in view of the non-disclosure, asked the
two Members to withdraw from the Sub-Committee.
Councillors Chase and Templeman gave assurances that
all candidates would be judged impartially.  The
interviews continued.

At the conclusion of the interviews, the Sub-Committee
considered the appointment to be made.  Councillor
Roderick expressed the opinion that the interviews had
not been fair and impartial.  Councillor Templeman
stated that he had tried to be as objective as possible
in assessing all of the candidates and reaching his
decision.  Councillor Roderick proposed that Mr. Penny
should be appointed to the post.

Motion by Councillor Templeman,   seconded by
Councillor Chase,

That

   Mr. T. Smith, aged 33 years, be appointed to the
   post of Research Officer at a salary of £10,473
   (the bottom of Scale 6), the appointment to be
   for a fixed term of six months, subject to the
   Standing Orders of the City Council together with
   the Scheme of Conditions of Service of the National
   Joint Council for Local Authorities Administrative
   etc. Services, and to be effective from a date to
   be arranged.

A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                 For the Motion      2
                 Against it          1

The Motion was carried and it was resolved accordingly.
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
