                                           W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                           City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                           P.O. Box No. 88
                                           Municipal Buildings

LIVERPOOL                                  Dale Street
                                           LIV E R P O O L L69 2DH

                                           Telephone: 051—227 3911     Ext:
                                                         0 51—225      (Direct Line)
                                           Fax: 0 5 1 -2 3 6 2047
                                           D X 14206 LIVERPO O L


                                           Your ref

                                           Our ref    F&S/AKC/LW
                                           Date       1  h January
                                                      17th .T a n  1990

TO:   All Members of the
      Finance and Strategy Committee




My dear Sir/Madam,


You are requested to attend a meeting of the FINANCE AND STRATEGY

COMMITTEE to be held at 2.00 P.M. on MONDAY next, the 22ND JANUARY

1990 in a Committee Room in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street.



The agenda for the meeting is enclosed.



Yours faithfully,



City Solicitor,
Secretary to the Council
                     OMt



MEMBERS ARE REMINDED THAT SMOKING IS NOT PERMITTED AT COMMITTEE
                       MEETINGS

LABOUR GROUP MEETING - 12.30 p.m, on Monday 22nd January 1990 in the
Members Room in the Municipal Annexe.
                 FINANCE AND STRATEGY COMMITTEE

                       22ND JANUARY, 1990

                              AGENDA

                           A. GENERAL

Money Advice Working Party                                       A.1

To consider the proceedings of the Money Advice Working
Party of the 8th December, 1989.

             (A copy of the proceedings is enclosed)


Capital Receipts Working Party                                   A.2

To consider the proceedings of the Capital Receipts Working
Party of the 18th December, 1989.

             (A copy of the proceedings is enclosed)


Budget Monitoring Sub-Committee                                  A .3

The   proceedings of the Budget Monitoring Sub-Committee of
the   6th, 8th, 13th, 15th, 18th, 21st and 28th December, 1989
and   3rd, 5th, 8th, 10th and 12th January, 1990 are submitted
for   the information of the Committee.

             (A copy of the proceedings is enclosed)


Restructuring Sub-Committee                                      A.4

The proceedings of the Restructuring Sub-Committee of the
7th December, 1989 are submitted for the information of the
Committee,

             (A copy of the proceedings is enclosed)


Private Sector Development Sub-Committee                         A.5

The proceedings of the Private Sector Development
Sub-Committee of the 12th December, 1989 are submitted for
the information of the Committee.

             (A copy of the proceedings is enclosed)




AAWAAC
Environmental Services Sub-Committee                           A.6.

The proceedings of the Environmental Services Sub-Committee
of the 18th and 22nd December are submitted for the
information of the Committee.

           (A copy of the proceedings is enclosed)


Contract Control Sub-Committee                                 A.7.

To consider the proceedings of the Contract Control
Sub-Committee of the 19th December, 1989 and 16th January ,
1990.

           (A copy of the proceedings is enclosed)


City Services Sub-Committee                                    A. 8 .

The proceedings of the City Services Sub-Committee of the
29th December, 1989 are submitted for the information of the
Committee.

           (A copy of the proceedings is enclosed)


Capital Monitoring Sub-Committee                               A. 9.

To consider the proceedings of the Capital Monitoring
Sub-Committee of the 10th January, 1990 so far as they
require confirmation by the Committee.

           (A copy of the proceedings is enclosed)


Special Sub-Committee -                                        A.10.
Banking Services

The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re Banking
Services of the 10th January, 1990 are submitted for the
information of the Committee.

           (A copy of the proceedings is enclosed)




AAWAAC
Cutting-off of Gas Supplies -
Council Motion

To consider the following Motion which appeared in the name
of Councillor Rosemary Cooper at the meeting of the
Council held on the 20th December, 1989, viz:-

"That the Finance and Strategy Committee request the City
 Solicitor to report on the current procedures in which gas
 supplies are cut off, with particular reference to -

 (a)   stopping any action cutting off gas supplies on a
       Friday which leaves residents without a supply or
       means of re-connection until after the weekend;

 (b)   affording those without telephones, a last chance to
       resolve difficulties regarding their bill;

 (c)   what action is taken by the Social Services Department
       in the Districts when they receive notification from
       the Gas Board that a supply is to be cut off; and

 (d)   explain what action was taken in detail by both the
       Gas Board and the Social Services Department with
       regard to 320 East Prescot Road where, between 7.00
       p.m. and 9.00 p.m. on Friday evening with the aid of
       a locksmith, entry was gained to the property and the
       meter removed leaving the family (which included a 6
       month of old baby) without cooking facilities, this
       happening for a bill of just £50. The re-connection
       fee is £35, how precisely does this sort of situation
       arise."


Oil Collection Points -
Council Motion

To consider the following Motion which appeared in the name
of Councillor Beatrice Fraenkel at the meeting of the
Council held on the 20th December, 1989, viz:-

"This Council is aware that many car owners dispose of
 their used oil by putting it down the drains, or by other
 non-environmental means and instructs the appropriate
 officers to look at suitable locations where oil collection
 points could be provided, and also to report on ways this
 might be done in conjunction with local garages."


Aluminium Can Collecting Sites -
Council Motion

To consider the following Motion which appeared in the name



AAWAAC
of Councillor Beatrice Franekel at the meeting of the
Council held on the 20th December, 1989, viz:~

"Following the success of the bottle bank sites across the
 City for collecting glass, the Finance and Strategy
 Committee instructs the appropriate officers to provide
 aluminium can collection points at suitable locations,
 possibly in conjunction with the bottle banks."


Paper and Cardboard Collection Points -                           A,14
Council Motion

To consider the following Motion which appeared in the name
of Councillor Beatrice Franekel at the meeting of the
Council held on the 20th December, 1989, viz:-

"Following the success of the Merseyside Waste Disposal
 Authority in raising over £1,500 for charity in eight
 months by providing paper collection points at its disposal
 sites, this Council is concerned that despite several
 requests from the Liberal Democrats over the past year, no
 action has yet been taken by the Council to provide paper
 or cardboard collection points across the City.

The Council is aware that recycling paper not only raises
money for charity but is 'environmentally friendly1. This
Council is concerned at the continued delay in taking
practical steps to collect paper and cardboard and asks the
appropriate officers to report on the setting up of
collection points as matter of urgency, possibly in
conjunction with the Bottle Bank sites."


Municipal Year 1990/91                                            A.15

RECOMMENDATION

That -

(a)      the Annual Meeting of the City Council be held at 1.30
         p.m. on Tuesday, 15th May, 1990;

(b)      a Committee of Selection be appointed and be held at
         10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, 9th May, 1990; and

(c)      nominations for the office of Chairman of the Council
         for the Municipal Year 1990/91 be submitted to the
         Committee of Selection.

(In 1988 the Committee of Selection comprised 7 Labour, 1
 Conservative and 4 Liberal Democrat Members)




AAWAAC
Local Government and Housing Act, 1989                         A.16

RECOMMENDATION

That a small Sub-Committee be appointed to consider and
determine -

(a)   arrangements for the allocation of the expenditure
       permitted under the Local Government and Housing Act,
       1989 for the payment of allowances to members; and

(b)   the adoption of certain procedural Standing Orders
       which may be imposed by the Secretary of State under
       Regulations issued pursuant to the provisions of the
       1989 Act.


Councillor Jean Newton                                         A.17

RECOMMENDATION

That, pursuant to Section 85 of the Local Government Act,
1972 the reason (namely illness) for the non-attendance of
Councillor Jean Newton at meetings of the City Council and
its Committees, be approved.


Local Government Boundary Commission                           A.18
Review of the Metropolitan County of
Merseyside and its Metropolitan Districts

To consider the arrangements to be made in order for the
Council to respond to the preliminary proposals for changes
to the City boundary made by the Local Government Boundary
Commission, contained in report No. CS/19/90 of the City
Solicitor.

                     (See enclosed report)



Merseyside Valuation and                                       A.19
Community Charge Tribunal

To consider the appointment of a member to serve upon the
Merseyside Valuation and Community Charge Tribunal in place
of Mr. P. Kellett who is past the retirement age for
membership of the Tribunal.

(Mr. Kellett was nominated to serve upon the Tribunal by the
 Social Democratic Party on the City Council).




AAWAAC
Hillsborough Disaster - Hire of                                A. 20
Camera Crew and Photographer

RECOMMENDATION

That authority be granted for a payment of £728.41 to the
Unversity of Liverpool in respect of the cost of hiring a
camera crew and photographer on 19th May, 1989 in connection
with a visit to Hillsborough by the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party.


Civic Delegations to                                           A.21
Cologne and Odessa

To consider whether to accept invitations to send civic
delegations to Cologne and Odessa and, if so, to determine
the composition of the delegations.


University of Liverpool -                                      A. 22
University Court

To consider the appointment of six members to serve upon the
University Court for the period 1st January, 1990 to 31st
December, 1992.

(Note: The current representatives are Councillors I. Scott,
       R. Quinn, Linda O'Sullivan, G. Ben-Tovim and
       F. O'Donoghue.)


Environmental Services Sub-Committee                           A.23

Recommendation

That authority be granted for the proceedings of a meeting
of the Environmental Services Sub-Committee to be held on
25th January to be submitted direct to the City Council.


Energy Surveys                                                 A.24
(CA/5/90)

Recommendation

That the sum of £7 47,376 for the purpose of carrying out
energy conservation measures identified in the Energy
Surveys carried out by the Acting City Architect be approved
and funded from the Capital Programme.

                       (See enclosed report)



AAWAAC
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
