                     CITY OF LIVERPOOL




                     15TH APRIL, 1992




At a Meeting of the City Council held on Wednesday, 15th
April, 1992 at 1.30 p.m. in the Town Hall.




al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z15 0492
                                                 15th April, 1992
                               - 535 -


                           PRESENT

                       THE LORD MAYOR
                  (Councillor Trevor Smith)

COUNCILLORS: Alderson, George Allen, Peter Allen, Anderson,
Backhouse, Ben-Tovim, Bermingham, Bolland, Dawn Booth,
Brazier, Joan Brown, Bullock, Cannon, Cardwell, Chase,
Chinn, M.B.E., Paul Clark, Margaret Clarke, Clein, Flora
Clucas, Concepcion, Rosemary Cooper, Coventry, Coyne, Curry,
Eileen Devaney, Doran, Doyle, Duckworth, Edwards, Marilyn
Fielding, Stephen Fitzsimmons, Beatrice Fraenkel, Dorothy
Gavin, Theresa Griffin, Hackett, Cathy Hancox, Hegarty,
Juliet Herzog, Susan Hogan, George Hughes, Leslie Hughes,
Jennings, Johnston, Lady Doreen Jones, Ann Keenan, Mary Kidd,
Knibb, Lafferty, Lang, Petrona Lashley, Ledwich, McCauley,
Margaret McDaid, Marie McGiveron, McGrath, Pauline McKibbin,
McKittrick, Lesley Mahmood, Mills, Noon, Sarah Norman,
O'Donoghue, Oldfield, Owen, Quinn, Radford, Ratcliffe,
Richardson, Rimmer, Bill Roberts, Vicky Roberts, Ruse, Ian
Scott, Gerard Scott, Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer, Jacqueline
Smith, Snell, Spriggs, Stanley, Storey, Tyrer, Vaudrey,
Williams and Cathy Wilson.



Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors Vera
Best, B. Fitzsimons, Anne Gorton, Elaine Kinahan and Judith
Nelson.



                       MR. WALTER LANE

Resolved that this Council has learned with deep regret, of
the death of Walter Lane, a former Member of the Council and
extends to his family its sincere condolences in their
bereavement.



                    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

The City Council observed a one minute silence in memory of
the 95 Liverpool supporters who lost their lives at
Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989.

                       VOTE OF THANKS

Motion by Councillor H. Rimmer,
  seconded by Councillor M. Storey and resolved -

That -



al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z150492
15th April, 1992
                               - 536 -


 (i) the best thanks of the Council be extended to the Lord
     Mayor (Councillor Trevor Smith) for the impartial manner
     in which he has presided over this Council and for the
     courtesy and ability with which he has sustained the
     office of Lord Mayor during the past Municipal Year; and

(ii) this Council places on record its appreciation of the
     valuable services rendered to the administration of the
     City by those Council Members who are not candidates in
     the forthcoming Municipal Elections.




                        COUNCIL MINUTES

The minutes of the meeting of the City Council held on the
11th March, 1992 were submitted and signed by the Lord Mayor.


                   LORD MAYOR'S COMMUNICATIONS

1.   Petition signed by residents of the Churchview Estate
     requesting the Council's assistance in identifying the
     work necessary to bring the roads of the estate up to
     adoption standard and offering advice on cost and
     repayment methods available.

A representative of the Petitioners addressed the Council.

2.   Petition from parents of children attending Butler J.M.I.
     School requesting the Council to review the cut in the
     Schools community funding.

A representative of the Petitioners addressed the Council.

3.   Petition from residents of the St. Domingo Vale area
     requesting the City Council to implement as a matter of
     urgency the decision of the Legal, Land and
     Transportation Committee of 1st April regarding road
     traffic safety in their area.

4.   Petition signed by residents of the Old Swan area
     regarding places available for local children at St.
     Oswalds Junior School commencing in September, 1992.

A representative of the Petitioners addressed the Council.


                      POLICY AND RESOURCES

The proceedings of the Policy and Resources Committee of the
6th April, 19 92 and the City Challenge Sub-Committee of the
14th April, 1992 requiring the confirmation of the Council
were submitted.


al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z150492
                                                 15th April, 1992
                               - 537 -


Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

By permission of the Council the resolution (Minute 574)
approving the proceedings of the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party was varied to provide that the Council, being
of the opinion that it would be in the interests of, and
would bring direct benefit to their area or any part of it or
all or some of its inhabitants, authorises the City Solicitor
to provide typing, printing and collating facilities to
assist the Hillsborough Family Support Group to make
application to the Attorney General for him to exercise his
fiat and order the High Court to scrutinise the Inquest
proceedings.

         (See Minute Book 35, page A593, Minute 574)


Local Government and Housing Act 1989
Members Allowances

The Chair (Councillor Vicky Roberts) referred to the
resolution of the Policy and Resources Committee authorising
the submission of a recommendation in relation to Members
Allowances and recommended that in respect of the current
financial year, the Scheme of Allowances provide that -

(a) the basic allowance be set at £806;

(b) an attendance allowance of £24 be paid to each Councillor
    in respect of each occasion on which the Councillor
    carries out an approved duty specified in Schedule 2 of
    the current Scheme;

(c) a Special Responsibility Allowance be paid to the members
    holding the offices listed in Appendix "C" of the Chief
    Executives report CE/33/92 at the amounts specified
    therein;

(d) attendance at Seminars and presentations arranged by the
    Chief Executive be classed as an approved duty; and

(e) the allowances be reviewed by the Committee of Selection
    at its next meeting.

Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

         (See Minute Book 35, page A602, Minute 595)

Special Meetings of the Committee

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Policy and
Resources Committee authorising the submission of a
recommendation in relation to special meetings of the
Committee and recommended that, in order that the next stage


al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Zl50492
15th April, 1992
                                - 538 -


of the restructuring process can be taken forward without
undue delay, and bearing in mind that the next ordinary
meeting of the City Council is not likely to take place until
the 1st July, authority be granted for the proceedings of a
meeting of the Restructuring Working Party to be submitted to
the Special Meeting of the Policy and Resources Committee
which is scheduled to be held on 1st May for consideration
under delegated powers.

This item then stood opposed.

         (See Minute Book 35, page A602, Minute 596)

West Derby Wastelands Charity

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Policy and
Resources Committee authorising the submission of a
recommendation in relation to the appointment of a
representative to serve upon the West Derby Wastelands
Charity and recommended that Councillor W. Edwards be
appointed.

Resolved that the recommendation be approved.

         (See Minute Book 35, page A603, Minute 598)

Official Labour Group - Personal
Assistant to the Leader

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Policy and
Resources Committee authorising the submission of a
recommendation in relation to the post of Personal Assistant
to the Leader of the Official Labour Group and recommended
that the Revenue Budget of the Policy and Resources Committee
(Councillors Support Services) be varied by the addition of
£20,400 to provide for recruitment, during the present
financial year, to the post of Personal Assistant to the
Labour Group Leader, Grade S02, and that the Director of
Personnel and Administration make every effort to identify
compensating savings during the course of the year.

This item then stood opposed.

          (See Minute Book 35, page A605, Minute 605)

Local Government Boundary Commission -
Review of the Boundary between
Liverpool and Knowsley

The Chair referred to the resolution of the Policy and
Resources Committee authorising the submission of a
recommendation in relation to the review of the boundary

                                                                ;

al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z150492
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
