                       City of Liverpool     Agenda Item No.




 umwv

REPORT TO.                  Hillsborough Working Party

REPORT NO.                  CMS1 100

DATE:

REPORTING OFFICER: David McElhinney, Executive Director
                   225 2696

CONTACT OFFICER:            David Jones, Council Secretariat
                            225 2568

SUBJECT:                    Hillsborough Conference - 19th
                            October 2000

WARD:                       All




PURPOSE OF REPORT:

To review the conclusions and recommendations of the
Hillsborough Conference held on 19th October 2000 and to
consider a way forward.


RECOMMENDATION:

That the report be noted.




Hillsborough Working Party
INFORMATION:

The Lord Mayor hosted the Hillsborough Conference in the Town
Hall on the 19th October 2000. It was set up to discuss a number
of outstanding issues raised by the Hillsborough Family Support
Group and the Hillsborough Justice Campaign and to agree a way
forward.

Prior to the commencement of the conference the Hillsborough
Justice Campaign indicated that they would not be taking part and
made the following statement -

“Members o f the Hillsborough Justice Campaign will not be taking
part in this conference because we consider the City Council
Hillsborough Working Party has rendered itself useless by
repeatedly ignoring our request to confirm and abide by its original
remit of support for all Hillsborough victims.

The working party has in its last two meetings gone out of its way
to change the remit focus in order to exclude the HJC and its
members from its considerations. In so doing it has distanced
itself from supporting bereaved families and survivors who
continue to pursue legal actions against the perpetrators of the
Hillsborough disaster. Although we originally welcomed the call for
a conference this was immediately undermined by the changed
terms of reference for the working party which we find
unacceptable and contrary to our interests.

At our membership meeting on Monday 16th October it was
democratically decided that it was not in the best interests o f HJC
members or other Hillsborough victims to participate in this
conference. In consequence we ask that you show your support
for our actions by refusing to take part and join us in calling for a
conference based on the original remit of the working party to
support all victims o f the Hillsborough disaster”.

At the beginning of the Conference the Chair of the Hillsborough
Working Party (Councillor Peter Millea) responded to the statement
made by the Hillsborough Justice Campaign and indicated that the
terms of reference of the Working Party had last been amended in
April 1989 and had not changed since that date. He did say that


Hillsborough Working Party        2
its terms of reference had evolved over time to take into account
issues which were no longer relevant.

For the morning session the delegates were split into two
Workshops and the outstanding issues raised by the family groups
were discussed in detail.

During the afternoon session all delegates were given feedback
from the Workshops. A copy of the notes from Workshop 1
(Appendix ‘A’) and Workshop 2 (Appendix ‘B’) are attached to this
report.

The delegates raised the following issues during the afternoon
session -

♦ Freedom of Information Act. This should enable access to
  Police records, altered statements and Video evidence which
  has never been made public.

♦ statement made by Norman Bettison about his role in the
  Hillsborough investigation.

♦ statement made by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith agreeing with the
  Taylor Report which placed the blame on Police control.

♦ lobbying of the Home Secretary, The Rt.Hon Jack Straw M.P.
  and Local M.P.’s to give support to the campaign.

♦ assistance required by the family groups via the City Council’s
  political structure to support the aims of the family groups.

♦ meetings held with other disaster groups which have identified
  similar problems.

♦ the need for the Government to hold a public inquiry in
  accordance with promises previously made.

♦ criticism was levelled at the Hillsborough Justice Campaign for
  boycotting the conference.




Hillsborough Working Party       3
♦ it would be useful for the Family Support Group to obtain a
  transcript of Newsnight Programme about the Hillsborough
  disaster.

At the conclusion of the conference Councillor Peter Millea
thanked everyone who was present and expressed regret that the
families from the Hillsborough Justice Campaign had decided not
to attend. He felt that the purpose of the conference had been
achieved. He said that ideas and thoughts had been aired and a
certain amount of agreement had been reached about the way
forward. He added that the Council had never considered winding
up the Hillsborough Working Party.

The delegates agreed that a meeting of the Hillsborough Working
Party should be held as soon as practicable to discuss the
following issues and recommendations raised through the
Workshops -

1.   Direct pressure should be placed upon the Home Office to
     push for a full Freedom of Information Act which would
     enable Police records to be accessed.

2.   Jack Straw should stand firm in his commitment to the
      Freedom of Information (FOIA) Bill.

3.   It was felt that it is important that the public have some input
      into the development of the FOIA Bill.

4.   The FOIA Bill and the Human Rights Act should tie in/join up
     with each other.

5.   Liverpool City Council could help by advising the families on
     the new legislation that is to be introduced. The City Council
      should take a lead role and press for action.

6.   Push for the release of the TB1 video cassette from South
     Yorkshire Police archive.

7.   Have the master tape (TB1 video cassette) examined by an
     independent expert - possibly even in another country - to
     determine whether or not it has been tampered with.




Hillsborough Working Party       4
8.    Set up a meeting between Jack Straw and representatives
      of the families to discuss how an enquiry can come about
      and how a policy could be established to prevent Police
      officers avoiding disciplinary action by ill-health retirement.

9.    A full investigation be made by the District Auditor into the
      excessive amount of money spent by the defence and
      funded by the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

10.   The City Council should pursue the formation of an
      independent investigating body which would be properly
      accountable in the event of any future disasters.

11.   The Family Support Group would like the City Council to
      request the resignation of the Chief Constable.

12.   It was also agreed that Councillors from other Local
      Authorities, the Association of District Councils and
      Merseyside M.P.’s should be asked to support the campaign
      of the family groups.

Finally, a statement was read out by the Lord Mayor informing the
delegates that Hillsborough documents and records including
statements from South Yorkshire Police Officers and evidence
submitted to the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry would be available for
inspection at the Records Office, 4th Floor, Central Library, William
Brown Street from 25th October 2000.

Access to the information would be restricted to the family
members during the first two weeks following which there would be
open access to members of the public.


FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS:

None at this stage.


TIMESCALE FOR ACTION:

To achieve the conclusions and way forward agreed by the
conference at the earliest opportunity.



Hillsborough Working Party         5
CONSULTATION:

Improvement and Best Value Team.


BEST VALUE:

Not Applicable.


EQUALITY IMPLICATIONS:

The conclusions and recommendations agreed at the conference
will enhance equality issues.


CORPORATE STRATEGY:

Not applicable.


COMMUNITY SAFETY IMPLICATIONS:

The conclusions and recommendations agreed at the conference
will assist with future public safety issues.

BACKGROUND PAPERS:

None.




Hillsborough Working Party    6
                                                 APPENDIX "A"
              Hillsborough Conference

                   Workshop Group 1

                Attendees: Tony O’Neill (facilitator)
                           Stephen O’Brien (notetaker)
                           Sandra Stringer
                           May Corrigan
                           Cllr Jan Clein
                           Cllr Jack Spriggs
                           Cllr Len Tyrer
                           P. Brennan
                           Jenny Hicks
                           J. Traynor
                           J. Sefton
                           Julie Fallon
                           Bryce Morrison
                           Bernie Swift
                           Cllr Kieron Reid


1)   Freedom of Information Act / Human Rights Act /
     Hillsborough Archive

Background:

• Legislation like the Freedom of Information Act and the Human
  Rights Act would have been useful 11 years ago - it was very
  difficult to get access to important information back in 1989.
• South Yorkshire Police hold all archive material - the families
  could not get access
• Limited information was presented at the inquests
• There was no independent monitoring of the archive - some of
  which was altered for the benefit of SYP
• The problem was confounded by the fact that SYP were
  investigated by another police force; West Midlands Police, who
  themselves were criticised for bad practice.



Hillsborough Working Party     7
• If certain information is not freely available, people will suspect
  some ‘hidden agenda’.
• Mr Sefton pointed out that his MP was an advisor to the Home
  Office - a fact he was unaware of when he was dealing with
  him

The wav forward:

• Direct pressure should be placed upon the Home Office to push
  for a full Freedom of Information Act
• The group hoped that Jack Straw would stand firm in his
  commitment to the FOIA bill.
• It was felt that it is important that the public have some input
  into the development of the FOIA bill
• Can the FOIA bill and the HRA tie in with each other?
• Liverpool City Council can help by advising the families on the
  new legislation that is being introduced.


2)    TB1 / Video Evidence / Full Enquiry

TB1

Background:

• This tape is a master tape from the CCTV room at Hillsborough
  and contains much of the relevant footage of the disaster. The
  material on this tape is from the pens where the crushing
  occurred.
• It is one of the two tapes that were allegedly “stolen” from the
  CCTV room.
• The tape has virtually no soundtrack, a number of key scenes
  are blurred, frames with snow indicate that the cassette has
  been edited.
• The SYP’s excuse for the “edited scenes” is that the video
  recorder was knocked into time-lapse mode.
• Other videotapes from the CCTV room are of poor quality.

The wav forward:

• Push for the release of the TB1 video cassette from South
  Yorkshire Police archive.


Hillsborough Working Party        8
• Have the TB1 video cassette examined by an independent
  expert - possibly even in another country - to determine
  whether or not it has been tampered with.

Video Evidence

Background:

• South Yorkshire Police have in their possession video material
  that has not been seen by the families or the general public.
• At the Leeds trial, the defence used video tape evidence that
  was denied to the families in their quest for prosecution
  evidence.
• The families were told that the video evidence they wanted was
  not available or was lost.


The wav forward:

• An explanation from the South Yorkshire Police and the South
  Yorkshire Coroner about the video evidence used at the trials
  and inquests.


Full Enquiry

Background:

• The families approached Jack Straw to ask him to set up a full
  enquiry into the behaviour of the South Yorkshire Police force.
• He told them that he couldn’t do anything about it.
• Jack Straw is the Home Secretary - why can’t he do anything
  about it?
• If he can’t do anything about it, then who can?

The wav forward:

• Set up a meeting between Jack Straw and representatives of
  the families to discuss how an enquiry can come about.




Hillsborough Working Party      9
                                   APPENDIX "B"
HILLSBOROUGH CONFERENCE-19 OCTOBER 2000
TOWN HALL
Facilitator: David Elwand
Notetaker: Suzanne Joyce
Workshop 2

Attendees: Norman Whibley, Trevor Hicks, Bill Pemberton, Ms.
McCadam, Margaret Ellis-Jones, Ray Ellis-Jones, Jim Wakeley
Councillor Frank Ruse, Peter Furmedge, Councillor Jimmy
Gouldbourne, Sheila Spiers, Sid Edwards and Joe Murphy.

Issue 1
“Immediate progress towards a full Freedom of Information Act”.
The group felt that over the years their main problem had been
access to information; e.g. the release of information detailing how
their relatives had died, the missing police notebooks giving police
officer’s account of what happened on the day and the ‘missing’
video tape.
It was agreed that the introduction of a Freedom of Information Act
would assist their cause, however, as the Government is still
reviewing this it was thought that maybe the Human Rights Act
recently brought into force may offer an earlier opportunity to view
the necessary information.
It was felt that this was an important area where Liverpool City
Council could take a lead role in pressing for action.

Issue 2
“Immediate transfer of the Hillsborough Archive from South
Yorkshire Police to the Home Office or a suitable Public Records
Office”.
The group were concerned that the archive was allowed to be held
by South Yorkshire Police; how could it be that the accused could
hold all the records relating to their actions? One group member
commented that it was the equivalent to allowing a prisoner to hold
all the evidence relating to himself and expecting him not to
destroy it!

Issue 3
“Examination of master tape referred to as ’TB1’ by an
independent expert”
With regards to the videotape evidence, the group were denied
access on the grounds that South Yorkshire police hold the


Hillsborough Working Party       10
Copyright. It was hoped that any Freedom of Information Act
would allow the group to have the tape examined by an
independent expert to see if it had been doctored.

Issue 4
“A joint statement by the South Yorkshire Coroner and South
Yorkshire Police explaining the video evidence at the inquest”
The Group felt that the evidence presented at the inquest was
dubious. Firstly they went missing, then they turned up and then
the quality was so bad it could not be used.

Issue 5
“A full public enquiry into the two areas of: editing of crucial
statements and the control of information and the way South
Yorkshire Police Force behaved between 1989 and 1991”
The group has long been calling for a public enquiry into how the
investigation was conducted.
They had been promised by the then shadow Home Secretary that
a full public enquiry would be set up when he got into office.
After more than three years in office he still has not kept his
promise.
The group had concerns relating to the fact that the 3 senior
officers involved held a meeting on 5 May 1989 and after this
produced their statements. According to police procedures if any
officer is involved in an incident then it must be written up in his/her
notebook that day. The notebooks have never been produced.

Concerns were also raised by the fact that it was the police who
were investigating themselves, especially when the Taylor Report’
questioned the conduct of senior police officers involved. Another
point raised was that members of the South Yorkshire Police
Authority might have had a conflict of interest.
The point was raised that some witnesses’ statements and
evidence were ignored by the investigation.
The groups were concerned that the coroner reached a verdict of
accidental death. Lord Justice Taylor concluded that the conduct
of Senior Police Officers involved was questionable, thus reached
a conclusion opposing the coroner’s verdict.
Why did the Taylor Report’ not include the coroner’s inquest?




Hillsborough Working Party         11
Issue 6
“A full investigation by the District Auditor into the excessive
amounts of money spent by the defence and funded by the South
Yorkshire Police Authority”
The point was made that whilst the families had to ‘club together’
to raise the funds in order to pursue their legal action against the
individual officers, their defence was funded by South Yorkshire
Police. The group agreed that there should be a mechanism in
place to ensure that both parties have an equal fund.

Issue 7
“Immediate formation of an independent investigating body which
is properly accountable to cover future disasters”
The whole group agreed that an independent body should be set
up to investigate future disasters. It was thought this could act
swiftly compared to the amount of delays experienced, not only by
Hillsborough but also of other disasters.
It was felt that had problems been identified from earlier matches
at Hillsborough; notably 1981, and acted upon them, maybe the
Hillsborough tragedy would not have happened.
This is where the group seemed to think that the actions of
Sheffield City Council in granting safety certificates, allowing
Hillsborough to host such an event should be more closely looked
at. It was an opinion expressed by a number of members that
Sheffield City Council “got off lightly”.
One of the group, who approached their MP was told that they
could not help as the MP held the position of Junior Minister, so a
conflict of interest would arise within the Home Office. An
independent body would remove this conflict of interest.
It was the group’s view that the Police force should not be asked to
investigate itself in such matters.
The group would like Liverpool City Council to pursue this
point on their behalf, to try and get an independent body set
up.

Issue 8
“Immediate implementation of the Home Secretary’s declared
policy of preventing police officers avoiding discipline by ill-health
retirement”
The group asked for Liverpool City Council to help in getting the
Home Secretary to set up a policy preventing police officers
avoiding discipline by ill-health retirement.



Hillsborough Working Party         12
Issue 9
“The resignation of the Chief Constable of Merseyside Police
Norman Bettison”
Although this item had been removed from the agenda the group
raised this issue of the Chief Constable’s appointment as Chief of
police at Merseyside due to his involvement in the Hillsborough
investigation and his amended statement.
They would like Liverpool City Council to request that the Chief
Constable resign.




Hillsborough Working Party       13
