                                                 FINANCE
                          -            A203 -
                FINANCE AND STRATEGY COMMITTEE

                     18th September, 1989



PRESENT:   Councillor K. Hackett, Chair,
           Councillor A. Jennings, Deputy Chair;
           Councillors F. Anderson, J. Backhouse,
           Vera Best, M. Bolland, Dawn Booth,
           J. Brazier, P. Clark, Flora Clucas,
           Keva Coombes, Rosemary Cooper, J. Doyle,
           Beatrice Fraenkel, Juliet Herzog,
           Sir Trevor Jones, W. Lane, J. Lang,
           Marie MeGiveron, D. McKittrick,
           Lesley Mahmood, K. Noon, K. Ratcliffe,
           E. Roderick, F. Ruse, I. Scott,
           Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer and M. Storey.


Councillors G. Allen, H. Chase, L. Hughes, Vicky Roberts,
Jackie Smith and Geoffrey Smith also attended.



Financial Review of the Authority
(CT/362/89)

The Committee considered a financial review of the Authority
in the light of information contained in Report CT/362/89.


Motion by the Chair, duly seconded,

That -

(1) Report CT/362/89 of the City Treasurer be noted.

(2) The City Estates Surveyor in consultation with the City
    Treasurer, report to the next meeting of the Capital
    Receipts Working Party on a planned programme of
    disposal of the City Council's freehold interest in
    commercial and industrial properties, with a view to
    ensuring the generation of all required capital receipts
    within this financial year.




AABAAA
FINANCE
                             - A204 -

(3) The Council is satisfied that notwithstanding the City
    Treasurer's financial advice given now and at the time
    of the preparation of the budget, it is reasonable to
    capitalise in 1988/89 a further £10 million repairs
    expenditure giving a total level of capitalisation of
    £25 million in 1988/89 having regard to inter alia the
    many considerations itemised in the revenue budget
    resolution for 1989/90. In consequence, the City
    Treasurer be instructed to capitalise in 1988/89 further
    repairs expenditure not exceeding £10 million as would
    be sufficient to eliminate any revenue deficit at 31st
    March, 1990.

(4) The Secretary of State for Environment be asked to make
    a further special allocation to the City in respect of
    the £15 million estimated cost of repurchase of Boot and
    Boswell homes and that he be asked again to receive an
    all Party delegation on this issue; and

(5) Chief Officers be instructed not to permit expenditure
    in excess of previously agreed budget resolutions and
    that each Chief Officer report to the next meeting of
    the Revenue Monitoring and Performance Review
    Sub-Committee on the steps being taken to achieve this
    and offset any overspendings currently anticipated as;aas
    itemised in Annex A to the Financial Review.

Amendment by Councillor P. Clark,
     seconded by Councillor Sir Trevor Jones,

That -
(1) the Motion, save for paragraphs 4 and 5, be not app:
    and that -
    (a) the Treasurer's Report showing a forecast deficit ot
        £5.9 million at this stage of the financial year is
        an indictment of the way in which this Council is
        being run by the Labour Party. After six and a half
        years of Labour control the City Council is lurching
        from one crisis to another. The budget crisis is
        heightened by the Tory Government's underfunding of
        this City;
                                                            -
    (b) it be noted that the year-to-year Council deficit
        has been fundamentally exacerbated by the m a s s i v e
        loans taken out by the Labour Council over the Vact
        six and a half years. In the current financial




AABAAA
                                                FINANCE
                           - A2 0 5 -
         year, the payments of principle and interest to
         money lenders is estimated at £106 million out
         of a net budget of £338 million. Therefore, one
         third of the net budget goes direct to the money
         lenders and does not provide any services to the
         people of Liverpool?

    (c) more than £500,000 of the £5.9 million deficit is
        made up of grant to the Merseyside Trade Union
        Centre which is nothing but a front for the Labour
        Party and the exorbitant cost of the new public
        relation offices?

    (d) an emergency meeting of the Finance and Strategy
        Committee be convened to consider the following and
        to take action to remove the deficit by amongst
        other initiatives -
            (i) methods to increase productivity in the
                Council workforce to provide better services
                for the people of Liverpool?

           (ii) priority for capital expenditure restricted
                to the committed programmes for Highways,
                Social Services and Education Committees,
                Improvement Grants, improvement and repairs
                to existing Council houses and to comply with
                the council's legal obligation to the
                occupiers of "Boot" and "Boswell" Houses?

          (iii) the "sale of the century" widespread asset
                stripping of green area of Liverpool be
                ceased forthwith; and

           (iv) the "in principle" Capital Programme be
                accepted as nothing but an electoral con by
                the Labour Party and that the emergency
                meeting of the Finance and Strategy Committee
                reconsider the proposals in order of priority
                to ensure that some of the schemes are
                facilitiated.

A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                     For the Amendment     9
                     Against it           15

The Amendment was lost.

The Motion was carried (15 Members voting in favour and 9
against) and it was resolved accordingly.

(Note:   Councillor J. Backhouse not voting).



AABAAA
    FINANCE
                                  - A2 0 6 -
235. Money Advice Working Party
    The Committee considered the proceedings of the Money Advice
    Working Party of the 4th and 18th August, 1989 and 8th
    September, 1989.

    Resolved that -

     (a) the contents of Report CS/282/89 in relation to
         overpayments of housing benefit and referred to in
         Minute 18 be noted; and

     (b) the proceedings be approved.


236. New Technology Working Party
     Resolved that the proceedings of the New Technology Working
     Party of the 23rd August and 11th September, 1989, be
     approved.


237. Capital Monitoring Sub-Committee
     The proceedings of the Capital Monitoring Sub-Committee of
     the 10th, 18th and 24th August, 1989 were submitted for the
     information of the Committee.


238. Special Sub-Committee re
     Transport Policies and
     Programme

     The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re: Transport
     Policies and Programme of the 25th August, 1989 were
     submitted for the information of the Committee.


239. Urban Programme Sub-Committee
                                                                        -'.V- -::'V


     The Committee considered the proceedings of the Urban
     Programme Sub-Committee of the 24th August, 1989.

     Resolved that -

     (a) the proceedings be approved; and
                                                                  : ■
                                                                    .

     (b) a meeting of the Sub-Committee be held prior to the n e x t
         meeting of the City Council to consider decisions of t h e
         Community Services and Neighbourhood Development
         Committee in relation to Urban Programme bids and
         authority be granted for the proceedings to be submitted
         direct to the City Council.



     AABAAA
                                                         FINANCE
                                  - A2 07 -


240. Special Sub-Committee re
     Brownlow Hill Entertainment Centre

    The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re: Brownlow
    Hill Entertainment Centre of the 17th August, 1989 were
    submitted for the information of the Committee



241. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

    The Committee considered the proceedings of the Hillsborough
    Disaster Working Party of the 28th June 8th and 11th August
    and 6th and 15th September, 1989.



    With the permission of the Committee, Councillor H. Chase
    addressed the meeting and introduced the interim report of
    the Working Party which had been circulated to members.


    Resolved that -

     (a) Standing Order 89(vii) be suspended and the financial
         implications in Minutes 22 and 42 be approved; and

     (b) the remainder of the proceedings be approved.


242. Contract Control Sub-Committee

    Resolved that the proceedings of the Contract Control
    Sub-Committee of the 8th September, 1989, be approved.


243. Anti-Poverty Sub-Committee

    Resolved that the proceedings of the Anti-Poverty
    Sub-Committee of the 12th September, 1989, be approved.


244. Environmental Services Sub-Committee

    The Committee considered the proceedings of the
    Environmental Services Sub-Committee of the 13th September,
    1989.




    AABAAA
FINANCE
                             - A2 08 -
Resolved that -

(a) Minute 10 be varied by the addition of the words "and
    Assistant Chief Executive" in paragraph (b); and

(b) the proceedings as amended be approved.


Stanley Park Security
Council Motion

The Committee considered the following Motion which appeared
in the name of Councillor Vera Best at the meeting of the
City Council held on 16th August, 1989, viz:-

That in view of the high incidence of vandalism to flower
beds in Stanley Park, which recently cost this City Council
£10,000 to replace and bearing in mind the theft and damage
to private properties in this area, the Finance and Strategy
Committee arrange for the Security Force to patrol this Park
on a 24 hour basis and that the Director of Environmental
Services report upon the further security that can be
provided in other parks across the City.

Resolved that the report already called for in this respect
by the Environmental Services Sub-Committee and referred to
in Minute 4 of that Sub-Committee be submitted for
consideration during the next cycle of meetings.


Land at Kings Drive/James Road
Council Motion

Resolved that the following Motion which appeared in the
name of Councillor Pauline McKibbin at the meeting of the
City Council held on the 16th August, 1989, viz:-

That the Director of Environmental Services take immediate
steps to "landscape" the land on Kings Drive/James Road (at
the entrance to Sainsbury's, Liverpool, 25) which resembles
an overgrown jungle and is a nesting place for rats, bearing
in mind that the land in question is apparently owned by the
City Council,

be referred to the Director of Environmental Services, the
City Solicitor and the Chief Environmental Health Officer
for a report to the Environmental Services Sub-Committee.




AABAAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
