                                                               W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                                               Gity Solicitor, Secretary to the Councii
                                                               P.O. Box No. 88
                                                               Municipal Buildings

LIVERPOOL                                                      Dale Street
                                                               LIVERPO O L L69 2DH

                                                               Telephone:   051-22 7 3911         E x t:
                                                                            0 5 1 - 2 2 5 2 4 3 0 (D irect Line)
                                                               Fax: 0 5 1 - 2 3 6 2047
                                                               DX 14206 LIVERPO OL


                                                               Your ref
                                                               Our ref      F + S /A K C /M M .

       To:        All Members of the                           Date         6th December, 1989
                  Finance and Strategy
                  Committee.




        My dear Sir/Madam,
                  You are requested to attend a meeting of the

        FINANCE AND STRATEGY COMMITTEE to be held at 2.00 P.M.

        °n MONDAY next, the 11TH DECEMBER, 1989 in a Committee

        Room in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street.
                  The agenda for the meeting is enclosed.
                                                    Yours faithfully




                                                    City Solicitor,
                                               Secretary to the Council.



           MEMBERS ARE REMINDED THAT SMOKING IS NOT PERMITTED
                          AT COMMITTEE MEETINGS

        LABOUR GROUP MEETING - 12.3 0 p.m. on Monday, 11th December
                               in the Members Room in the
                               Municipal Annexe.




When calling oi   telephoning please ask for    Mr . Corns .
               F IN A N C E   AND    S T R A TE G Y C O M M IT T E E

                          11TH DECEMBER,, 1989
                                     AGENDA
                                A,    GENERAL

Money Advice Working Party

To consider the proceedings of the Money Advice Working
Party of the 27th October and 10th and 24th November, 1989.

     (A copy of the proceedings accompanies this agenda)

Capital Receipts Working Party

To consider the proceedings of the Capital Receipts .Working
Party of the 23rd November and 4th December,. 1989.

     (A copy of the proceedings accompanies this agenda)

Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

To consider the proceedings of the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party of the 13th November,, 1989.

Capital Monitoring Sub-Committee

Trie proceedings of the Capital Monitoring Sub-Committee of
the 2 0th and 23rd November, 1989 are submitted for the
information of the Committee.

     (A copy of the proceedings accompanies this agenda)

Contract Control Sub-Committee

The proceedings of the Contract Control Sub-Committee of the
13th November, 1989 are submitted for the information of the
Committee.

     (A copy of the proceedings accompanies this agenda)




AAOAAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
       CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




Code: ZYZ
                                 D.   SOCIAL SERVICES
Hillsborough Disaster -                                                          D.l.
Regional Unit
(DSS/323/89)
To consider Minute So of the Social Services                 C o a a a itt.e e
recommending that -

 {i)     the City Council underwrite its proportion of the. cost
         of the Hillsborough Regional Unit, up to a maximaa of
         £12,500 in 1989/90 and £25,000 in 1990/91? and
(ii)     the Director of Social Services be requested to
         continue to seek funding towards the total cost of the
         Regional Unit and report the outcome in due course.

(NOTE:     (a)      consideration of this matter was deferred at
                    the last meeting; and
            (b)      see enclosed report).


Approved Adoption Allowance                                                      D.2
(CT/401/89)

To consider Minute 21 of the Childrens Sub-Committee
recoxronending that, for the purposes of calculating the
payment of Adoption Allowances the following revisions to
the 'thresholds' be approved, viz;-

Family    c o m p o s it x o n        'Threshold'       'Threshold ‘
                                        1988/8S           1989/90

1
X.   Adult,. 1 Child                       96               104
1    Adult, 2 Children                    114               116
2
2
            f
     Adults 1 Child
     Adults, 2 Children
                                          183               220
                                                            232
2
2
            ,
     Adults 3 Children
     Adults, 4 Children
                                          196
                                          205
                                            -t
                                                            240
                                                            245
2    Adults, 5 Children                   215               249
2    Adults, 6 Children                   217               251

                                 (See enclosed report)




AAGAAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
        CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS BARCODE




Code: ZYZ
                                                     Appendix to item No.




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
REGIONAL UNIT.
(DSS/ 323^89).



           Report of the Director of Social Services.

INTRODUCTION.

Following the disaster in Sheffield on 15th April, 1989, various
actions have been taken by the City Council to ensure that the
Liverpool victims have been provided for and a separate report dealing
specifically with Liverpool's response is under consideration. The
Social Services Department has continued to co-ordinate the main aspects
of the response to the disaster in total and we have worked with the
four other Merseyside Authorities; Lancashire, Cheshire, Nottinghamshire
and Sheffield to achieve this co-ordination.

PURPOSE OF THE REPORT.

On 29th April 1989, the Leadership of these seven Councils met to
consider the question of the continuing need for a co-ordinated response
in the longer term and the establishment of an appropriately staffed
unit in order to achieve this aim. The proposal for a Regional Unit
was agreed in principle and officers were requested to prepare a more
detailed scheme and to examine possible sources of finance for such a
unit. On 6th September» 1989 at a further meeting of the Leadership
of the Councils involved it was agreed that the unit be created and run
until March 1991 at least and that the costs be underwritten by the local
authorities involved.

RECOMMENDATION.

that (a)   the City Council underwrite its proportion of the cost of the
           Regional Unit up to a maximum of £12,500 in 1989/90 and
           £25,000 in 1990/91;

     (b)   the Director of Social Services continue to seek funding for
           some or all of the above resources and report on the outcome
           in due course.

BACKGROUND.

On Sunday, 16th April, officers of the Social Services Departments met
and agreed a concerted approach to Hillsborough. Members have seen a
resume of the action taken already. It was recognised that direct
services to survivors and families would be provided within each Authority,
but that certain core services could best be provided across all
Authorities from one Unit and an outline structure was devised for the
establishment of such a Unit.

 The Helpline has continued to provide a 24 hours/day service since
 midday on 16th and some 3,000 people have used this service from all
 over the country. With effect from 3rd October, the staffing of Helpline
 has been taken over by a voluntary organisation based at Walton Hospital.
 A Database (computerised) has been established to ensure that people are
 not either missed from service or experience intrusive visiting. This
 database will also be expanded to keep track of people involved in
 Hillsborough who may be identified from other indirect sources enabling
                        _2~


the service to take on a pro-active mode of operation. Many people
involved live outside the seven Authorities involved and co-ordination
of both information and outreach work across the country is necessary
following the experience of previous disasters.

There is a continuing need for training and staff development to tackle
this sensitive and often intensive work which exists across all of the
Authorities and has been recognised by N.W.A.S.S.A. The interest of the
media has predictably diminished following the first week and it is
necessary to engage in substantial and positive publicity. This latter
activity will be assisted by the production of a Newsletter for people
who are experiencing problems following Hillsborough. There are obviously
major administrative requirements to support the Unit and Liverpool's
other service response.

Approval has already been given to the establishment of a Counselling
Service additional to the aalnstream social work provision. Plans are
finalised for the building of a permanent outreach centre near Anfield
to be run with maximum user involvement.

The services currently provided will be exceedingly difficult to maintain
unless some regional structure is devised which can ensure continuation
of service provision. Staff have been diverted from their substantive
responsibilities and have carried considerably increased workloads. This
demonstrates a high level of personal commitment, but leaves this service,
which is crucial to the services to families and survivors, in a marginal
position. An initial appraisal of the service carried out recently shows
that the uncertainty and lack of substantial co-ordination is leading to
problems and risk of breakdown.

The Leader of the Council acting in accordance with the decisions of
Council on 19th April has authorised the commitment of expenditure to
underwrite these services. The discussions and pursuit of finance will
continue and the problem has been shared and acknowledged by the other
Local Authorities involved. To date there has not been a positive
response from either the E.E.C. or Government. The Government have
indicated that they are prepared to accept an application for assistance
in line with the Bellwin Rules. These rules cover emergency services and
their associated costs, but the usual threshold for Government assistance
 is expenditure by a Local Authority in excess of the exclusive product
of a penny rate - £630,000. However there are a number of other sources
of finance which are being investigated and the Director will report on
these in due course.

The details of staffing and expenses for the establishment of a Regional
Unit are attached to the report at A p p e n d i x /AS. The question of which
Authority should undertake managerial responsibility for the Unit and
the locality in which the Unit would be established are still to be
decided.




 SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE,          CONTACT OFFICER : MR. P. M1RLEY
 18TH~OCTOBER, 1989.                 EXT. 3776.
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
