                                                        3 ! Wfirt 1995
                                                   SOCIAL SERVICES
                              - F379 -

                    SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE

                        31st March, 1993



 PRESENT:   Councillor Ann Keenan, Chairj
            Councillor Petrona Lashley, Deputy Chair;
            Councillors P. Allen, Vera Best, M. Bolland,
            Dawn Booth, Keith Cannon, N. Cardwell, K. Coyne,
            A. Dean, Frank Doran, J. Doyle, Marilyn Fielding,
            Cathy Hancox, Mary Johnston, Elaine Kinahan,
            N. Mills, S. Oldfield, M. Richardson, G. Scott,
            Jacqueline Smith, N. Stanley and Cathy Wilson.



            Councillor A. Jennings.




            Advisory Representatives:

            Mr. R. Currie, Liverpool Personal Services
            Society, Mr. J. Hamilton, Central and Southern
            CHC and Mrs. J. Roberts, Age Concern.




            Councillors G. Knibb, Marie McGiveron, J. Spriggs
            and P. Tyrrell also attended.




 Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors Joan
 Brown and Steve Fitzsimmons, and Rev. Susan Havens
 (Liverpool Trades Council).




* Time of Meeting

 Resolved that the action of the Chair in convening this
 meeting at 3.00 p.m. on 31st March, 1993, instead of at the
 time selected by the City Council, be confirmed.




al/cttee/soc.serv/finalmin/F310393
       SOCIAL SERVICES

          '                         - F380 —
220. Petition; Fairfield Mult Training Centre
        The Committee considered, in accordance with Standing Order
        No. 8, a petition containing 105 signatures, in the
        following terms, viz:-

              "We the members of the Parent Action Group, representing
               parents, students and friends of Fairfield Adult
               Training Centre, Sheil Road, Liverpool, 6, were gravely
               concerned at the recent allegations, publicly made,
               against the Centre, including the latest stigma of
               racism. Because we believe Fairfield management and
               staff to be innocent of such charges and because of the
               damage already done to the good name of the Centre, we
               call upon Liverpool City Council to investigate the
               matter and see that justice is done, that the Manager
               and Deputy return to their work and that order and
               security are restored to one hundred and twenty
               students who are the innocent victims of a veryunjust
               campaign".



         A representative of the petitioners addressed the meeting.



         Resolved that as this matter is currently the subject of
         complex and detailed investigations which are nearing
         completion, the Committee at this stage notes the
         representations made and requests the Director to conclude
         the investigation at the earliest opportunity and to keep
         the petitioners' representatives informed of developments.


221.     Representatives of the Social Services _
         Committee: Proceedings

         Resolved that the proceedings of the Chair, Deputy Chair
         and Opposition Spokespersons of this Committee of 22nd
         February, 1993, be approved.


222 *    Registration, Inspection and Complaints
         Sub-Committee: Proceedings

         Resolved that the proceedings of the Registration,
         Inspection and Complaints Sub-Committee of 12th, 19th and
         26th March, 1993, be approved so far as they require
         confirmation by this Committee.




       al/cttee/soc.serv/finalmin/F310393
                                                           SOCIAL SERVICES
                                    - F3 8 1 -

 223.     Children and Families Sub-Committee;
          Proceedings

          On Motion:

          That the proceedings of the Children and Families Sub­
          committee of 15th March, 1993, be approved so far as they
          require confirmation by this Committee.


          Amendment by Councillor Cathy Wilson,
                     seconded by Councillor S. Oldfield,

          That Minute No. 60 (relating to the Child Support Act 1991
          and the Child Support Agency) be varied to provide that in
          addition, the Committee agrees to place on record its total
          opposition to the Act and to express its support for those
          organisations in the City which are united in opposing the
          provisions of the Act.
          During the course of the debate the Amendment was accepted.



          The Motion, as amended in respect of Minute No. 60, was
          carried and it was resolved accordingly.


?'224,    Community and Health Care Services
          Sub-Committee: Proceedings

          On Motion:

          That the proceedings of the Community and Health Care
          Services Sub-Committee of 16th and 24th March, 1993, be
          approved.



          Amendment by Councillor Cathy Wilson,
                     seconded by Councillor S. Oldfield,

          That Minute No. 33 (relating to the European Year of Older
          People and Solidarity between Generations) be varied to
          provide that in addition, the Committee agrees to place on
          record its total opposition to the proposal of Government
          to apply Value Added Tax to domestic fuel bills and to
          support the campaign against the proposal being waged by
          various organisations in the City.
          During the course of the debate the Amendment was accepted.




         al/cttee/soc.serv/finalmin/F310393
       SOCIAL SERVICES

                                      - F382 -

         The Motion, as amended in respect of Minute No. 33, was
         carried and it was resolved accordingly.


225.     Grants and Contracts Sub-Committee;
         Proceedings

         Resolved that the proceedings of the Grants and Contracts
         Sub-Committee of 17th March, 1993, be approved so far as
         they require confirmation by this Committee.

226. Service Review and Egual Opportunities
         Sub-Committee; Proceedings

         Resolved that the proceedings of the Service Review and
         Equal Opportunities Sub-Committee of 22nd March, 1993, be
         approved.


227.     Early Years Joint Sub-Committee;
         Proceedings
         I'   IM
               U   I   ■   —



         On Motion:

         That the proceedings of the Early Years Joint Sub-Committee
         of 23rd March, 1993, be approved so far as this Committee
         is concerned.




         Amendment by Councillor Cathy Wilson,
                    seconded by Councillor S. Oldfield,

         That Minute No. 30 (relating to the proceedings of the
         Early Year Forum and in particular, Minute No. 129 of the
         Forum dealing with child abuse) be vatied to provide that
         in addition, the Director of Social Services be requested
         to submit a report to the Special Meeting of the Early
         Years Joint Sub-Committee on 15th April 1993 on whether
         there is any substance to a suggestion that the Royal
         Liverpool Children's NHS Trust may have plans to close the
         Unit for Psychological Medicine at Alder Hey because of the
         inability of the Trust to recruit to a vacant post of
         Consultant.

          During the course of the debate the Amendment was accepted.




          The Motion, as amended in respect of Minute No. 30, was
          carried and it was resolved accordingly.



       al/cttee/soc.serv/finalmin/F310393
                                                         SOCIAL SERVICES

                                  - F383 -


228.    Representatives of the Grants and Contracts
        Sub-Committee: Proceedings

        Resolved that the proceedings of the Chair, Deputy Chair
        and Opposition Spokespersons of the Grants and Contracts
        Sub-Committee of 25th March, 1993, be approved.


229.    Representatives of the Social Services
        Committee and the General Purposes Sub-Committee:
        Proceedings

        Resolved that the proceedings of the Chair, Deputy Chair
        and Opposition Spokespersons of this Committee and the
        General Purposes Sub-Committee (of the Housing Committee)
        of 30th March, 1993, be approved.


230.    Proceedings Direct to City Council

        Resolved that authority be granted for the proceedings of -

        (a) the Children and Families Sub-Committee
            (Special Meeting) of 1st April;

        (b) the Early Years Joint Sub-Committee
            (Special Meeting) of 15th April;

        (c) the Grants and Contracts Sub-Committee
            (Special Meeting) of 19th April; and

        (d) any other meetings of Sub-Committees convened for
            reasons of urgency before the date of the next ordinary
            meeting of the City Council,

        to be submitted direct to that meeting for confirmation
        where appropriate.


231.    April/May Cycle of Meetings

        Resolved that bearing in mind the next scheduled date for a
        meeting of the Social Services Committee is 5th May, 1993
        and in order to facilitate a full range of meetings of Sub­
        committees in the April/May Committee cycle, meetings as
        indicated below be convened and where necessary, the
        Officers be empowered to put these arrangements into effect
        in advance of approval by the City Council, viz:-




       al/cttee/soc.serv/finalmin/F310393
   SOCIAL SERVICES
                                     - F384 -

              Sub-Committee              Date                 Time

        (a)    Children and        19th April,   1993   10.00 a.m.
              Families

        (b)    Grants and          22nd April,   1993   10.00 a.m.
              Contracts

        (c)    Registration,       23rd April,   1993   10.30 a.m.
              Inspection and
              Complaints

        (d) Service Review and     26th April, 1993     10.00 a.m.
            Equal Opportunities

        (e)    Community and       28th April, 1993     10.30 a.m.
              Health Care Services


232.    Association of Directors of Social
        Services - Meeting in Liverpool

        Resolved that authority be granted for a meeting of the
        Association of Directors of Social Services to be held in
        Liverpool on Friday, 10th September, 1993, and for any
        incidental expenditure arising to be met from within the
        existing Budget of this Committee.


233.    Council Motion
        Disabled People: Structural Adaptations to Homes
                      -1-   ■       ■■                    —




        The Committee considered a recommendation of the Head of
        Committee and Member Services that, in accordance with
        Standing Order No. 17, the City Council approve an
        extension of the period of time within which a report
        should be submitted on the following Motion which appeared
        in the name of Councillor Paul Clein at the meeting of the
        City Council held on 27th January, 1993, viz:-

              "That the Social Services Committee produce a
               comprehensive report detailing the workings of the
               "system" currently used to provide structural
               adaptations for the disabled such as stair lifts, step
               lifts, bathing facilities etc., with particular
               emphasis on the efficiency or otherwise of this
               "system", details of criteria used in determining,
               granting and processing of applications for such
               facilities and bringing forward suggestions for
               bringing about improvements to the "systems" such that
               a larger number of facilities are installed bearing in
               mind that anything up to 25% of applicants die before
               processing is completed."



       al/cttee/soc.serv/finalmin/F310393
                                                   SOCIAL SERVICES
                            - F385 -
 Resolved that -

  (a) the recommendation be approved, and

  (b) pending receipt by this Committee of the report called
      for and in the light of the decision of the City
      Council to increase the budgetary provision for aids
      and adaptations to £1.4 million, the Director be
      empowered to place orders in respect of minor
      adaptation works with the Maintenance and Building
      Works Department.

 Council Motion
 Short Term Care/Rehabilitation Centres

 Resolved that, in accordance with Standing Order No. 17,
 the City Council approve an extension of the period of time
 within which a report should be submitted on the following
 Motion which appeared in the name of Councillor Elaine
 Kinahan at the meeting of the City Council held on 27th
 January, 1993, viz:-

     "That, in the light of community care legislation which
      moves the emphasis, philosophically and practically,
      away from local authority provided residential care for
      elderly people, and as part of the consequential
      rationalisation of residential accommodation, Short
      Term Care/Rehabilitation Centres be created, where
      respite care, full and residential assessments, and
      intensive rehabilitation training and therapy could
      take place."


 Social Services Committee Meetings:
 Venue: Access for Disabled People
 (DRES/9 5/9 3)

 The Committee considered a recommendation of the Head of
 Estates that -

  (a) the Head of Estates, in his report to the Planning,
      Land and Transportation Committee on access for the
      disabled to City Centre Administration Buildings, be
      requested to draw attention to the wishes of this
      Committee that high priority be given to making
      budgetary provision available to enable detailed design
      work to be commissioned to make the Municipal Annexe
      accessible to disabled people?

  (b) until such time as the Municipal Annexe is made
      suitable, meetings of this Committee be held in the
      Town Hall following completion of the refurbishment
      works currently taking place (anticipated completion
      date being Summer 1994); and


al/cttee/soc.serv/finalmin/F310393
       SOCIAL SERVICES

                                   - F386 -


         (c) until Summer 1994, consideration be given to the other
             venues within the City Centre identified in the
             Appendix to Report DRES/95/93.

         Resolved that -

         (a) paragraphs (a) and (b) of the recommendation of the
             Head of Estates be approved and pending the
             availability of suitably refurbished and accessible
             accommodation in the Municipal Annexe, every endeavour
             be made to make the Committee Room in the Town Hall
             available for meetings of this Committee in advance of
             the current anticipated date for the completion of the
             total refurbishment of the Town Hall;

         (b) in view of the problems associated with temporary moves
             to any of the other buildings identified in the report
             submitted and pending the availability of accommodation
             in the Town Hall, meetings of this Committee continue
             to be held in the present venue of the Municipal
             Annexe;

         (c) this Committee again apologies to those who are
             disadvantaged by the lack of accessible and suitable
             accommodation but it be noted that this unsatisfactory
             situation is now being addressed; and

         (d) the Head of Committee and Member Services be requested
             to forward a copy of this resolution and the
             accompanying report to the Liverpool Association of
             Disabled People and the organisation be requested to
             disseminate the information to relevant groups and
             individuals.


236.     Hillsborough Disaster Advice Centre

         The Committee considered, at the request (Minute No. 7) of
         the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party of 25th February,


         (a) a copy of a statement issued by a meeting of bereaved
             families, survivors and other users of the Hillsborough
             Disaster Advice Centre held on 17th February, 1993,
             expressing concern regarding proposals being considered
             by the City Council which question the future use and
             role of the Centre; and

         (b) a recommendation of the Working Party that all methods
             possible be examined to ensure that the Hillsborough
             Centre and the services provided at the Centre, are
             retained.



       al/cttee/soc.serv/finalmin/F310393
                                                   SOCIAL SERVICES
                           - F387 -

 Motion by the Chair, duly seconded,

 That in the light of the decision of the City Council at
 its Budget Meeting held on 3rd March 1993 to retain the
 Hillsborough Centre and to continue to provide a service to
 victims of the Hillsborough disaster, the representations
 made be noted.



 During the course of the debate it was agreed that the
 Motion be approved subject to the Director of Social
 Services informing the Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition
 Spokespersons of this Committee before the City Council on
 21st April 1993 of -

 (a) the number of posts on the establishment of the
     Hillsborough Centre prior to the Budget resolution to
     reduce the revenue funding of the Centre by 8150,000 in
     1993/94;

 (b) the number of posts which are to be transferred/
     deleted; and

 (c) the anticipated effect of the reduction in funding on
     services provided at the Centre.


 Northern Race Relations Advisers' Group: Conference

 Resolved that the Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons
 of this Committee (or their nominees) be appointed to
 attend a conference being organised by the Northern Race
 Relations Advisers' Group on the 1991 Census and Ethnic
 Monitoring, to be held in Manchester on 22nd April, 1993.


 Joseph Gibbons Centre, Lark Lane

 Motion by Councillor Marilyn Fielding,
            seconded by Councillor Cathy Hancox,

 That this Committee, being mindful and concerned at the on­
 going serious problems of vandalism and break-ins at the
 Joseph Gibbons Centre in Lark Lane and the fact that these
 problems are restricted to that part of the building
 occupied by Social Services and not to that part occupied
 by the Health Authority (reflecting the fact that security
 measures have been installed by the Health Authority in its
 portion of the building), the Director of Social Services
 be requested, following consultation with the Community
 Police Officer based in Lark Lane, to arrange for an alarm
 system and anti-vandal measures (including anti-vandal
 paint on the roof to deter skate-borders) to be provided as
 a matter of urgency, to complement the action already taken
 by the Health Authority.


al/cttee/soc.serv/finalmin/F310393
       SOCIAL SERVICES
                                      - P388 -


        Amendment by the Chair, duly seconded,

         That the Director of Social Services be requested to
         examine the proposal and report, with costings, to the
         appropriate Sub-Committee.

         During the course of the debate the Amendment was accepted.
         And on being put as the Substantive Motion and carried, it
         was resolved accordingly.


239.     Criminal Justice Act 1991:
         Revenue Options
         (DSS/119/93)

         The Committee considered a recommendation of the Director
         of Social Services that the detailed proposals contained in
         Report DSS/119/93 in relation to revenue provision for the
         implementation of the Criminal Justice Act 1991, be
         approved in principle.

         Resolved that the recommendation be approved and the
         Director be requested to report further on the detailed
         implementation of the various proposals identified in the
         Report.


240.     Warner Inquiry into the Selection, Development and
         Management of Staff in Children's Homes
         (DSS/116/93)

         The Committee considered a recommendation of the Director
         of Social Services that, subject to the approval of the
         Personnel Committee -

         (a) the detailed information provided'in Report DSS/116/93
             concerning the recommendations of the Warner Inquiry
             into the selection, development and management of staff
             in children's homes, be noted; and

         (b) the proposed action in response to the recommendations
             outlined in the Appendix to the Report, be approved.

         Resolved that -

         (a) the recommendation be approved and the Director be
             authorised to submit the report to the Department of
             Health as the Council's initial response to the Warner
             Report; and




       al/cttee/soc.serv/finalmin/F310393
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
