                                                                                        W.     1. Murray,     LL.B.
                                                                                        City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                                                        P.O.    Box    No.    88
                                                                                        Municipal      Buildings

                    LIVERPOOL                                                           Dale Street
                                                                                        L IV E R P O O L     L 69 2D H

                                                                                        Telephone:      05 1 -2 2 5 3911        Ext:
                                                                                                        0 5 1 —2 2 5 - 2 4 3 Q D i r e c t   Line)
                                                                                        Fax: 0 5 1 - 2 3 6    2047
                                                                                        DX     14206    L IV E R P O O L


                                                                                        Your ref

                                                                                        Our ref P & F /A K C / L T N
!                                                                                       Date          2nd October, 1989

                  TO:     All members of the
.                         Hillsborough Disaster
                          Sub-Committee.




                  Dear Sir/Madam,

                  You are requested to attend a meeting of the HILLSBOROUGH

                  DISASTER SUB-COMMITTEE to be held at 2.30 P.M. on FRIDAY,
       a
                  n ext, the 6TH OCTOBER, 1989 in a Committee Room in the Municipal

                  Annexe, Dale Street.
             .V

                  The agenda for the meeting is enclosed.

                  Yours faithfully,




                  City Solicitor,
     #/■          Secretary to the Council




    T -.:\
    i.




                  When   calling   of   telephoning   please   ask   fo r   Mr. Corns
            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER SUB-COMMITTEE

                     6TH OCTOBER, 1989

                          AGENDA



THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER AND                     1.
THE WORK OF THE PROMOTION AND
NEWS UNIT
(CS/210/89)

RECOMMENDATION


That - '

(a)   the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Shop be closed with
      effect from the 6th October, 1989 and its future
      use be determined; and

(b)   report CT/210/89 of the City Solicitor be circulated
      to all members of the City Council and all Chief
      Officers for information.


                   (See enclosed report)
THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER AND THE
WORK OF THE PROMOTION AND NEWS UNIT



                Report of the City Solicitor

INTRODUCTION:

     The tragic events at Hillsborough on April 15th, 1989
will be etched forever on the minds of the thousands of
people around the world.

     This report details the intense involvement by all
members of Promotion and News Unit staff from the moment the
disaster started to unfold until the present time when the
appeal is beginning to wind down with more than £10 million
in the disaster fund.

     The PNU learned much from others including authorities
in Bradford who had to cope with the aftermath of the
Bradford F.C. Fire.

     The detail in this report is also intended to assist
those who may also have to deal with a similar large-scale
tragedy in future.

OUTLINE

      Just 12 weeks after the new influx of staff was
beginning to work in the Unit and as fresh working practices
were beginning to develop, the tragedy became the top
priority almost to the total exclusion of all other Council
work.

     The U n i t 's immediate tasks - within a couple of hours
of the tragedy - were to respond to intense pressure from
the media who wanted as much information as possible and to
aid the Council's Social Services Department which needed
specific advice on handling the press.

     These aspects will be covered in greater detail later
in the report.

     It was immediately recognised that as Merseyside's
largest employer, the City Council would have a major role
to play in all aspects of the tragedy and the subsequent
appeal.

     As a result, every section of the Unit was quickly
given areas of responsibility.




EDIAAQ
     For some people, that meant ringing round businesses
asking for free services including printing, posting and
delivery of appeal literature.

     For others, there were long sessions of sending out
leaflets and posters to companies and individuals in a bid
to get fund-raising moving.

     Free advertising worth £50,000 in local and national
newspapers was secured within a few days, encouraging people
to contribute generously to the appeal.

     To cater for the longer-term response to the tragedy, a
Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Sub-Committee comprising the
Council Leader and Deputy Leader and their Opposition
counterparts was established.

     An outline plan of co-ordinated action was formulated
and agreed along with a contingency fund for special
appeal-related expenditure.  The Assistant Chief Public
Relations Officer was given responsibility for managing the
budget and was appointed Hillsborough Disaster Appeal
Co-ordinator.

     Officers also liaised with those who were later to
become involved with the administration of the appeal fund
itself - a function kept separate from Liverpool Council.

     And the PNU had close contact with Liverpool Football
Club which was experiencing similar problems with intense
press interest plus a flood of letters and phone calls from
individuals, organisations and businesses.  Every member of
staff in the Promotion and News Unit was heavily involved in
Hillsborough work.

     "Virtually every radio and T.V. broadcast on the event
was moniotored with daily bulletins compiled on coverage.
Copious newspaper cuttings were collected and filed.

     A system was quickly developed where various staff
members looked after fund raising in their various areas of
interest.

     Businesses kindly volunteered large donations.  The
Police, Fire Brigade and Ambulance services were encouraged
to be involved in many enterprising events to keep the money
coming in.

     Trade Unions were contacted for assistance and members
of community groups played their part too.  The amount of
goodwill was phenomenal.




EDIAAQ
     Within two or three weeks, Unit staff were meeting all
sorts of fund-raising groups all over the country,
collecting cheques and spreading the message.

     When the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Shop was
initially set up, officers decided against basing staff
full-time on the shop premises.  Instead, they would work
from the Unit so that established working practices could be
followed and staff would be called down to the shop as and
when necessary.

     As the weeks went by, a major development was the
implementation of a computerised system for dealing with
countless requests for assistance with fund-raising and the
collection of donations.

     It was agreed that the Unit should make every effort to
encourage fund-raising without becoming too involved in
individual efforts.  Staff were also available to go
anywhere in the country to collect donations where required.

DETAIL

Press

     The attention of the media was the immediate pressure
brought to bear on Unit staff members shortly after the
disaster began to unfold.

     Press Office staff were involved that evening in making
arrangements which included escorting the Chairman of the
Council to Sheffield the following day, attendance at the
Catholic Requiem Mass and the staffing of telephones both at
the Press Office and at officers' homes.

     Press Officers reported for work on the Sunday - the
day following the disaster - and spent long hours over the
next three weeks dealing with a constant stream of questions
and arranging countless interviews with politicians and
officers.

     A separate press office run by PNU staff was set up
within the Social Services Department.

     Daily press conferences were arranged by the team
working at Hatton Garden.  Each morning, camera crews, radio
and newspaper reporters packed the Unit's conference room to
hear Social Services Director, David Mason, relate the
latest developments.

     Other events which fuelled media interest included the
flowers on the Mersey ceremony and the memorial services.




EDIAAQ
       Although the intense pressure on the Press Office eased
after the first two or three weeks, there has continued to
be a heavy demand for information and interviews on
developments associated with the tragedy including the
Taylor Inquiry and the Council's own Hillsborough Working
P art y.

     Other issues which demanded a quick response included
the outburst by Jacques Georges, the President of UEFA, who
referred to the Liverpool fans at Hillsborough as
"hooligans", the Heysel judgement and the visit to Liverpool
of National Opposition Leader, Mr. Neil Kinnock.

The Appeal Shop

     The Appeal Shop was established by the Special
Sub-committee referred to earlier in the report. Approval
was given to use premises in Whitechapel and Council workers
burnt the midnight oil, in their own time, to convert former
newsagent's premises into an attractive shop.

     In yet another gesture of goodwill, local businesses
helped equip the shop providing free of charge, carpets,
furniture, telephones and even nails and screws.

     It was decided that the shop would be open six days a
week and would be staffed on a voluntary basis by Council
workers from various departments.

     The shop was opened on Friday, April 28th, by the
Council Leader and the Leader of the Opposition with guests
from Anfield including Liverpool F.C. Chairman, John Smith
and ex-player Steve Heighway.

     It was stocked with 'T' shirts, scarves, caps and books
bought at cost.  Donated gifts were also for sale.

     The premises were immediately swamped with people
wishing to buy the goods and seeking advice on their own
fund raising efforts.

     The walls were covered with messages from all over the
world and people were encouraged to hand-over their appeal
cheques in the shop where their efforts were recorded and a
gallery of photographs and presentation cheques
established.

   . Members of the media from throughout Britain and the
world dropped into the shop.

     Celebrities came to accept cheques on behalf of the
Appeal and the Chairman of the Council also became a regular
visitor to receive countless donations and to welcome fund



EDIAAQ
raisers from all over Britain.

     Shop staff handed out sponsor forms by the score plus
buckets, badges and other regalia to help smooth the
fund-raising path. And they also greeted fund raisers with
a difference including two men from the Is^ltiof Man who
pushed a concrete mixer around Douglas and the World's
Champion Backwards Runner, Yves Pol, who took to a treadmill
in Lord Street to raise money by covering 95 miles over two
days.

     The position of the shop on a principal bus route and
opposite the City's main Post Office served as a constant
reminder of Hillsborough and enabled many people to "do
their bit".

     Five months later, cash and cheques totalling thousands
of pounds were still flooding in.

     A Press Officer was assigned to produce all press
releases relating to fund-raising activities and to help
groups achieve as much publicity - and thereby cash - as
possible.

     A great deal of press coverage was secured in this way.

     Since the shop opened, more than £1,120,000 has been
received with £17,500 spent on stock to date.

GENERAL

     Unit staff ensured the fund raising bandwagon started
rolling at the very beginning.

     Immediately, they began ringing round local and
national printing firms asking for assistance in printing
posters, leaflets and stickers to help get the message
across that the appeal fund was up and running.

     The response to their requests was tremendous with many
firms, especially local companies' offering their services
free of charge and saying they were grateful to be involved.

     Their actions resulted in the printing of 325,000
leaflets, stickers and posters.  Staff also arranged for
5,000 buses across the region to spread the fund raising
message sporting huge posters and for 850 advertising
hoardings in Liverpool, Sheffield Nottingham and Newcastle
to advertise appeal addresses and account numbers.

     Sacks full of mail were sent out to companies and
organisations asking them to distribute posters and leaflets
to their workforces and members.  Unit staff worked long



EDIAAQ
hours - and at weekends - to make sure the information was
sefil'out as quickly as possible. Royal Mail agreed to foot
the bill for postage.

     After the initial activity immediately following the
tragedy, publications staff began receiving poems from the
general public expressing their grief at the horrific events
at Hillsborough.

     Poems were also being sent to other organisations in
the City and it was agreed, in a joint effort by Liverpool
University Resource Unit, WALL (Writing Activities in
Liverpool Libraries), MAWW (Merseyside Association of
Writers' Workshops) and Fringe (Centre for Arts
Development), to publish a book entitled "Words of Tribute".

     Due to a large demand for the book, the first print-run
of 1,500 copies was not enough and the Unit's publications
section was approached to finance a second run of 10,000
copies, at a cost of £5,500, on the understanding that the
outlay would be recouped through sales of the book with any
extra cash going to the appeal.

     Unit staff assisted at the launch of the book at the
Town Hall in July when the Chairman met the authors of the
95 poems which had been selected for publication out of more
than 900 submitted.

     Unit staff were instrumental in organising many large
scale events, in the wake of the disaster.

     (a)   Flowers on the Mersey - The emotional ceremoney
           which saw floral tributes cast on the River Mersey
           by local schoolchildren.

     (b)   One-Minute Silence - The Police, Stores Committee
           and local taxi drivers were approached by Unit
           staff asking them to observe the minute's silence
           which was conducted exactly a week after the
           disaster at Hillsborough.

           The result was that the City Centre ground to a
           halt at exactly 3.06 p.m. when people stood in
           silence to remember the 95 victims at
           Hillsborough.

     (c)   Big Beat '89 - A consortium of Liverpool promoters
           put their heads together and came up with the idea
           of holding a two-week music festival in the City.

           A Unit member of staff worked almost full-time
           with the consortium using his knowledge and
           experience in the local music scene to full



EDIAAQ
           advantage and as a result a highly successful
           music festival was born.

           Many bands shared centre stage with big names like
           Icicle Works, Black, Fairgound Attraction, and
           Julian Cope and £15,000 was raised for the appeal.

           Altogether 9,000 people, among them performers,
           stage crew, lighting and sound specialists, put
           time and effort into the event which was held at
           various venues across the City including the Royal
           Court, Liverpool University and Polytechnic and
           the Trade Union and Unemployed Resource Centre.

           Eight thousand people watched the bands over the
           two week period and it is now hoped that the
           festival may become an annual event.

     (d)   Birdie Bonanza - A pro-celebrity golf tournament
           featuring Liverpool Manager, Kenny Dalglish and
           various Anfield stars played in Birdie Bonanza at
           Southport's Hillside Golf Club in July.

           They were joined by Ryder Cup player, Ian Woosnam
           and the event was sponsored by The Levitt Group, a
           major financial organisation which has recently
           opened offices in Liverpool.  The tournament was
           again organised by Unit staff in conjunction with
           Britains's "Putting Doctor" Harold Swash.

     (e)   Sporting Celebrity Dinner - Again sponsored by the
           Levitt Group, the dinner served as a Civic Tribute
           to Liverpool Football Club.

           The Council presented a plaque to Liverpool F.C.
           in recognition of the role the Club played in the
           months following the tragedy.

           The dinner took two months to organise and
           involved a great deal of public relations work.

           Among guests at the dinner were athlete, Sebastian
           Coe and ex-Anfield star, Ian St.John.

The Anfield Connection

     Like the Council, Liverpool Football Club was under
great pressure from the media and the public.

     Council officers decided to offer the Club as much
practical help as possible and this resulted in a very close
working relationship with Liverpool F.C.  in the weeks
following the disaster.



EDIAAQ
     A Unit staff member acted as a link between the Club
and Council, visiting Anfield on a daily basis at first,
relieving the administrative burden by taking all matters
concerning the appeal fund - and sympathy letters - off the
hands of Club staff.

     Since April, Promotion and News staff have dealt with
tens of thousands of letters of condolence, donations and
letters offering practical help.

     The vast majority were received at Anfield, but PNU
staff were able to reply to them and answer queries.

     Liverpool F.C. players and their partners played a key
role in consoling the bereaved who filed into Anfield after
the tragedy.

     PNU staff acted as a link between the Club and the
Council's Social Services Department who in turn advised the
players and their partners on how to cope with such
tremendous emotional pressure.

     The practical assistance offered by Unit staff was
mirrored by the Club who made players and officials
available for presentations and fund-raising events wherever
possible.

     The Club also helped swell appeal coffers by providing
items such as signed 'T' shirts and footballs.

     The Unit is still working very closely with Anfield and
expects to do so for some time with a staff member visiting
the Club twice a week on average.

CONCLUSION

     The tremendous amount of work undertaken by Promotion
and News staff over the last five months proved to be a
baptism of fire for the fledgeling Unit.

     Hillsborough has dominated the work of many members of
staff in the Promotion and News Unit and other planned work
has had to be sacrificed.  The effect of Hillsborough on
normal workloads continues to be felt.

     Recommendation -

     (a)     That the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Shop should
             close with effect from Friday, October 6th, and
             its future use be determined.




EDIAAQ
     (b)   That this report be circulated to all Members of
           the City Council and all Chief Officers, for
           information.




EDIAAQ
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
