                                                      FINANCE
                           115
                FINANCE AND STRATEGY COMMITTEE

                       10th September, 1990



PRESENT:   Councillor Vicky Roberts, Chair;
           Councillor I. Scott, Deputy Chair;
           Councillors F. Anderson, G. Ben-Tovim, Dawn Booth,
           J. Brazier, P. Clark, E. Clein, Flora Clucas,
           Rosemary Cooper, A. Dean, A. Jennings,
           Lady Doreen Jones, Sir Trevor Jones,
           J. Livingstone, Marie McGiveron, Sarah Norman,
           K. Ratcliffe, H. Rimmer and M.J. Storey.



           Councillors G. Allen, D. Bermingham, M. Bolland,
           Joan Brown, N. Chinn, M.B.E., A. Concepcion,
           J. Doyle, B. Fitzsimons, Beatrice Fraenkel,
           K. Hackett, Ann Keenan, G. Knibb, Lesley Mahmood,
           Linda O'Sullivan, S. Oldfield, F. Ruse,
           Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer, Jacqueline Smith,
           L. Tyrer F. Vaudrey and Catherine Wilson also
           attended.




Financial Review of the Authority
(CT/168/90)

The Committee considered a financial review of the Authority
as detailed in Report CT/168/90.



With the permission of the Committee Councillors
Lesley Mahmood and F. Ruse addressed the meeting on this
item.


Motion by the Chair,
 duly seconded

That -

(a)   capital payments already authorised by the City Council
      to be deferred into 1991/92 and the interest thereon be
      treated as capital expenditure;

(b)   a Working Group of Officers be established to examine
      options available to the Council and its workforce to



ACAAAA
FINANCE
                              , ,   16

      guarantee a high standard of service to the City while
      protecting the interests of those presently employed in
      the Ground Maintenance D.S.O.;

(c)   the Working Group to be convened by the Director of
      Environmental Services and comprise the City Treasurer,
      City Solicitor, Director of Personnel and Management
      Services and Assistant Chief Executive and report its
      findings to the Financial Control Sub-Committee, in due
      course;

(d)   all Chief Officers be reminded of the need to achieve
      the savings already called for in their departmental
      budget; and

(e)   in respect of the references in the Financial Review
      regarding Poll Tax payments, the City Council
      reiterates its opposition to the introduction of the
      Poll Tax by an uncaring Tory Government.  It recognises
      the potential hardship to many Liverpool residents as a
      result of its introduction and that it is a costly,
      inefficient, and inequitable means of financing local
      services. It recognises also that the current payment
      levels are a reflection of this and the chaotic
      circumstances - affecting all local authorities - in
      which the tax was introduced, rather than the
      activities of organisations - like the Anti Poll Tax
      Federation - which are encouraging non-payment.

      Nevertheless the City Council accepts its
      responsibility to pursue outstanding payments of the
      Poll Tax in order that it may continue providing
      essential services to the people of Liverpool.   In this
      connection it deplores the actions of Nalgo within the
      Information Technology Department and City Treasury in
      its callous attempts to frustrate the City Council in
      the fulfillment of its duty to provide services in this
      city.

Amendment by Councillor P. Clark,
 seconded by Councillor M.J. Storey,

That the Financial Review reveals a lack of urgency and
competence on behalf of the Labour Administration and its
Chief Officers leading the City Council to drift towards an
unlawful deficit. Despite previous initiatives from the
Liberal Democrat Opposition, suggesting co-operation and
partnership in order to solve this problem having been
defeated, this Committee agrees to ensure that an unlawful
deficit does not occur by:-




ACAAAA
                                                          FINANCE


                                117
    (a)   approving recommendations 1 and 2 in Report CT/168/90;
          and

    (b)   establishing a Budget Crisis Sub-Committee comprising
          the Leader of the Council, the Chair of the Finance and
          Strategy Committee and the Leader and Deputy Leader of
          the Opposition to receive the appropriate Officers
          report on recommendations 3, 4 and 5 in Report
          CT/168/90 and the implications of the contents of that
          report and report to the City Council meeting on 19th
          September with recommendations to comply with the
          Councillors legal responsibilities.

    A vote was taken when there appeared -

                        For the Amendment - 7
                        Against it        - 11

    The Amendment was lost. The Motion was carried and it was
    resolved accordingly (11 Members voting in favour and 7
    against).


218. Sub-Committee Re: Local Government and Housing Act

    The proceedings of the Sub-Committee re: Local Government
    and Housing Act of 26th July, 1990 were submitted for the
    information of the Committee.



    The Chair advised Members that as the anticipated
    introduction of the new allowances had now been postponed
    no action will be taken to implement these decisions.




219. Private Sector Development Sub-Committee

    The proceedings of the Private Sector Development
    Sub-Committee of 27th July, 1990 were submitted for the
    information of the Committee.


220. Financial Control Sub-Committee

    The proceedings of the Financial Control Sub-Committee of
    27th July, 1990 were submitted for the information of the
    Committee.




    ACAAAA
    FINANCE
                                  11.8

221. Capital Receipts Working Party
    Resolved that the proceedings of the Capital Receipts
    Working Party of 10th August, 1990, be approved.


222. Client Services Sub-Committee
     Resolved that the proceedings of the Client Services
     Sub-Committee of 21st August, 1990, be approved.


223. Special Sub-Committee - Upper Parliament Street/
     Falkner Estate
     Resolved that the proceedings of the Special Sub—Committee —
     Upper Parliament Street/Falkner Estate of 4th, 5th and 6th
     September, 1990, be approved.


224. Hillsborough Working Party

     The Committee considered -
     (a)   proceedings of the Hillsborough Working Party of 31st
           August, 1990; and
     (b)   whether the Working Party should be reappointed.

     Resolved that consideration of both these matters be
     deferred and the Chair be authorised to submit a
     recommendation direct to the City Council in this respect,
     such recommendation also to take account of the continuance
     of the Working Party on Ground Safety.


225. Corporate Policy and Performance
     Review Sub-Committee
     Resolved that the proceedings of the Corporate Policy and
     Performance Review Sub-Committee of 30th August, 1990, be
     approved.
      (Note:   Councillor P. Clark declared and interest in
               respect of Minute 13 of the Sub-Committee took no
               part in its consideration and did not vote).




      ACAAAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
