                                         19th April,   1989
                           - 513 -

                           PRESENT

                        THE CHAIRMAN
                 (Councillor Dorothy Gavin)


COUNCILLORS: Allen, Anderson, Ben-Tovim, Bermingham,
Vera Best, Bolland, Dawn Booth, Gary Booth, Brady, Brazier,
Sybil Brookes, Bullock, Burke, Clark, Clein, Flora Clucas,
Coombes, Rosemary Cooper, Coventry, Cunningham, Curry,
Davison, Dean, Doran, Doyle, Elizabeth Drysdale, Edwards,
Feintuck, Hannah Folan, Beatrice Fraenkel, Hackett, Cathy
Hancox, Herrity, Juliet Herzog, Philip Hughes, Hutchinson,
Mary Johnston, Roger Johnston, Lady Doreen Jones, Sir Trevor
Jones, Kendrick, Elaine Kinahan, Knibb, Lafferty, Lane,
Lang, Livingstone, Marie McGiveron, McKittrick, McManus,
Lesley Mahmood, Millea, Morgan, Judith Nelson, Noon,
O'Donoghue, Linda O'Sullivan, Robert Owen, William Owen,
Radford, Ratcliffe, Rixnmer, Bill Roberts, Vicky Roberts,
Richard Roberts, Francis Roderick, Ruse, Ian Scott, Gerard
Scott, Sylvia Sharpey Schafer, Geoffrey Smith, Trevor Smith,
Storey, Tyrer, Vaudrey.



Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors
H. Chase, N.G. Chinn, M.B.E. S. Fitzsimmons, L. Hughes,
John Jones, Frances Kidd, S. Ledwich, R. Quinn,
E. Roderick, Jacqueline Smith and I. Templeman.




                       COUNCIL MINUTES

The Minutes of the Special Meeting of the City Council held
on 22nd March, 1989 were submitted and signed by the
C ha i r m a n .




                  TELEVISING OF PROCEEDINGS

Resolved that authority be granted for the BBC and I.T.N. to
televise the proceedings of the meeting.




CCAACE
19th April, 1989
                              - 514 -

Hillsborough Disaster

Motion by Councillor K. Coombes
     seconded by Councillor P.  Clark and resolved -

T h a t :-

(1) Liverpool City Council sends its heartfelt condolences
    to all the families and friends of those tragically
    killed and injured at Hillsborough.  We pledge to do
    everything in our power to help and assist the bereaved
    and their families and the whole City and County in this
    hour of desperate need.

      Liverpool City Council recognises that the City and the
      nation is stunned and shocked by this tragedy and that
      now is a time for personal grief - into which the City
      Council does not in any way wish to intrude.

      However, this City Council will ensure that every
      facility is afforded to those people who have evidence
      to present to the inquiry in an effort to ensure that
      the full story surrounding those tragic events is told.
      To this end, a Working Party of Councillors of all
      parties will be set up to oversee events, to ensure that
      there is no cover up and to report back to the Council
      as appropriate.

(2) This City Council extends its heartfelt thanks to those
    supporters who acted so heroically at the ground, and
    also, those people of Sheffield and other places who
    responded in such a positive fashion to people in need.


Adjournment of Meeting

Motion by Councillor K. Coombes
     Seconded by Councillor P. Clark and resolved -

That this Meeting stand adjourned to a date to be arranged
by the Chairman.



The Council then adjourned.




CCAACE
