                                                        POLICY
                              -   2 0 i?   -


               POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                     13th January, 1992



PRESENT: Councillor H. Rimmer, Deputy Chair, in the Chair;
         Councillors J. Backhouse, G. Ben-Tovim, Dawn Booth,
         J. Brazier, N. Cardwell, P. Clark, Flora Clucas,
         Rosemary Cooper, A. Dean, W. Edwards, Cathy Hancox,
         Susan Hogan, A. Jennings, R. Johnston, Lady Doreen
         Jones, A. Keenan, Frances Kidd, G. Knibb, Lesley
         Mahmood, M. McCauley, Marie McGiveron, Sarah
         Norman, W. Owen, I. Scott, M. Storey and Cathy
         Wilson.


         Councillors Vera Best, M. Bolland, H. Chase,
         L. Hughes and F. Ruse also attended.



         An apology for absence was submitted from the Chair
         (Councillor Vicky Roberts).




Restructuring Working Party

Resolved that the proceedings of the Restructuring Working
Party of the 10th January, 1992, be approved.


Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

Resolved that the proceedings of the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party of the 30th December, 1991, be approved.


Special Sub-Committee
Stanley Industrial Estate

The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee re: Stanley
Industrial Estate of the 5th December, 1991 were submitted
for the information of the Committee.


Private Sector Development Sub-Committee

The proceedings of the Private Sector Development
Sub-Committee of the 2 3rd December, 1991 were submitted for
the information of the Committee.



PR2AAA
    POLICY
                                _   2fxi)   _

424. Corporate Policy and Performance Review
     Sub-Committee

    Resolved that the proceedings of the Corporate Policy and
    Performance Review Sub-Committee of the 27th December, 1991,
    be approved.


425. Corporate Programmes Sub-Committee

     Resolved that the proceedings of the Corporate Programmes
     Sub-Committee of the 31st December, 1991, be approved.


426. Financial Control Sub-Committee

     Resolved that the proceedings of the Financial Control
     Sub-Committee of the 10th January, 1992, be approved.


427. Meeting of the Chair, Deputy Chair and
     Opposition Spokespersons

     The proceedings of a meeting of the Chair, Deputy Chair and
     Opposition Spokespersons to consider Estate Action tenders
     of the 10th January, 1992 were submitted for the information
     of the Committee.


428. Student Grants - Council Motion

     Resolved that the following Report upon the undermentioned
     Motion which appeared in the names of Councillors
     S. R. Radford and Pauline McKibbin at the meeting of the
     Council held on 11th December, 1991, viz:-

       "This Council declares its support for the National Union
        of Students demonstration organised for 12th February,
        1992 as this Council is well aware of the financial
        difficulties effecting students because of persistent
        reductions in student grants thinly disguised by the
        student loans scheme. This Council also deplores the
        debarring of students from housing benefit/income
        support.

        This Council therefore instructs the City Solicitor to
        send a message of support to the NUS and to circulate to
        the City M.P.'s the terms of the above Motion."

     be approved, viz:-




     PR2AAA
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
