                                             HILLSBOROUGH


             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                         19th May, 1 9 8 9




PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
           Councillors A. Jennings, S. Ledwich,
           P. Millea and I. Templeman.



Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors
W. Edwards, Mary Johnston and F 0 Roderick.




Detailed Arrangements for
Visit to Sheffield

The Chair informed members that, whilst it had not proved
possible to arrange a meeting with representatives of
Sheffield City Council, it had been possible to arrange a
visit to the Football Ground.


Production of Leaflet

The Chair informed members that a leaflet relating to the
work of the Working Party and giving details of the
proposed Public Meeting had been prepared for circulation
at the Cup Final and at Anfield.


Proposed Public Meeting

The Chair informed members of the arrangements made for a
Public Meeting to be held at St. Georges Hall on 25th May
1989.


Visit to Hillsborough.

The Working Party then visited Hillsborougji Football
Stadium.
                                                 HILLSBOROUGH


              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                          7th June, 1989



 PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
            Councillors W. Edwards, A. Jennings, Mary
            Johnston, S. Ledwich, Peter Millea, K. Noon,
            F. Roderick, Jacqueline Smith and I. Templeman.



            Mr. Peter Jackson attended as an observer
            representing the Football Supporters
            Association.



Minutes of Last Meeting

Resolved that the Minutes of the last meeting be approved.


Visit to Hillsborough
(CS/124/89)

The Working Party considered Reports of the City Solicitor
and Mr. Giles of the City Engineer's Department concerning
the visit of the Working Party to Hillsborough Football
Stadium on 19th May, 1989.

Resolved that -

(a)   the Reports be approved;

(b)   the City Building Surveyor be requested to prepare
       a Report on the visit to Hillsborough; and

(c)   arrangements be made for Members of the Working
       Party to view when available the video recording
       of the visit and the video of the Disaster prepared
       and made available by the Football Supporters
       Association.


Distribution of Leaflets

The Chair informed members that -

(a)   30,000 leaflets publicising the work of the Working
      Party and giving details of the Public Meeting had
      been distributed at the F.A. Cup Final on 20th May,
      1989 and at Anfield on 23rd May, 1989; and
      HILLSBOROUGH


      (b)   publicity had also been given to the Working Party
            on the Wembley scoreboard before the Cup Final and
            during the half-time interval.


16.   Public Meeting
      (CS/123/89)

      The Working Party considered -

      (a)   Report CS/123/89 of the City Solicitor concerning
            the Public Meeting held at St. George's Hall on
            25th May, 1989 to discuss the Disaster and the
            way forward for football; and

      (b)   the Statement of the Chair made at, and endorsed
            by the Meeting

      Resolved that the statement be approved subject to the
      deletion in paragraph 7 of the words "those responsible
      for Hillsborough are exposed and brought to justice"
      and their replacement with the words "the lessons of
      the tragedy are learned and acted upon".


17.   Conference - Football Supporters Bill

      The Working Party considered a Report from Representatives
      who attended the Conference on the Football Supporters
      Bill held on 16th May, 1989 at Hammersmith Town Hall,
      London.



      Councillor Peter Millea informed the Working Party of
      the advice, printed on the renewal forms issued by
      Liverpool Football Club to its season ticket holders,
      that they will be required to comply fully with any
      legislation introduced by the Government or the
      Football Authorities regarding football membership
      schemes.



      Resolved that -

      (a)   the Research Officer, when appointed be requested
            to prepare a Report as a matter of urgency on the
            proposed Supporters I.D. Scheme; and

      (b)   Liverpool and Everton Football Clubs be contacted
            in order to determine their current position in
            regard to the Government legislation on football
            supporters, particularly in the light of the advice
            given by Liverpool to its season ticket holders.
                                                HILLSBOROUGH


Staffing and Administrative Support

The Chair informed the Working Party that following
advertisement in the Liverpool Echo short-listing
will take place on 8th June, 1989 for the post of
Research Officer.


Licensing of Football Stadiums

Resolved that the City Building Surveyor be requested to -

(a)   prepare a Report on the present arrangements for
      the licensing of Football Stadiums particularly
      insofar as they apply to Anfield and Goodison
      Park; and

(b)   provide the Football Supporters Association, as
      requested with'a copy of the Ground Safety
      Certificate for Anfield subject to the consent of
      Liverpool Football Club.
              \
Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry

The Deputy City Solicitor reported upon the further
request which has been submitted to the Lord Justice
Taylor Inquiry upon the representation of the City
Council at the Inquiry. A response to the request was
expected imminently.
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
