                                                                  POLICY
                               - 229


                  POLICY AND RESOURCES COMMITTEE

                         13th April, 1993



     PRESENT: Councillor Dawn Booth, Chair;
              Councillor Marie McGiverion, Deputy Chair;
              Councillors M. Alderson, G. Allen, K. Cannon,
              N. Cardwell, Paul Clark, Flora Clucas, J. Devaney,
              W. Edwards, Cathy Hancox, A. Jennings,
              Lady Doreen Jones, Ann Keenan, R. Kemp,
              Frances Kidd, G. Knibb, D. McKittrick, P. Millea,
              F. Prendergast, I. Scott, W. Snell, M. Storey and
              Cathy Wilson.



              Councillors A. Dean and H. Rimmer.



              Councillors Vera Best, Roger Johnston and
              P. Tyrrell also attended.



446. Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons
     of the Finance Sub-Committee and the Education
     Committee

     Resolved that the proceedings of a meeting of the Chair,
     Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons of the Finance
     Sub-Committee and the Education Committee of the 18th
     February, 1993, be approved.


447. Special Sub-Committee - Appointment of Chief Officers

     The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee - Appointment
     of Chief Officers of the 24th February, 5th, 8th, 29th,
     30th and 31st March, 1993 were submitted for the
     information of the Committee.


448. Special Sub-Committee - M&BW Orders

     Resolved that the proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee
     - M&BW Orders of the 12th March, 1993, be approved.




  al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/Al30493
   POLICY
                                “   230   "




449. Performance Review Sub-Committee

     Resolved that the proceedings of the Performance Review
     Sub-Committee of the 15th March and 5th April, 1993, be
     approved.


450. Scheduling Sub-Committee

     The proceedings of the Scheduling Sub-Committee of the 18th
     March, 1993 were submitted for the information of the
     Committee.


451. Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons
     of the Policy and Resources Committee

     Resolved that the proceedings of a meeting of the Chair,
     Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons of the Policy and
     Resources Committee of the 17th March, 1993, be approved.


452. Finance Sub-Committee

     Motion -

     That the proceedings of the Finance Sub-Committee of the
     19th March, 1993, be approved.

    Amendment by Councillor Flora Clucas,
     duly seconded -

     That, because of the extreme problems facing the Management
     Committee of Colomendy Centre in finding any further cuts
     to the proposed budget for 1993/94, the Director of
     Education consider utilising part of the contingency
     referred to in Minute 93 of the Sub-Committee to finance
     the £56,000 needing to be identified in the budget and that
     consideration be also given to the possibility of utilising
     resources from the Liverpool Institute Foundation for
     providing grants for Liverpool pupils in deprived areas to
     attend the Colomendy Centre.



     During the course of the debate, it was agreed that the
     Chair would submit a recommendation to the Council in
     relation to the issue referred to in the Amendment.



     Whereupon the Motion was carried and it was resolved
     accordingly.



   al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A130493
                                                                      POLICY
                                 “   231   -




453. Special Sub-Committee re:
     Shaw Street/Haigh Street

     The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee - Shaw Street/
     Haigh Street of the 22nd March, 1993 were submitted for the
     information of the Committee.


454. Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons
     of the Corporate Policies and Programmes Sub-Committee

     The proceedings of meetings     of the Chair, Deputy Chair and
     Opposition Spokespersons of     the Corporate Policies and
     Programmes Sub-Committee of     the 12th, 22nd and 26th March,
     1993 were submitted for the     information of the Committee.


455. City Challenge Sub-Committee

     The proceedings of the City Challenge Sub-Committee of the
     24th March, 1993 were submitted for the information of the
     Committee.


456. Community Services and Neighbourhood Development
     Sub-Committee

     Resolved that the proceedings of the Community Services and
     Neighbourhood Development Sub-Committee of the 29th March,
     1993, be approved.


457. Corporate Policies and Programmes Sub-Committee

    Resolved that the proceedings of the Corporate Policies and
    Programmes Sub-Committee of the 1st April 1993, be
    approved.


458. Special Sub-Committee - Community Charge and
     Rating Hatters

    The proceedings of the Special Sub-Committee - Community
    Charge and Rating Matters of the 6th April, 1993 were
    submitted for the information of the Committee.


459. Economic Development Sub-Committee

    Resolved that authority be granted for the proceedings of
    the Economic Development Sub-Committee of the 14th April,
    1993 to be submitted direct to the meeting of the City
    Council on 21st April, 1993.



   al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/Al30493
   POLICY
                                 ~   ,232   -   "




460. Working Party re: Use of Official Cars

    Resolved that the proceedings of the Working Party re: Use
    of Official Cars of the 25th March, 1993, be approved.


461. Catering at St. Georges Hall ~ Council Motion

    Resolved that the Motion which appeared in the name of
    Councillor Flora Clucas at the meeting of the City Council
    held on 10th March, 1993, calling for a report upon the
    use, by the "civic catering" establishment of the basement
    of St. George's Hall be referred for a report to the
    Contract Services Board.


462. Work Undertaken by DSO's - Council Motion

     Resolved that the Motion which appeared in the names of
     Councillors P. Clein and R. Johnston at the meeting of the
     Council held on 10th March, 1993, relating to working
     practices within Council DSO's be referred to the Director
     of Operational Services and the Director of Resources for a
     report.


463. Zurich Insurance - Council Motion

     Resolved that the following Report upon the undermentioned
     Motion which appeared in the names of Councillors Bill
     Roberts and D. McKittrick at the meeting of the Council
     held on 10th March, 1993, viz:-

            That, in view of the   statement madeby Zurich
            Insurance that it will be unwilling to honour MSF's
            recognition agreement with Municipal Mutual Insurance
            when it takes control of that company, the Council
            resolves to withdraw from any future dealings with
            that company until recognition is granted

    be approved, viz:-

                                Report

    The Council is informed that the acceptance of the proposal
    contained in the Motion would not be lawful and members who
    vote for it would be liable for surcharge if, as a
    consequence of approving it, the Council suffered &
    financial loss. In the circumstances, the Committee has
    decided to reject the proposal.




  al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A130493
                                                                 POLICY
                                 233     "




    However, the Director of Resources has been instructed to
    write to Zurich Insurance to advise the company of the
    Council's strongly-held view on this matter and to request
    the AMA to draw to the attention of all member Authorities
    the attitude of Zurich Insurance to Trade Union membership.


464. Decentralisation - Council Motion

    The Committee considered the following Motion which
    appeared in the name of Councillor R. Kemp at the meeting
    of the Council held on 10th March, 1993, viz:-

          That bearing in mind the proposals of the budget
          Council to include £60,000 for decentralisation, the
          Wavertree area be identified as the pilot area for the
          creation of a "Mini Town Hall" to bring together
          services for the people of the area.

     Motion by the Chair, duly seconded -

     That the Council be informed that the debate about the
     areas of the City which will benefit from the
     decentralisation of services is taking place at thepresent
     time and a final decision will be made when the series of
     seminars for elected members is concluded. It is,
     therefore, premature to identify one particular area as
     being suitable for a pilot scheme, even if a by-election is
     imminent. Once again, the Liberal Democrat group has
     demonstrated that it is prepared to resort to empty
     gestures such as this to conceal from the electorate of
     Picton the fact that they have no policies of substance
     which will result in an improvement in living standards for
     the people of Liverpool.

     A vote was taken, when there appeared -

                        For the Motion - 15
                        Against it        9

     The Motion was carried and it was resolved accordingly.


465. Wavertree Technology Park - Council Motion

     The Committee considered the following Motion which
     appeared in the name of Councillor R. Kemp at the meeting
     of the Council held on 10th March, 1993, vizj-

          That bearing in mind the all - party agreement to
          provide the Economic Development Section with a budget
          of £150,000 and bearing in mind the fact that few
          Wavertree residents work in the Wavertree Technology


   al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/Al30493
      Park, the Section convene a meeting of local
      residents, the TEC and the Technology Park to progress
      a study audit for the area to ensure that jobs located
      in Wavertree will, whenever possible be filled by the
      people of Wavertree.

 Motion by the Chair, duly seconded -

 That the Council be informed that this is another example
 of the depths to which the Liberal Democrat group will sink
 to attract a handful of votes. To suggest that employment
 opportunities in the Wavertree area should be "ring fenced"
 is arrant nonsense. Presumably the mover of the motion has
 been influenced by the film "Passport to Pimlico" and will
 now go on to suggest that the people of Wavertree should
 adopt their own currency and that the "Mini Town Hall"
 should set up its own Duty Free Shop.  If the Liberal
 Democrat group could expend the same amount of energy on
 promoting sane and sensible strategies to help the people
 of Liverpool as it does on embarking on flights of fantasy,
 the City would be well served by its elected members.



  During the course of the debate, the Motion was withdrawn
  and it was agreed that way in which the Council might
  preserve local jobs for local people would be the subject
  of a report to the Economic Development Sub-Committee in
  the next cycle of meetings.


* "Guardian Angels'* - Council Motion

  Resolved that the following Report upon the undermentioned
  Motion which appeared in the name of Councillor D.
  McKittrick at the meeting of the Council held on 10th
  March, 1993, viz:-

      That this City Council is deeply concerned that
      following recent adverse media coverage, a group of
      maverick vigilantes known as "Guardian Angels" is
      considering setting up a citizens patrol in this City.
      This Council therefore declares that this form of
      action could be contrary to the requirements of its
      citizens and therefore states that no assistance,
      financial or moral will be given to this or similar
      groups,

  be approved, viz:-

                           Report

  The Committee supports the terms of the Motion.



al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A130493
467. Merseyside Emergency Planning Seminar
     Emergency Planning College, Easingwold

     Resolved that the action of the Chair in authorising 3
     Labour and 3 Liberal Democrat members and one Liverpool
     Labour Councillor, together with a representative of the
     Head of Legal Services, to attend the Merseyside Emergency
     Planning Seminar at the Emergency Planning College,
     Easingwold, from 2nd to 4th April, 1993, be confirmed.


468. Hillsborough Disaster Working Party

     The Committee considered a recommendation that the action
     of the Chair, Deputy Chair and Opposition Spokespersons in
     granting authority for -

     (1)   the payment of a sum equivalent to the cost of second
           class return rail fare for up to 13 persons
           representing the bereaved Hillsborough families to
           enable them to attend the High Court in London on 6th
           April when the application for judicial review was due
           to be heard; and

     (2)   the payment of a grant of £500 as a contribution
           towards the cost of purchasing video film of the
           Hillsborough Disaster and agreeing to review the
           matter in the event of Sefton Council not being
           prepared to make a matching grant,

     be confirmed.

     Resolved that -

     (a)   the recommendation be approved;

     (b)   this Committee welcomes the recent decision of the
           High Court and delegates power to the Chairs, Deputy
           Chairs and Opposition Spokespersons of this Committee
           and the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party to
           consider and determine ways of assisting the
           Hillsborough families in the forthcoming judicial
           review; and

     (c)   arrangements be made for the members to meet
           representatives of the families within the next two
           weeks.

469. Members Allowances 1993/94

     Resolved that the action of the Chair, Deputy Chair and
     Opposition Spokespersons in agreeing that -



   al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/A13 049 3
POLICY
                               “   236   "




  (a)    the maximum permitted expenditure on allowances be
         increased by 5% to £311,850;

  (b)    the sums allocated for the Basic Allowance and the
         Special Responsibility Allowance at the present time
         be increased by 1.5% in 1993/94;

  (c)    the attendance allowance be reduced to £17 per
         approved duty and reviewed following the Annual
         Meeting of the Council; and

  (d)    the allocation of the Special Responsibility Allowance
         be reviewed when the Committee Structure for 1993/94
         is determined,

  be confirmed.


I. Railway Privatisation - "Save Our Railways”

  Resolved that the following declaration of an all-party
  coalition established to oppose the rail privatisation
  proposals as set out in the Railways Bill, be supported by
  the City Council -

         "We believe that the Government's proposals for
          privatisation of British Rail as set ut in the
          Railways Bill, threaten the public interest.

         We must resist:

            the break-up of our national rail network

            the closure of rail lines

            the loss of discount tickets

            the loss of travel cards and railcards for senior
                  citizens, students and family

            higher fares and poorer service

         that may result from the government's proposal.

         We believe that a fragmented railway would be a less
         safe railway.

         We want to see a new deal for the railways, a new
         approach to rail investment and a national rail
         strategy."




al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/Al30493
Placeholder Code: ZXY
