                                                                   1 8 OCT 1989

                                                    SOCIAL SERVICES

                                 -FI 3 I-

                       SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE

                          18TH OCTOBER,     1989



    PRESENT:   Councillor Dawn Booth, Chair;
               Councillor E. Roderick, Deputy Chair;
               Councillors G. Allen, J. Brady, P. Coventry,
               Hannah Folan, Beatrice Fraenkel, Cathy Hancox,
               H. Herrity, Les Hughes, Mary Johnston,
               J. Kendrick, Elaine Kinahan, W. Lane, J. Lang,
               Judith Nelson, K. Noon, Vicky Roberts, I. Scott,
               Sylvia Sharpey-Schafer and I.  Templeman.



               Councillor A. Dean.



               Advisory Representatives

               Mr. R. Currie, Mr. J. Hamilton, Mr. S. Martin and
               Mr. H. Quilliam.



               Councillor G. Knibb also attended.



               Apologies for absence were submitted from
               Councillor Steve Fitzsimmons and Mr.
               I. Brodie-Brown and Mrs. Sheila Fleetwood.




8 7 . Residential and Community Services
   Sub-Committee: Proceedings

   Resolved that the proceedings of the Residential and
   Community Services Sub-Committee of 6th October, 1989, be
   approved so far as they require confirmation by this
   Committee.                                            ■


88. Development Review Sub-Committee: Proceedings

   Resolved that the proceedings of the Development Review
   Sub-Committee of 9th October, 1989* be approved.



   AAFAAG
   SOCIAL SERVICES

                                -F132-

89• Under 5's Joint Sub-Committee: Proceedings

   On Motion:-

   That the proceedings of the Under 5 ’s Joint Sub-Committee of
   12th October, 198 9 , be approved so far as this Committee is
   concerned.



   Amendment by Councillor Les Hughes,
     seconded by Councillor I. Scott.

   That -

    (a) Minute No. 8 relating to pre-school services integration
        be varied by the deletion of paragraph (e) thereof and
        the substitution therefore of the following paragraph,
        viz:-

        "(e) the Director of Social Services be also requested
             to submit a report to the Sub-Committee on any
             difficulties being experienced with regard to the
             registration, monitoring and support of
             Childminders;"

       and

    (b) the Education Committee be informed accordingly.

   During the course of the debate, the Amendment was accepted.



   The Motion, as amended in respect of Minute No. 8, was
   carried and it was resolved accordingly.




90. Chair (Social Services) and Chair/
    Opposition Spokesperson (Personnel): Proceedings

   The proceedings of the Chair of this Committee and the Chair
   and Opposition Spokesperson of the Personnel and Equal
   Opportunities Policy Committee of 2 9 th September and 5th
   October, 198 9 , were submitted.


91. Children’s Sub-Committee: Proceedings

   The proceedings of the Children’s Sub-Committee of 16th



   AAFAAG
                                                                nocnw?
                                                 SOCIAL SERVICES

                               -F133-

October,    1989, were submitted.

Council Motion
Warden Service

Resolved (12 Members voting in favour and 7 against) that
the following Report upon the undermentioned Motion which
appeared in the name of Councillor Beatrice Fraenkel at the
meeting of the City Council held on 27th September, 1989,
v i z :-

       "That this Council expresses its extreme concern that
       hundreds of elderly residents in Council run
       accommodation are without Warden cover or emergency
       cover when the Warden is off duty or on holiday.

       This Council is aware that many elderly residents are
       infirm, and unable to respond to a fire alarm or other
       emergency without assistance.       This Council is also
       aware of how many f e a r s a n elderly person is prey to
       and how vulnerable they feel without access to 24 hours
       protection.

       Whilst this Council is able to make use of the City
       Security Force as an emergency ’stop g a p ’ this Council
       does not believe the medically untrained Security
       Service should be used as a substitute for the Warden
       Service, as happens on occasion at present.

       This Council therefore calls for the following action
       to be taken as a matter of urgency, before a death
  ■■   occurs - '                          \ ^' r

       1.   the implementation of a 24 hour Community Warden
            Service without further delay;  ;:  r .c i;

       2.   the provision of a portable emergency call unit for
            each elderly resident;

       3.   a complete review of Care for the .Elderly in
            Grouped Accommodation, in consultation with the
            Social Services, to formulate a City Wide Policy;
            and

       4.   the consideration of incorporating elderly
            residents living in their own homes into a City
            Council run 24 hour Community Warden Service
            (possibly by subscription) so that this City can
            provide as wide a service to the Elderly as
            possible.”




AAFAAG
   SOCIAL SERVICES

                                -F134-

   be approved, viz:-

                               Report

    1.   The Social Services Committee reports that it has
          considered the terms of the Council Motion and has
          decided to refer the proposals numbered 1,2 and 4 to
          the IHomelessness and Sheltered Housing Joint
          Sub-Committee for detailed consideration.

   2.    So far as proposal number 3 is concerned, the Committee
          would inform the Council that the Development Review
          Sub-Committee has recently considered a comprehensive
          review of services for older people and it has
          accordingly decided to take no further action regarding
          this particular part of the Council Motion, other than
          to request that a copy of that review be sent to the
          mover of the Motion.                         i-i‘




93. Social Services Department
    Structure, Organisation and Management .
    (DSS/329/89)

   The Committee considered a recommendation of the Director of
   Social Services that - :

    (a) the consultation document on the structure, organisation
        and management of the Social Services Department which
        forms an appendix to Report DSS/329/89 of the Director
        of Social Services, be noted;

    (b) the Director be authorised to undertake detailed
        consultation on the basis of the document;

    (c) the Director be requested to arrange a seminar, under
        the auspices of the Development Review Sub-Committee,
        for interested members of this Committee, to consider
        the future structure^ organisation and management of the
        Department and make more specific comment;

    (d) a further report be submitted in early 1990 detailing
        the changes recommended by the Director for the future
        structure, organisation and management of the
        Department, together with a costed action plan and
        proposed timetable for implementation; and

    (e) the Director be authorised to determinej in conjunction
        with the Director of Personnel and Management Services,
        the extent of any additional facility time necessary for



    AAFAAG
                                                                  i8 OCT 1939

                                                   SOCIAL SERVICES

                                 -F135-

         Trades Union officers to fully participate in the
         consultation process.

   Resolved that -

   (a)    the recommendation be approved, subject to -

            (i) paragraph (c) being amended to provide for the
                report to be considered in detail at a Special
                Meeting of this Committee to be held on Monday,
                20th November, 1989;  and

            (ii) paragraph (e) being subject to the approval of
                 the Personnel and Equal Opportunities Policy
                 Committee;  and

   (b)    the meeting of the Development Review Sub-Committee
          scheduled to be held on 20th November, be cancelled.


94. New Hall Strategy
    Support Agreement with Liverpool
    Housing Trust
    (DSS/321/89)

   Resolved that -

   (a)    in connection with the New Hall Strategy, the Director
          of Social Services be authorised, on behalf of the City
          Council, to sign the Support Agreement with Liverpool
          Housing Trust appended to Report DSS/321/89;  and

   (b)    schemes covered by the Agreement be added to the
          Schedule when financial resources are made available by
          the City Council.     • - -■                •'•••" -•-


95. National Development Team Report
    'Towards a New Sense of Community1
    (DSS/325/89)

   Resolved that -

    (a) the report 'Towards a New Sense of Community' of the
        National Development Team, be noted;

    (b) the report be used as a point of reference in the
        planning and implementation of the Social Services
        Department's strategy for services for people with
        learning difficulties;




   AAFAAG
   SOCIAL SERVICES

                                        -F136-

    (c) the Director be requested to respond positively to the
        offer of the N.D.T.  to assist the City Council, the
        Liverpool Health Authority and the voluntary agencies,
        to co-ordinate their planning and operations with the
        aim of establishing a joint strategy for services for
        people with learning difficulties; and

    (d) the Director be authorised to continue to consult with
        the N.D.T. on matters concerning the implementation of
        the Department's strategy.


96. Hillsborough Disaster                                    -
    Regional Unit
    (DSS/323/89)

   Resolved that, subject to the approval of the Finance and
   Strategy Committee -

    (a) the City Council underwrite its proportion of the cost
        of the Hillsborough Regional Unit, up to a maximum of
        £ 1 2 , 5 0 0 in 1 9 8 9 / 9 0 and £ 2 5 , 0 0 0 in 1 9 9 0 / 9 1 ; and

    (b) the Director of Social Services be requested to continue
        to seek funding towards the total cost of the Regional
        Unit and report the outcome in due course.


97. Hillsborough Disaster
    Staffing of the Hillsborough Centre
    (DSS/324/89)        I

    The: Committee considered a recommendation that, subject to
    the approval of the Personnel and Equal Opportunities Policy
    Committee and the Finance and Strategy Committee, the
    establishment of the Social Services Department be varied by
    the creation of the following posts at the Hillsborough
    Centre, viz:-

       Post No.                    Designation                      Grade

    SS/ 8 3 D/I     Senior Assistant (Administration)                Scale 5

    SS/83D/2        Clerical Officer                                 Scale 2

    SS/ 8 3 D / 3   Clerk/Typist                                     Scale 1

    SS/83D/4,5      Receptionist (part-time - 20                     Scale 2
                    hours per week) - 2 posts

   Resolved that -




   AAFAAG
                                                                     1 S OCT 1989

                                                   SOCIAL SERVICES

                                  -F137-

   (a)   the recommendation be approved and the Director be
         requested to make every effort to ensure that the posts
         of receptionist are filled by redeployment within the
         service;  and

   (b)   a report be submitted to the next meeting of this
         Committee up-dating members of the work currently being
         undertaken at. the Centre.


9 8 . Telephones for Disabled Persons
    (DSS/322/89)

   The Committee considered Report DSS/322/89 of the Director
   of Social Services concerning the need for additional
   budgetary provision for the installation of telephones for
   disabled persons in the remainder of the current financial
   year and subsequent years.

   Resolved that, in order to permit the installation of a
   further 2 0 0 telephones in the current financial year, a sum
   of £23,000 be vired from the Tools and Equipment line of the
   Welfare Meals Service to Telephones for the Handicapped.


99. Mental Health Day Centre -
    Staffing
    (DSS/ 3 2 6 / 8 9 )

   Resolved that, in connection with the staffing of Mental
   Health Day Centres and subject to the approval of the
   Personnel and Equal Opportunities Policy Committee, the
   Finance and Strategy Committee and to. additional financial
   resources being confirmed through Urban Programme
   arrangements or other sources, the establishment of the
   Social Services Department be varied by the creation of the
   following posts:-

   Post No.                 Designation                   Grade

    SS/63D/3                Officer-in-Charge            Scale 6
                            Mental Health Day Centre

    SS/63D/6                Deputy Officer in   Charge   Scale 5

    SS/63D/13 to 18         Support Workers              Scale 3
                            (6 posts)




    AAFAAG
    SOCIAL SERVICES

                                   - F 138-

100. Social Services Department
     Application for Unpaid Leave of Absence
     (DSS/30B/89)
    Resolved that, subject to the approval of the Personnel and
    Equal Opportunities Policy Committee, a n application from a
    Home Help employedat-District-Office *D * for unpaid, leave
    of absence for the period 2 8 th -October, 1 9 8 9 , to 4th March,
    1 9 9 0 , inclusive, such employee being not eligible for
    maternity leave, be granted.


101. Social Services Department
     Application for an Ex-Gratia Payment
     (DSS/309/89)

    Resolved that, an application for an ex-gratia payment from
    a Senior Social Worker at St.   Paul's Eye Hospital who
    suffered damage to and theft from his car whilst on duty, be
    declined.            .     - --


102. Social Services Department
     Application for an Ex-Gratia Payment
     (DSS/310/89)

     Resolved that, applications for ex-gratia payments from a
     Social Worker and Social Work Assistant arising from.damage
     to and theft from a car whilst the employees concerned were
     on duty, be declined.


103. Social Care Association   -
     Associate Corporate Membership
     (DSS/306/89)

     Resolved that, the Director of Social Services be authorised
     to enrol 3,800 members of Social Services Department staff
     as Associate Corporate Members of the Social Care
     Organisation and the subscription fee of £380 be paid from
     within the Budget line for subscriptions.


104. Parkside Hostel, 7 Aigburth Drive,
     Liverpool, 17

     Resolved that, for the purposes of Regulation 4(1) of the
     Town and Country Planning General Regulations 1976,
     permission be sought for the enclosure of a link corridor at
     Parkside Hostel (Independence Project for People with a
     Physical Disability), 7 Aigburth Drive, Liverpool, 17.




     AAFAAG
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
