              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                        26th April,   1989



PRESENT:    Councillors H. Chase, W. Edwards, A. Jennings,
            Mary Johnston, S. Ledwich, Peter Millea,
            K. Noon, F. Roderick and Jacqueline Smith.



            Councillor F. Ruse also attended.




Appointment of Chair

Resolved that Councillor H. Chase be appointed the Chair
of this Working Party.


Terms of Reference of Working Party

The Working Party considered its terms of reference in
the light of the decision of the City Council of the 19th
April, 1989.

Resolved that -

   (i) the revised terms of reference be approved, viz:-

       1.   To ensure the submission    of proper evidence
             to the Taylor Inquiry on   behalf of the people
             of Liverpool.

       2.   To assist in finding out the truth of what
             occurred at Hillsborough including the
             preparations made in advance and to enable
             the Council to comment thereon.

       3.    To enable the Council to respond to any issues
             arising from the tragedy and to make
             observations generally.

       4.   To cause a report on the tragedy to be made
             to the City Council via the Finance and Strategy
             Committee as soon as practicable.

  (ii) the Working Party would urge all football supporters
       to give their evidence to the Official Inquiry
       but, in the case of those supporters who do not-
       wish to be interviewed by the Police Officers
       appointed to assist the Inquiry, the Working Party
       wishes  to  provide facilities for such evidence
      to be taken by the City Council.   All unsolicited
      submissions so far received by the City Solicitor
      or Council members will be held to establish
      whether those who have made them wish them to be
      forwarded to the Inquiry team.   The Working Party
      has asked the City Solicitor to obtain from Lord
      Justice Taylor his views on whether he would be
      prepared to -

       (a) accept evidence from this Working Party on
           behalf of persons who do. not wish to give
           their evidence to the Police;

       (b) provide copies of submissions made to his
           Inquiry to this Working Party.

 (iii) the City Estates Surveyor and the City Solicitor
       be requested to find premises for a working office
       for this Working Party as a matter of urgency;

  (iv) the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Council, in
       conjunction with appropriate Chairs, be requested
       to make available appropriate staffing and
       administrative support forthwith to ensure the
       proper workings of this Working Party;

  (v) the City Solicitor arrange for all existing
      Council reports which have been prepared covering
      the arrangements for safety at football grounds
      to be made available forthwith to all Members
      of the Working Party;

 (vi) the attached letter from the Football Association
      relating to ground safety be noted and the
      City Building Surveyor be requested to report to
      an early meeting of this Working Party upon the
      terms of the letter;

 (vii) an early meeting be arranged between this Working
       Party and the Football Supporters Association so
       that consideration can be given to making
       available facilities by the Council to assist
       football supporters generally in the submission of
       evidence to the Taylor Inquiry ; and

(viii) facilities be made available for discussions to
       take place with Sheffield City Council as soon as
       practicable.
3. Conference on Football
   Supporters Bill

  The Working Party considered an invitation to appoint
  representatives to attend a Conference on the Football
  Supporters Bill to be held on the 16th May at
  Hammersmith Town Hall, London.

  Resolved that the Chair (Councillor H. Chase) or his
  nominee be appointed to attend this Conference.
                        DOCUMENT NOT DIGITISED




Placeholder Code: ZXY
