Letter sent to Social Services Department (Director)


Sefton,
Wirral,
Knowsley.
St. Helens.
Cheshire.
Lancashire.


                                                                 225-3776.

                                  PM/BP.                         23rd February, 1990.




Dear Colleague,

                          HILLSBOROUGH ASSISTANCE UHIT.

     As agreed at the last Inter Agency Meeting, 1 have prepared an
advertisement, which is enclosed, publicising the posts available in the
new Hillsborough Assistance Unit.

     1 regret the delay in producing this information but 1 should be
grateful if you would arrange for it to be circulated throughout your
Authority as soon as possible.




                                       Yours sincerely,




                                  Director of Social Services.
               HILLSBOROUGH ASSISTANCE UNIT.


The Inter Agency Group of Local Authorities co-ordinating the
response to the Hillsborough Disaster are seeking applicants from
within the constituent Authorities for secondment to a newly
created Hillsborough Assistance Unit. The posts are available
initially for one year and it has been agreed by the Authorities
that staff seconded would be able to return to their substantive
posts at the end of the secondment. The Unit will be located in
Liverpool.

The posts on offer are as follows:-

1)   Assistance Unit Manager - Grade P.0.6. (£20,571 - £21,972).

     The occupant of this post will be responsible to the Inter Agency
     Group for the co-ordination of the response to the Disaster.
     In addition to being responsible for the operations of Helpline,
     he/she will oversee the development of the computerised database,
     liaise with the Co-ordinating Committee of Local Authorities,
     liaise with other Local Authorities throughout the country, liaise
     with the Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal, plan and
     oversee the development of an outreach service so as to identify
     as yet, unknown victims of the disaster, ensure the production and
     dissemination of information and statistics on the disaster,
     supervise the production and implementation of a training programme
     for appropriate agencies and personnel, and in conjunction with the
     Press Officers, deal with public relations issues.

2)   Outreach Development Officer - Grade P.0.1. (£14,658 - £15,810K

     The postholder will liaise with the Helpline staff providing
     24 hour cover. An important task will be the detailed work in
     developing an outreach service to identify casualties of the
     disaster and ensuring that proper services are provided for them.
     He/she will also ensure that all necessary information is processed
     to the Database.

3)   Clerical Officer/Typist - Scale 2. (£7,578 - £8,007).

     This officer will provide clerical support to the members of the
     Assistance Unit. Duties will include reception, filing, making
     appointments, typing and such other duties of a clerical nature
     as may be required.



     Applicants should submit a brief C.V. together with a written
     statement indicating why they wish to be considered for the posts
     in question. Applications should be sent to David Mason, Director
     of Social Services, Liverpool City Council, Hatton Garden,
     Liverpool L3 2AW by 26th March, 1990.
