NOTES TAKEN 16/4/89. FROM MICHAEL STEWART & PETER HOGGINSON - DISASTER CONSULTANTS


Most people involved will have had no previous contact with Social Services Departments
and will be reluctant clients.

1.   At first they will appear numb, dazed and disbelieving, especially if condition
     of their loved one has not been confirmed yet.

2.   Secondly - Realisation characterised by unusual feelings (often physical) or
      weakness, panic etc. will appear unbidden and for no apparent reason. Will
      often think there is something wrong with them. Will need reassurance that
      these feelings are natural and they are not going mad.

3.   Followed by euphoria (often seen in combat soldiers, fire victims etc.) optimistic
      comments, faith in community spirit etc.

4.   When back to 'normal life' will have felt 'cared for' in the beginning but
      as this goes may require help later. Needs variable/responses variable help
      must be offered at pace client requests. Danger in punishing with too many
      and too various visits.




     Syndrome is know as "Post Traumatic Stress" coupled with suddent violent death.

      (a)   Uninjured
            victim population will potentially be all victims of that stand and many
            others from different parts of ground. 40% - 50% of these will experience
            psychological difficulties during next year.

      (b)   Those with more injuries will suffer less psychologically.. They know
            what happened and be recognised as injured and have attention.

      ( c ) . Uninjured will suffer more psychologically - we relive what happens,
              what might have happened. Will feel imprint of death (sensory experiences,
              sights, sounds, smells etc. may trigger panic, may suffer nightmares.

      (d)   All may suffer survivor guilt:- existential guilt.

            "Did I save myself at others' expense?"
            "Did I help enough people to escape?"
            "Why me?" - unanswerable questions asked again and again.

     Psychic Numbing. May feel emotionally dead - can be permanent.
     May be unable to trust anyone, cannot seek help, feel they are going mad, ashamed
     of surviving and extreme feelings.

     Formulation process - understanding of what really happened, why they survived
     Will need to talk out the experience again and again. The earlier they are
     able to talk, better prospect for recovering in long term.

      During this time may have

      (a)   Re-experience phenomona - thoughts, nightmares of event recurring.


                                                                 continued
                                    -   2   -




(b)   Avoidance: May have become frightened and agoraphobic. May be unable
      to recall detached, loving feelings. May feel their own future is foreshortened,

(c)   May suffer increased arousal to anger, have sleeping difficulties, become
      super vigilant, suffer from super sensitive startle response.

All these feeling are normal after disaster event and are usually self terminat­
ing. If not may need specialist help but best help is encouraging to talk
over and over upsetting incident.

Those bereaved

Will suffer shock of untimely death of loved one.     (bizarre reversal of normal
death).

Will suffer guilt about imperfect partings.     May have had a row or regret last
words.

May suffer enhanced anger   at police, football club, etc. but this hampers
greiving process.

May resent authorities of any sort. May therefore have difficulty ati@nding
post mortem, police interviews for identification etc.

They will probably be obsessed with details of death.. May need to see body,,
though some people will advise they should not, but remember relative "as they
were". Need to be advised on this choice by social worker, prepared for experience,
accompanied through it and afterwards.

Understanding how death occured is starting point.

Worker must live with inability to give all answers.

Listen!!!!!

Being there listening is not doing nothing!

Move in quickly but gently.

Reassure that grieving and anger are not psychiatric illness.

Psychological health depends on

(1)   Personality before event.

(2)   Opportunity to discuss endlessly nature of trauma.

(3)   Supportive environment after event.


                                                         continued
For Staff


     It is impossible to work effectively without being affected or upset. There
is a need to identify with victims suffering to have credibility with them.

Workers need debriefing.    They will worry about vulnerability of their own families
and children.

Management need to offer practical and political support.

Good supervision helps staff to stay sane.

Get private support as and where you can.

Respect Clients' defences

Groupwork may be effective for survivors and for bereaved but separately

Don't encourage dependency.

Only other victims can feelthe same.

Normalising can lead to isolation.

Support may be needed for years.

Parents with adult children suffer more.     (Law does not acknowledge death of 18+
year old unless they are married).

Groupwork needs careful advertising -

Task needs defining and group will make own agenda.
