                           G E N E R A L   I N F O R M A T I O N


HELPLINE

      Welcome to Helpline

      Thank you for offering to run this service, .which is performing 2 main
      functions.

       (a)    receiving offers of help; and

      (b)     responding to requests for help, which may be anthing from enquiries
      ab      about t§i§gHone numbers, to the need to talk to someone.

2.    Taking jReferrals

       i)     'fill out white referral form (N.B. not yellow department referral
               form) in duplicate - carbon paper is available. Make sure you enter
               the time and date at the top, and print your name apd workplace clearly
            ;‘ (in case of queries later).

ii)    ii)    place both copies in the box in the middle of the poomv'

      iii) remember that running the Helpline is not l^ike being an social services
           duty officer. Mariy gSQgle are ringing us because they simply need
           to talk to someone,; the most important thing you can do for them is
           listen. Don’t press them for personal information which they may
           not want to give. Several people have only given us their first name,
           and no address.                    ,     •

      iv)     where people do give us information, make sure it is precise and factually
              correct, e.g. house numbers, postal districts, telephone numbers,
              etc.

3.     Information
          —■           /
            (                {                         .


      We have various information directories on the co—ordinator1s desk — please        ^
      make sure you return them after use.                                               ™

       There are also information folders by each telephone, containing useful
       'phone numbers, articles etc.1J Try and take time to read the notes of
       the briefingssession given by Michael Stewart and Phill Hodgkinson
       (Disaster Consultants); these detail the sorts of reactions people involved
       in the disaster may experience. The notes will help ;orientate you, and
       help to give appropriate advice.

4.     Looking after yourself

       Some of the phone calls you take may be quite harrowing. Try to work in
       pairs, so that you can take turns in answering the phone. Dontt be afraid
       to ask for help either from the Leader of the shift or the Co-ordinator.
                                           -   2   -




5.. ♦ Updates
     1,     Posted • r o » 4 -     are various lists                       “*
            These change asiinformation comes in, so keep y

     ii)    Aa update of facts and information will be issued daily.   We also have
            copies of press releases.

6.   Telephones

     i>     tl   £
                                   +- +-x fhP kitchen are not on the Helpline number.
                                        outgoing calls, so that the Helplines are
            left free.
      ii)   For outside calls, press 9 then the number you want

      iii) All .the telephones will take trunk calls.

      iv)   For directory enquiries, press             6,192.
