                                                PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL



                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY
                 NOTES OF A MEETING HELD WITH M E M B E R S ■
                     OF THE SURVIVORS GROUP AT THE
             HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE ON 1ST APRIL,         1992



PRESENT:     Councillor Harry Chase, Chair;
  r          Councillor Dot Gavin.




             Ann Adlington and                  from the City
             Solicitor's Department and Sheila Coleman from

                                      and 18 members of the Survivors
             ^Gl^ug^rs"6^r
                         €letfdl=d     .




INTRODUCTION

1.   Councillor Chase opened the meeting by explaining that
     it had been called in accordance with the following
     resolution of the meeting of the Working Party held on
     21st February 1992, viz:-

     20. Hillsborough Survivors Group

           With the consent of Members, Mr. Peter Rea from the
           Hillsborough Centre, addressed^jkhe-Working Party on
           matters of concern to his Group in respect of the
           Hillsborough related activities of Liverpool City
           Council, with particular regard to -

             (i)     the lack of information received on Working
                     Party meetings;

            (ii)     the difficulties caused to survivors wishing
                     to attend such meetings because they are held
                     during the d a y t i m e ;

           (iii)     problems encountered with the Social Services
                     Department; and

            (iv)     the perception of the Survivors Group that
                     they do not receive the full support of the
                     City Council.

           Resolved that -

           (A)       a special evening meeting of the Working Party
                     be held with the Survivors Groups at the
                     Hillsborough Centre to discuss these matters
                     of concern; and
                 (B)    a meeting be arranged as soon a s ’possible
            ...... .... between— the Si}rvivor-S_ Group and th.e_l_eaders— --
                        of the three main City Council political
                        groups, the Chair of the Working Party and         <
                        the Chair of the Social Services Committee to
                        discuss the matters, which have been raised.

    1. 1.   Councillor Chase said it was considered best to Tiave this
            meeting first in order to ascertain the problems which
            needed to be raised at the meeting with the Leaders.
            Thereupon the Members «?£ the Survivors Group, commencing
            with Peter Rea, expressed the matters of concern to them
            with regard to the role played by the City Council in the
            provision of services to Bereaved Families and to survivors
            in the 3 year period since the Disaster.  The main issues/
            comments which were related during the evening, in no
            particular order, are detailed below.
              ‘ ■a.

            MATTERS WITH SPECIFIC REFERENCE TO THE ROLE OF
            THE DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES

     2.      Requests were made for as much information as possible
             relating to the people who have used the.Hillsborough
             Centre-arid for an Audit of all the Equipment which had
             been donated and its present state and whereabouts.


     3.1.    The question of Access to Files was raised.      Who has
             such access from the point of view of both Social Workers
             and Clients? ' H o w can. access be gained.without excessive
             dif f iculty?


     .3.2    There was also a belief expressed that confidentiality of
             files may have been broken on occasion with for example
             addresses given out without permission.

                                                  _
    '4.1 Q N o n e of the Group as Clients had been consulted on their
- -   ’    ' v i e w s of the service they had received from Social Workers
              such views had largely been ingnored perhaps ia the light
     f 5 - that many£<^Snsidered the service they -received as "shoddy”
              Yet Social Workers had been to speak to outside bodies
              around the. country and in some cases received promotion
              on the basis, so the group perceived, that they were
          ^> "experts" on Disaster associated work.


     4.2     In a similar fashion there was also      an objection to the
             person from-the "National.Institute      of Social Work" who
             had been appraising the Social Work      involved, speaking
             on behalf .of Survivors as Clients.      This should not happen,


      5.    The Group was unclear as to the present role of the Centre
            which was now being used for a wider range of Social
^     >A-orMServices matters and indeed was uncertain of its future.
                   still called the "Hillsborough Centre" and still
      f 3'  funded as such but was "Hillsborough" still very important
            to its role?
/   S ..    There was also a belief that many peope who may use the
      • j J & e r v i c e were unaware thatt it still existed and that
    :<r^- po^ssxbly even p-eople- had therefore' been discouraged '
            from using it.        It was claimed that the phone was not
            always staffed which would not encourage potential new
            "clients" or indeed existing o n e s          ^   „ s- ,
                                                                     f   r^p t   H   ^


            It was believed- that the Social Workers feltc^Tif%lrt:e^ed^fete^-^--^
            rather than encouraged by survivors wishing to hold
            meetings on their own.   They were being seen as being
            "too independent" and on some occasions as being "too
            political.*4

              COb    _

    8.      There had~been a lack of support for Survivors/Bereaved
            Families at the Inquests when at times only Social Workers
                                                                             (_ P 'S C                                                             '
            from Sheffield were present and indeed only two Social
            Workers were present when the Inquests verdict was
            announced.  One person claimed that when they asked for
            aid to go to Sheffield they were given a train timetable ^ c'e"'rn-’
           g f o t * =- r e   s   p   0   n   s   e   ’7 ~ " r * 1                       r   T - - ................. r - ~ S . - » r r - T B -r.




             The Advisory Group meetings were mentioned and it was
             said the survivors no longer attend as they were
             dissatisfied that they were asked to do things by Social
             Workers (e.g. fill in questionnaires)j[which the
             survivors wished dealt with were rarely considered.


             General Matters

    10.1     It was claimed that the Survivors Group had until fairly
             recently been unaware of the existence of the Working
             Party and that information about its activities had not
             been passed on to them through the Social Services
             Department. —


    10.2      There was a worry expressed that the Working Party was
              being run down particularly since the 'demise of the
              post of Research O f f i c e r T Although a Liaison Officer
              was now in place it was believed this was only a
              secondment assisting in the legal matters being pursued
              and that effectively most of the duties of the Research
              Officer were no longer being undertaken.


     11.       The matter of the arrangement of visits to the two
               seriously injured survivors was raised though it was
               accepted that considerable sensitivity had to be shown
               towards their families in determining how best to provide
               support in these cases.
There was a problem mentioned with regard to the
obtaining of statements from West Midlands Police.    It
was believed a lot, of usgful .information could have.
been pieced together from such statements had they been
more accessible.


 A worry was stated that the Council was trying to
 discontinue the Ground Safety Advisory Group which was
 considered essential.  (Councillor Chase explained
 the recent background in this matter, the fact that
 such Groups were not mandatory and that the Council had
 agreed to continue with the Group.    Indeed it was
 meeting this evening which explained the absence of two
-Members of this Working P a r t y ) .


A question was raised about the motivation of one Member
of the Working Party who had previously made statements
against its continuation.  It was believed that these
comments should really be addressed directly to the
Councillor involved.


Conclusion

It was agreed that prior to the meeting with Council
Leaders the Note of this meeting should be circulated
to all appropriate parties to give an indication of the
areas of dissatisfaction to all concerned.


It was also agreed that attempts should be made to hold
the meeting with Council Leaders as soon as possible and
hopefully before the Municipal Elections.          In addition
to the 3 Group Leaders and the Chairs of the Working
Party and the Social Services Com m i t t e e ,   bwo
representatives of the Survivors Group should attend
the meeting and the Director of Social          Services and the
Team Leader or Senior Officer with responsibility for
"Hillsborough" should also be invited to have the opportunity
to answer the statements which have been made.
