              REPORT FROM THE COORDINATORS MEETING
                            21.11.89

INTENT

The intent of the meeting was to enable the coordinators of
several disaster responses to consider what had been the main
issues they faced as coordinators, and what recommendations they
had for Social Services, and for the Disasters Working Party.

PROCESS

The process used was a day long meeting which began with an
introduction of the Disasters Working Party given by the
Chairman, and an introduction of the participants.     This was
followed by a workshop on key issues, during which 59 concerns
were raised.  These were grouped into areas, and each area was
discussed in terms of what recommendations could be made.

SUMMARY OF CONCERNS

The main concern discussed was the need to clarify the role of,
social services as the coordinator of the long term response,
and to establish     theprinciple values     of that    response.
Considerable time was spent discussing the difficulties in
persuading people of the need for a long term response; the issue
of professional rivalry within the;-.'department ; and between
organisations; the difficulty of providing adequate support for
staff.

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

A complete list of the’ recommendations is attached.     The main
ones had to do with naming the role of social services as
coordinator, the acceptance of a proactive longterm response,
the discussion' in the planning stage with all the other agencies
involved to clarify roles and agree on the approach, and the
essential elements of training based on enhancing        exisitng
skills.        .

PARTICIPANTS
Colin Mackenzie, Grampian Social Services, Piper Alpha
Sandy Pelling, Dumfries & Galloway Social Services', Lockerbie
Alan Brown, Dorset Social Services, Clapham
John Kershaw, Leicestershire Social Services, Kegworth
David Bolton, Western Health & Social Services Board, Enniskillen
Linda Goldsmith, Westminster Social Services, Marchioness
David Mason, Liverpool Social Services, Hillsborough
Aileen Walker Smith, Camden Social Services, Kings Cross
Wilf Twist, Lancashire Social Services, Hillsborough
Tony Allen, Chairman, Disasters Working Party
Christine Mead, Research Assistant, Disasters Working Party
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE SOCIAL SERVICES
 COORDINATORS OF DISASTER RESPONSES
          21.11.89

1. PLANNING

1.1 Local Authority Emergency Plan covers rescue, investigation,
support and infrastructure.
1.2 Social Services has traditionally played a welfare role.
This should be revised to include the following.
1.3 New role: to provide the organisational structure for people
to work together in the aftermath, and to coordinate the
response.
1.4 In doing so Social Services must recognise the role of other
agencies.
1.5 Social Services also is a provider of services.
1.6 Social Services main role is to facilitate a sensitive
response through identifying the need, coordinating and providing
services immediately and in the long term.
1.7 In order to do so, Social Services have to agree to talk to.
•the Voluntary Sector, the NHS, religious leaders, social
security, coroners and the police before, during and after the
disaster. These groups would form an ongoingsteering group to
assess the immediate and long term response.
1.8 During the impact stage, social services role is to enhance
the role of the police, and enhance people's recovery.
1.9 During the impact stage, social workers'may be involved in
police interviews, identifying bodies, the police control room,
and the coroner.

2. PARAMETERS
2.1 Start with statutory responsibility
2.2 Be proactive, if potential need is identified
2.3 Undertake response as part of responsibility for preventive
mental health in the community.
2.4 Provide support for the disabled.

3. PRINCIPLES/VALUES
3.1 Accessibility
3.2 Proactive
3.3 Avoid stigma
3.4 Security
3.5 Confidentiality
3.6 Coordination
3.7 Avoiding convergence
3.8 Inclusive not intrusive
3.9 Has to be able to be sustained for as long as the consumer
wants
3.10 On average, maintained for 18 months.
3.11 Provide help which gives control back to the victims.
3.12 Provide help which is ethnically sensitive.

4. RESOURCES
4.1 Logistics
4.2 Administrative
4.3 Space: discrete, debriefing, multi-purpose
4.4 Database: operational guidelines     information forms
              link with daily use
4.5 "Away" list
4.6 Information Pack

5. FUNDING
5.1 Decided by Chief Executive and Director of Social Services
5.2 Contingency funds
5.3 Give someone authority to do what is needed without checking
every expense.

6. PERSONNEL
6.1 People named in plans may not be the right ones, may respond
in unhelpful way in a crisis or simply not be there.
6.2 Have to be able to pick and use individuals who are there and
show their ability at the time.

7. TRAINING
7.1 Define philosophical framework.
7.2 Proactive service alien to normal.work.
7.3 Resource issue
7.4 Mobilise existing skills
7.5 Knowledge base: how people respond to trauma and bereavement
7.6 Educate other agencies.
7.7 Educate ourselves
7.8 Information does not prepare people - they have to understand
the process they might go through in crisis.
7.9 Educate politicians about realities.
7.10 Use elements of ordinary training - this uses generic skills
of social workers which are t^ransferrable <     rv          •
7.11 Need to brief: media, school, clergy
7.12 Teach the usefulness of debriefing
7.13Calrify the role of the mental health professions.

8. INTERAGENCY MANAGEMENT
8.1   Social  Services cannot work without:       key voluntary
organisations, health, religious leaders, housing.
8.2 Importance of understanding each other's roles in planning.
8.3 Main issue - don't know the validity of "counsellors" of
different organisations. .
8.4 Only work with bonafide agencies
8.5 Negotiate not to turn grief into an illness
8.6 Voluntary organisations must state what they can offer,
where, how long. They must show commitment, depth of awareness,
availability, ability to cope with excess work, accreditation.
8.7 Have to be able to rely on immediate response - that they can
provide the services when they are asked for.
8.8 Accredited list of organisations and counsellors part of
planning
8.9 Need shopping list of all the tasks to be done and
distributed
8.10 Need process to identify cranks
8.11 Cannot generalise about capability of local voluntary
organisation.
8.12 Use clear process for coordination
8.13 Keep accurate records of all meetings.
  9. STAFF CARE
  9.1 Immediate debriefing, to record what happened and to identify
  stress
  9.2 Organise debriefing days, recognising personal need to talk,
  in groups.
  9.3 Organise helpline for personnel
  9.4 Hold informal offload lunches
  9.5 Talk at the end of daily sessions
  9.6 Staff helpline should be available from day 1, and should
  also be proactive
  9.7 Debriefing has to be sincere - not there to offset problems
  9.8 Has to be at arms length
  9.9 Need for back up, secondment, for the first three weeks.
  9.10 Organise who picks up the other tasks.
  9.11 Organise structure to relieve staff
  9.12 Acknowledge and reward all staff.

     10. CHILDREN
     10.1 Recognition of children's needs
     10.2 Prepare information pack
     10.3, Work with education department on death and grieving, the
  •: importance of talking through, and working with families
     10.4 Use a child's page in thelink/newsletter
     10.5 Hold briefing sessions, with teachers explaining about
     changes in behaviour, immeidately after the disaster and several
     weeks later
     10.6 Train teachers- and Heads to let children talk
     10.7 Involve teachers in community meetings
■v. 10.8 Support- teachers who are recognising children 's -rieeds
  - 10.9 Mobilise the existing skills of teachers.

  The .following topics were    named as key areas in    which
  recommendations should be made, but were not fully discussed
  during the meeting:

  11     INFORMATION                       15. TRUST FUND
  *    Who was involved                        * Set up
  *    How to record the walking wounded       * Liaison
  *    The importance of accuracy              * Advocacy Role
  *    Confidentiality
  *    Security                          16. CULTURAL ISSUES
  *    Police liaison                         * Cul. differences
                                              * Language
  12. MEDIA                                   * Translators
  * Control                                   * Finding S .W. s
  * Security                      with cultural understanding,
  * Be pre-emptive                language and counselling
  * Skills                             skills

  13. BOMBARDMENT                          17. BLOCKS
  * Offers of help                             * Terrorism
  * Distribution of offers                     * Need for control
  * Separating requests and offers

  14. HELPLINE
  * Function
  * Misuse
  * Staffing



                                   3
