                                                         W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                                         City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                         P.O. Box No. 88
                                                         Municipal Buildings

 LIVERPOOL                                               Dale Street
                                                         LIVER PO O L L69 2DH

                                                         Telephone: 051-227 3911
                                                          Direct Line : 051-225 2436
                                                         Fax: 051-225
                                                         DX 14206 LIVERPO O L

                                                         Your ref
                                                         Our ref    SS/GPD/VJ
    TO: All Members of the Planning                      Date       1st August 19 91
        Sub-Group (Hillsborough I.A.G.)




    Dear Sir/Madam,

    2nd Meeting of the Planning Sub-Group
    I attach, for your use, a copy of the Minutes of the Planning
    Sub-Group of the Hillsborough Inter Agency Group on Monday,
    29th July, 1991.

    Yours faithfully,


          1/0


    City Solicitor.




When calling or telephoning please ask for   Mr. Davey
HILLSBOROUGH INTER AGENCY GROUP.
PLANNING SUB-GROUP MEETING HELD ON MONDAY, 29TH JULY, 1991,
AT THE HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE.


PRESENT:           Ms.   P.   Farrell.
                   Mr.   B.   Walker.
                   Ms.   J.   Harper.
                   Mr.   D.   Whitham.
                   Mr.   T.   Newburn.
                   Ms.   S.   Darcy.
                   Mr.   G.   Flanaghan.
                   Mr.   T.   Steele.
                   Mr.   P.   Marley.

APOLOGOES:         Mr. G. Davey.
                   Mr. S. Paul.
                   Mr. J. Pilling.


Minutes of the Meeting Held on the 18th June, 1991.

The Minutes were agreed with the addition of Mr. P. Mar ley to those
in attendance.

Report of Jane Harper.

Jane Harper submitted two draft programmes for a proposed conference.
The first       programme was largely focusing on the counselling and a
social work service involvement in Hillsborough and the second programme
w e is aimed at planners and managers, and had been drawn up in conjunction
with Dave Whitham. There was considerable discussion on the type of
participant which were being targeted for the seminar and whether there
should be more involvement from practitioners and less stress on the managerial
and political context of the response to the disaster.
It was also reported that the Family Support Group and the Disaster Action
Group had expressed an interest in being involved in the proposed seminar.
It was noted that the Liverpool Echo had published a brief item indicating
that the seminar w e is being considered.

At the conclusions of the discussion it was confirmed that the remit of the
Inter Agency Group w e is for us to consider a seminar which would be targeted
at senior managers and politicians and whilst we in no way understated the
experience of the practitioners, it w e is felt that we should stick to the
original brief. With this in mind the following decisions were made.

1.     This seminar would be of two days duration.
2.   It would be targeted at senior managers and politicians.
3.   The mail shot publicising the conference would be targeted at
     Directors of Social Services and Chairs of Social Services Committees.
4.     The conference would be organised firstly to cover the northern
      region and preferably held in the HallEun Tower Hotel on the 4th and 5th
     March, 1992. At the same time, a proposal to hold a second conference
      for the southern region based in Oxford w e is agreed for the 13th and 14th
      May, 1992.
5.    It was agreed that Terry Steele and Jane Harper examine the programme
      with some input from John Pilling if he was available.
6.   Terry Steele to draw up a costed plan for the proposal.
7.    The next meeting to consider these proposals would be held on Monday,
      30th September, 1991, at 10.00 a.m. at the Hillsborough Centre.

PM/BP.
30th July, 1991.
