                                                                        KtttV) otiL



HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE: DRAFT YOUTH POLICY.


A Report by the Youth Policy Working Group.




In the context of the Hillsborough Team’s planned development beyond the second
anniversary, it was agreed that work with young people would form a major aspect of
this work. To look at some of the implications, and to attempt to draw up a framework
for this planned work, a working group has met regularly since January 1991. This is
the result of those meetings. This document is not meant to be definitive, but is
intended for presentation to the team, and for circulation to all team members.
Comments and criticism will then hopefully develop the work further.
(1)   ADMINISTRATION:         THE YOUTH FORUM.

A) A forum of interested workers and young people should meet on a regular basis.
Its role would be to consider, co-ordinate, and publicise planned youthwork initiatives
and to act as an arena for discussion and source of support. It would also attempt to
locate such initiatives within the overall youth policy of the centre, and to develop this
policy in the future.

B) To avoid ‘drift’ it would be useful to have a permanent focus (probablyJWWWWfe)
to organise and publicise meetings regularly. The chair could rotate, and other
specific responsibilities could be assigned as necessary within the forum.

C) The forum is envisaged as being open to a wide variety of possible participants,
aiming to dovetail services and resources. It would be envisaged therefore , as
comprising not only of Hillsborough team members, but also other workers/young
people. It would be useful for there to be input from, for example; Youth Service,
Hillsborough team and management, Alder Centre, Children’s Society. This approach
recognises not only the difficulties of sustaining youthwork with the limited resources
from within the team, but also the positive benefits of sharing expertise and resources
if possible.
(2) POLICY.

(A) Statement of Intent.

1) That the centre should be committed to providing a service to      young people,
recognising the social contexts in which they live.

2) The service should aim to enable:

       a) The development of self awareness, self confidence, competence
          in relationships and social awareness.

       b) Young people to make through critical analysis, informed
          decisions, choices and independent judgments.

       c) Young people to actively explore, understand and express their
          opinions and values in order to effect positive change.

       d) Young people to defend and extend their own rights, opportunities
          and choices, and those of others.

       e) Young people to challenge prejudice and oppression and injustice
          and to promote equality of opportunity.

3) The nature of the relationship between workers and young people should be
essentially participative, based on trust, honesty and equality, in order for young
people to establish choice and control in their lives.

4) The service has a particular role to play in seeking to enable young people
 to work through issues of trauma and loss in their lives, in a non-threatening
participative environment.

(B) Clarity of Planning.

As far as possible, projects should have planned aims that are understood by workers
and young people, and their families. These should be reviewed and updated as a
project/case develops. Planning should be related to the statement of intent (above)
and other aspects of this policy.
(C) Staff Resources and Commitment

 All projects should be adequately staffed. This necessitates looking at back-up
possibilities, and allowing for sickness and leave where possible. In turn this would
require honesty and efficient communication between staff, and to this end the forum
should be updated about staffing problems that are difficult to resolve. Consideration
should be given to the race and gender of workers and young people and the
promotion of work by volunteers.


D) Training & Staff Needs.

Working with young people will be one element of broader staff development but will
have particular implications regarding training and support. In engaging in work
alongside young people no one skill will suffice, if we were to hear what they say and
respond appropriately then all our skills and knowledge, individual and shared will be
of value. Nevertheless training opportunities, for staff, volunteers and young people
will be essential for the success of the work, and for it to be rewarding to those
involved.
3)   ISSUES FOR FURTHER DISCUSSION.

A number of issues have been raised during the meetings which need to be discussed
further in the team, and the proposed Forum.                    These include; evaluation,
confidentiality, g e n d e r/ra c e , c o n tra c tin g , C h ild re n ’s Act, netw orking
representation/power sharing.

Addendum            Position.

Recent events throw much of what has been planned into doubt. In particular M f e
position as one of the main figures in actioning the policy is extremely vulnerable. This
is despite the ‘Hillsborough working Group (Youth Service) stating as recently as
February 1st that it is ‘vital to continue the placement’

The team will have to consider carefully to what extent the attached ideas are feasible,
if at all, in the light of M B s possible departure.
