                     INTER AGENCY MEETING


            THURSDAY, 20th APRIL 1989 (4.00 p.m.)




                       A G E N D A




      Minutes of the meeting held on 19th April 1989
      and issues arising.
                                       Cy   hi)
                                                  ^ --1
2.   Any Other Business.




                                                          (JLajlaA   s




NOTE:      The following documents are enclosed —

           (a)   Minutes of the 19th April meeting.

           (b)   Young Persons' Crisis Leaflet.

           (c)   Database.

           (d)   HelpLine Rota.




                           ■to-   •*    *   *
To: Hugh Lamont



                         INTER AGENCIES MEETING
                                                                           B
                       WEDNESDAY, 19TH APRIL, 1989



PRESENT:

       Mr. David Mason (In the Chair) Director of Social Services, Liverpool.
       Mr. Vic Citarella, Deputy Director of Social Services, Liverpool.
       Mr. P. Marley, Social Services, Liverpool.
       Ms. C. Wilkinson, Social Services Liverpool.
       Mr. M. Stewart, Centre for Crisis Psychology.
       Ms. G. Kingsman, Centre for Crisis Psychology.
       Mr. R.C. Duff, Mersey Regional Health Authority.
      Ms. M. Farrington Wood, Mersey Regional Health Authority.
      Mr. B. Walker, Social Services, Knowsley.
      Ms. P. Farrell, Director of Social Services, Sefton.
      Mr. T. Owen, Social Services, Cheshire.
      Mr. D. Mathieson, Merseyside Probation Service.
      Mr. R. Adams, Merseyside Probation Service.
      Mr. R. Tann, Merseyside F.&C.D.A. — Emergency Planning
      Mr. D. Evans, Social Services, Wirral.
      Mr. P. Johnson, Personal Services, St. Helens.
      Ms. P. Oliver, Deputy Director of Social Services, Lancashire.
      Ms. E. Newby, Division 4, Social Services, Lancashire.
      Mr. W.T. Twist, Lancashire.
      Mr. G. Davey, City Solicitor's, Liverpool.
      Mr. A. Horner, City Solicitor's, Liverpool.
                                     -   1   -




13. PLANNING GROUP

    The importance    of joint planning and the co-ordination of
    available resources, and the need to avoid convergence on
    clients, was stressed.  The level of service has to be coherent
    and the terms of reference for the planning group should
    reflect this.    The Director suggested, and it was agreed,             All to
    that:-                                                                  Note

    (a) the terms of      referencebe to consider nothing more than what
           needed Lo      be set upat- t-he centre;

    (b) Howard Parker, Professor in Social Work (Manchester) be
        invited to Chair the Group, utilising Liverpool University
        working space and support staff;

    (c) membership be on the basis of 1 representative per Local
        Authority, 1/2 reps of the MRHA, 1 rep of the Probation Service
        and 1 rep of the Voluntary Sector (Pauline Farrell to obtain
    the name at the meeting with the Voluntary Sector on 20th April,
    (N.B. Rod Tann, Emergency Planning, to be advised of the arrange­
        ments for meetings).

    Meetings are to be held with Howard Parker as follows, viz:-

             21st April (a.m.)
             24th April (all day)
             26th April (all day)

    and it is envisaged that a proposal will be available immediately
    thereafter for consideration by Social Services Departments
    and if acceptable, by a joint meeting of politicians the
    following weekend.

14. COMPUTER UP-DATE

    The Director advised the    meeting that offers of assistance
    from Authorities to provide staff to work on accessing information
    to the data base should be on the basis of secondments of
    a minimum of 1 week, preferably longer. An information/instruction
    sheet concerning referrals from other agencies will be circulated.
    Referrals from Health Agencies needs to be discussed.         It       K. Johnson
    was agreed that Ken Johnson would take these points on board
    and that a meeting of representatives of all Authorities
    be set up with the Kent people responsible for the system
    so that information on the system being used could be dissemimated
    and also to discuss and advise on the input of data from
    Education Authorities.

15. LMC/GP

   A note on the MRHA Senior Managers Training Day of 19th                 G . Davey
   April to be faxed to G. Davey for circulation at this meeting
   on 20th April.      The principle of providing psychologists
   to provide de-briefing for staff involved in the after-math
   of the tragedy was agreed.
                                    -   2   -

16. Leaflet

         The crisis ^eaflet to be ready for circulation on 21st April.
         The version for younger people should be ready late on 19th
         April (first print run approximately 35,000 copies to be
         shared between authorities).       It was agreed that posters
         on similar lines to the young persons leaflet be produced
         for circulation tin schools and colleges. There was no objection
         to the leaflets being reproduced in local free newspapers.

17-. Schoo 1s/Training Programme            -----   -- — ---- ------   --

         The meeting noted that arrangements had now been made for
         an Officer to be seconded immediately from Berkshire with            All to
         the aim of introducing as from 24th April educational training       Note
         programmes for staff of secondary schools and colleges of
         further education. Each authority agreed to take this information
         back to their Members for a decision on participation.
         In the meantime, 4 half day sessions have been set up for
         next week at which Liverpool will attend, possibly accompanied
         by staff from other Local Authorities (e.g. Sefton).      (N.B.
         Mr. Farley, Liverpool Education Committee, to arrange for            Mr. M. Far'
         the attendance of 100 staff per session from Liverpool -
         with reserve lists of approximately 50 staff - and to arrange
         venues).

18. Discharged Patients on Merseyside

         The MRHA has established a link with Sheffield Health Authority      Mr. R. Duf:
         and a list of injured people discharged from hospitals is
         now to be made available to Liverpool Social Services Department
         on a daily basis.

19. Helpline

         The meeting was informed that the staffing of the helpline
         had been scaled down at certain early hours of the day to
         reflect demand. The Director agreed to raise the matter of          Mr. D. Masoi
         seeking further assistance for the busy hours at a meeting
         with Directors of Social Services on 20th April.   Negotiations
         with the voluntary sector are continuing and Carole Wilkinson       Carole
         agreed to Fax through to Pauline Farrell slots in existing          Wilkinson
         rotas which would be filled by voluntary representatives,
         in time for her meeting with them on 20th April.       Knowsley
         indicated that all calls to their hotline are now being
         redirected automatically to the Helpline.   The meeting agreed
         that for the present, no other contact telephone numbers,
         should be made available.

20   .   Training

         The Director informed the meeting that arrangements were
         in hand for an Emergency Meeting of NWASSA to consider the
         funding of a Training Co-ordinator (to shadow Michael Stewart
         and thereafter, to train the trainers).

         Arrangements have been made for the training session for
         middle managers (to be held on 20th April) to be video recorded,
                                   -   3   -

    for the purpose of further training in due course.

21. Funeral Directors
                \_
    All authorities are asked to note that bodies are to be                All to
    returned from Sheffield without clothing or personal effects.          Note
22. Disaster Fund
                  t
    The meeting heard that 4 independent trustees have now been
    appointed.

2 3 ^ Liverpool Football Club-----------------------------------------

    Current playing staff will be attending Merseyside funerals,
    ex—iplayers  will be attending others outside the region.
    The Director has re-iterated the offer to the Club to provide
    support and assistance to players, wives and other Club
    staff.

24. Voluntary Sector Contact

    If possible, the name of a central contact person on behalf          Pauline
    of the voluntary sector to be provided to this meeting on            Farrell
    20th April.

25. Large North West Employers

    It was suggested that a presentation should be made to large         David Mason
    employers in the region with the emphasis on providing information
    on advising and assisting members of the workforce affected
    by the tragedy.      It was agreed that an approach be made
    in the first instance to the Chamber        of Commerce with a
    view to the services of Michael Stewart being bought in.

26. Letterhead/Press Notice Logo

    It was agreed that a letterhead/press notice would be designed        Peter
    incorporating the logos of the seven local authorities,               Venables
    as soon as possible, such paperwork to display the address
    as c/o 26 Hatton Garden, Liverpool.         Original copies of
    logos to be sent to G. Davey as soon as possible.

27. Anglican Cathedral Memorial Service

   The meeting noted that a Memorial Service is to be held
   at 11.00 a.m. on 29th April at the Anglican Cathedral and
   that personal contact is being made with all the families
   who have suffered a bereavement to ascertain their wishes
   about attendance:     A Memorial Service is also being held
   in Sheffield on 23rd April at 6.30 p.m. and, it is possible,
   a service will be held at Liverpool Football Club at 3.00
   p.m. on 22nd or 23rd April.

28. Offers of Help

   It was agreed that Pauline Farrell would raise at the meeting         Pauline
   of Voluntary Organisations on 20th April the possibility              Farrell
   of a micro computer and operator being made available to
   bring together the large number of offers of help and assistance
   which have had to be put to one side whilst concentrating
   on responding to those asking for help.
