                       •   W ith the
                       compliments of



                   '   David Mason

Director of Social Services,
Social Services Department,
Hatton Garden,                           Telephone:
Liverpool. L3 2AW                       051-227 3911
                F R O M T H E OFFICE OF THE L E ADER OF T H E CITY COUNCIL
                                       P.O.BOX 88
                _______________ MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.______________
                                  LIVERPOOL, L69 2DH.

                               Telephone: 051-238ca&Mx£xS.   2 2 5 -2 3 1 8


 To:   The Rt. Hon. Nicholas Ridley, M.P.,                               6th May, 1989.
       Secretary of State for the Environment.

       The Rt. Hon. Kenneth Clarke, M.P.,
       Secretary of State for Health.

       The Rt. Hon. John Moore, M.P.,
       Secretary of state for Social Services.



                              Hillsborough Tragedy

     Since Hillsborough seven Local Authorities in Merseyside, plus Cheshire
and Lancashire, together with Mersey Regional Health Authority, Merseyside
Probation Service and numerous voluntary organisations have been providing a
co-ordinated response.   On Saturday last, the 29th April, the Leaders of these
seven local authorities and the Leaders of Nottinghamshire and Sheffield Councils
met to consider a joint approach to the provision of services which will continue
to be necessary for several years to come.

     The attached report, prepared under the independent Chairmanship of the
Professor of Social Work at Manchester University, was agreed in principle. The
report recommends the establishment of a Regional Unit to provide a core of common
services, including:-

       i)     A Helpline to receive calls from anywhere day and night;
       ii)    The Co-ordination of counselling services both within and outside
               the nine local authorities provided by voluntary as well as
               statutory agencies;

       iii)   A Database capable of dealing with all requests for assistance and
              offers of help;

       iv)    A continuing training and staff support programme                   in this previously
               unfamiliar area of work;

       v)     The management of media contacts and publicity.


     It was agreed to reconvene the meeting following exploration of all possible
sources of funding.   Recognizing that services will need to extend beyond these
nine local authorities and be available nationally on a scale not previously
experienced by an authority or group of authorities, our first but not only approach
for funding is addressed to Government.   Further work is being undertaken to
approach private industry, charitable bodies and E.E.C.    Already the local social
services authorities in the North Vest have agreed to jointly sponsor an additional
training officer.

                                                                     /c o n t'd
                                       -2 -

                                                                6th May, 1989




 /continued




     The Department, we anticipate, would wish to be associated with this
initiative and through Government may be able to make finance available to fund the
Regional Unit at a cost of £350,000 per year for a period of three years. Within
all the participating local authority areas it will also be necessary to take urgent
action to strengthen staffing in order to directly help individuals and their families,
according to the scale of the problems which they are facing. As yet these costs
have not been fully assessed but when aggregated are unlikely to be less than £1millior
per year, spread across the North West.   The Government we hope would wish to be aware
of this and may consider making resources available to assist in direct service
provision as well as the establishment of the Regional Unit.

     It is, of course, appreciated that Government has already donated £500,000 towards
the National Disaster Fund.   This fund has quite properly focussed its attention on
the relief of individual hardship and will provide financial help directly to victims,
but will not do away with the need for other help of a non-financial kind to be
provided

     Given the nature and extent of these services this letter has been copied to
the Secretary of State for Environment and the Secretary of State for Social Security,
and also for information to officers in other agencies.

     In view of the importance of the issues involved a copy has been forwarded to
the Prime Minister so that she, personally, can be aware of the state of service
development and needs.

     An early decision on financial support would be most appreciated as it is
anticipated other potential sources of finance will await the response of Government
before making a commitment.

                                   Yours sincerely




   Councillor D                                          Councillor Mrs. L.J. Ellmanj
             ' D » Pettett
Leader, Netting                Councillor John Collins   Leader, Lancashire C.C.
             nfihamshire CC    Leader, Cheshire C.C.




   MARIE E. RIMMER
   Leader of St. Helens MBC
                                      °                  P. J, CORCORAN
                              IS. T. CUNNIFFE
                              Leader -> Democrat G r o u p Leader - La bo ur Group
                            -3 -




                                     tffdbfifi   &F ^      'bCMot&trt sd.-vt’




                                                   -ru t   U fa *   tto v f




  \




Councillor J Knight.   JP

Leader,   Knowsley Borough Council
            A F T E R    H I L L S B O R O U G H




     A Report and Recommendations for Co-ordinating and

              Delivering Helping Services of the

                Directors of Social Services

                    of the areas affected




  Prepared by Officers from Cheshire, Knowsley, Lancashire
  Liverpool, Sefton, St. Helens and Wirral in consultation
  with Merseyside Probation Service, the Voluntary Agencies,
  Mersey Regional Health Authority and Merseyside Emergency
  Planning Unit, under the Chairmanship of Professor Howard
  Parker.


                          APRIL 1989




HLAAAG
     AIM

          To consider the feasibility including costings of
     establishing a regional unit in order to marshall and
     organise the allocation of a variety of resources so that
     help can be made available in the right place at the right
     time to people affected by the "Hillsborough"* disaster.   In
     this context "Region" is the seven local authorities.

     METHOD AND FORMAT

2.       A working party of senior staff, drawn from statutory
     and voluntary agencies in the region was established to
     report on the potential for an Assistance Unit built upon
     the service structure created after "Hillsborough".  The
     group was chaired by Howard Parker, Professor in Social Work
     at the University of Manchester.

3.        The report uses the experience gained from the disaster
     at "Hillsborough" and other recent tragedies, and sets out
     recommendations for dealing with the organisational,
     information and co-ordination issues which have arisen.
     Specifically, this consists off a synopsis of the key
     elements required to operate a service which is responsive
     to need and has an outreach capability, including the
     provision of a helpline, counselling, specialised work,
     database, staff training/support and public relations.   All
     of these elements are included within the broad aim as
     stated above, and the role of the unit as perceived by the
     group.

     INTRODUCTION

4.        The events at "Hillsborough", Sheffield, on 15th April
     1989, are a graphic illustration of the extensive damage to
     personal well-being which can be precipitated by the trauma
     of a major disaster.  This applies to those directly
     involved, through injury or bereavement, their helpers,
     onlookers, and people suffering shock due to publicity or
     association with similar events.  The effects are often
     long-term and can have a profound impact upon family life
     and on individual ability to cope with everyday living.

5.        "Hillsborough" is the latest in a tragic line of
     disasters.  Manchester Airport, Bradford, Piper Alpha,
     Zeebrugge, Kegworth, Clapham and Lockerbie have all
     illustrated how a major unexpected disaster affects the
     lives of ordinary people and the agencies which must provide
     them with assistance.  We have learnt a great deal from
     these earlier tragedies, particularly how large scale
     disasters produce trauma and grief much further and deeper
     than common sense would expect.

     *   Football Stadium in Sheffield - Hillsborough


     HLAAAG
     Following the disaster, there was a rapid mobilisation
of resources from a variety of authorities, and
non-staLuLory agencies. It became apparent from the outset,
that a mechanism was necessary to ensure that these
resources were properly co-ordinated to reach people and
families in need in the.most effective and speedy manner.
Drawing from the experience of those involved in the
response to earlier disasters, and from the current
situation, it is considered essential that an infrastructure
is established which can consolidate the effort currently
under way, and develop and adapt it to meet the changing
needs of the region for a minimum period of two years.

BACKGROUND

     The services and resources available for assistance
are, in the main, already in place though not always on the
scale required.  These services are provided by a
multiplicity of organisations.  They must respond to those
who have asked for help, but also reach out to those who
have not come forward spontaneously.  It is important that
services are available quickly, are easily accessible,
approachable and able to deal with a whole range of
emotional and practical needs.  Some of these needs will be
immediate, some short-term, some of a more permanent nature
and in many cases needs will remain hidden for months, or
even years.

     Localised services, well publicised, are of course,
most important but these should be seen in the context of a
regional network of centrally co-ordinated resources.  In
addition, regional co-ordination can mobilise resources in
particular areas which would perhaps be overwhelmed by
demand, if left to cope alone.

KEY CO-ORDINATION FUNCTIONS REQUIRED A R E :-

(i)      Receipt and analysis of all requests for help both
          locally and nationally to ensure a co-ordinated
          response is made;

(ii)     provision of an outreach service to track those who
         need help, but who have not yet come forward;

(iii)    promote quality assurance of services, through
         monitoring and review;

(iv)     establishment of criteria for staff training and
          support patterns which are common across the region;

(v)      advise on the public relations function;




HLAAAG
         (vi)      guidance and assistance in the establishment of
                   appropriate local databases which are compatible with
                   the central system, to ensure speedy, reliable and
                   accurate information;

         (vii)     promotion of liaison and co-operation between all
                   relevant agencies in the region.

         (viii) review action already taken in other regions (e.g.
                Sheffield, Nottinghamshire).

         COUNSELLING SERVICES - CONTINUING REQUIREMENTS

10   .        It is clear from the information from previous
         disasters that continued access to practical and counselling
         services is required by some victims for a considerable time
         after the event.  It cannot be assumed that individuals
         needing help will be requesting or needing it now and
         arrangements must be made to ensure that help is accessible
         and readily available in the medium and long-term.

11   .        The extent of future service requirements is difficult
         to predict though some indications of the range of problems
         presented, the location of people needing help and the form
         of help they require should be available when data collected
         so far, has been analysed.  Some patterns of service
         requirements will be discernible and inform the detailed
         planning of provision.

12   .        Meanwhile it is possible to identify in broad terms the
         kinds of services that will be needed and the ways in which
         they may be provided.  A co-ordinated mix of centralised and
         local services from the statutory and voluntary sector is
         likely to provide the greatest flexibility in the use of
         resources;  such flexibility will be necessary given the
         difficulty of identifying the extent and type of need, and
         ensuring that deployment of resources is appropriate and
         adequately monitored.

         Philosophy

13.               It is important to ensure that the service response
         meets with an overall philosophy agreed by the participating
         ag e n c i e s .

                 For the consumer this will mean that:

         (i)      There are clear avenues for seeking help (locally and
                  re gionally).

         (ii)     The response to their requests will be quick and
                  appropriate.




         HLAAAG
           (iii)     Help is easily accessible (i.e.  help is not
                     dependent upon where people live).

           (iv)      Help should be non-labelling and non-stigmatising.

                For the participating agencies this will mean that
           services:

           (i)      Should be well co-ordinated                    and consistent.

           (ii)     Should be quality assured.

           (iii)    Cost effective.

           (iv)     Keep the consumer as the primary                       consideration.

14.             In addition, the agencies will need to contribute to
           the wider body of knowledge that can be drawn upon in the
           event of further disasters.  Funds to mount an evaluation of
           the response to this disaster are being sought
           independently.  The feedback from such research could be
           invaluable regionally and nationally in emergency planning.


           Specific Service Requirements

15.             The provision of services as a response to disaster can
           be considered along a continuum with practical help at one
           end and long-term counselling at the other.  Figure 1
           attempts to show this continuum in more detail.

           Figure 1 - A Service Continuum

P rac tic al                       Advice/ _                            Counselling                             Llong-term
Help                               Guidance                                                                    _Support
            1      1    1   1      1      1     1    1 1        1 1         1      I I        I I        1      1
         Transport | llegal | Information |     A    | Physical | Sharing |        I Mourning | Bereave- |    PTSD*
                   |        |             | ijisten-1           | fe elings |      |           | ment    |
                   |        |             | ing ear |           1           1      1           1          1
                   I    I                 I      I              1           1      1           1          1
                Finance   Medical      Referral Support      Medical     Relation­          S tress S ta ff Support
                                         on        Group                 ships
                                                                                 Grief

16.             It can be seen that the services along the continuum
           reflect particular post disaster time phases, the possible
           different modes or models of service provision and the
           possible locations where services are received.  Many of the
           services are best left at the local level where resources
           are familiar and can easily be adjusted in response to
           changes in need.


           *     Post Trauma Stress Disorder.


           HLAAAG
     However, some can be provided more effectively at a
Regional level, e.g.  Helpline, central information.  In
addition, some services can best be monitored, evaluated and
co-ordinated at a regional level.  A 'network' of specialist
skills can be developed by a regional unit.

     The Inter-Agency Planning Group recommends that a
co-ordinating body, known as the "Hillsborough Support Unit"
be established for a minimum period of two years.  The Unit
should have an executive officer, and support staff;
operate the central Helpline;  set up an efficient database;
oversee the pattern of services to enable resources to be
used effectively;  see that districts provide systematic
support and training for all staff;  develop clear channels
of communication and form partnerships with all relevant
authorities and non-statutory agencies in the region;  set
up monitoring, evaluation and performance review systems.

     The lead authorities responsible for the Unit could be
represented through a Committee comprising local authority
members and officers' representatives of Mersey Regional
Health Authority, Merseyside Probation Service, Voluntary
Organisations, and the National Disaster Appeal Fund.

Suggested 'Regional Services'

     The services outlined below will need to be linked to
each other through the proposed Regional Unit.

HELPLINE

     This service currently operates on a 24 hour day, 7 day
week basis and is staffed by officers of the Social Services
Departments and a variety of other organisations.  Given the
nationwide 'catchment' of potential users of the service it
will be cost-efficient to retain this centralised service at
its current level for a period of weeks to come and will
ensure a ready access point for assistance while medium to
longer term arrangements are effected.  It is envisaged that
the Helpline will become a national 'one number' service run
by the regional unit with calls then referred to local
services as appropriate.

Co-ordination of Counselling Services

     Whilst counselling will usually be offered very
'locally' it will be necessary to ensure that individuals
are referred to the most appropriate agency; that their
needs are met, and the services are monitored.   In addition
there will be people needing help from outside the 'region'
whose needs must be assessed and referrals made.   This will
require a team of 4 headed by a team leader.




HLAAAG
22.        It is important that referrals to and from statutory
      agencies across the country are properly co-ordinated.
      There are a number of voluntary agencies on Merseyside and
      in the region for whom counselling is already the major, or
      a significant part of their work; these should be used
      wherever possible.  These include COMPASS*, Personal Social
      Services, C. of E. Board of Social Responsibility (through
      the clergy and national organisations with local bases, such
      as Cruse*).  The regional unit would aim to co-ordinate
      referrals to and from these agencies where appropriate.

      Drop-in Centre

23.         The Anfield** Advice Centre has already allowed a large
      number of 'survivors' to describe and share their experience
      of being at Hillsborough.   It has offered other services as
      well.   It is likely that this Centre will continue via
      funding from other sources.   However, because of the
      symbolic importance of Anfield we recommend that it is used
      as a referral point for Helpline on Match Days.   We believe
      that many new referrals will be obtained on Match Days.

      OUTREACH AND CO-ORDINATION

24.        Whilst the majority of people affected by Hillsborough
      reside within or just outside the Merseyside region it is
      known that a significant number reside elsewhere.  This
      problem was found by Kent following the Herald of Free
      Enterprise disaster at Zeebrugge where survivors and others
      lived long distances from the centre of help.  An "away"
      Team was established to initiate and provide assistance
      outside the Dover area.  Zeebrugge also demonstrated that
      many people required specialist help from Counsellors,
      Psychologists and Psychiatrists etc., and that a mechanism
      was needed to co-ordinate their services.  Thus problems
      were both identified and met by the Kent "away" Team.

25.        Unlike Zeebrugge, however, the identity and location of
      people affected by "Hillsborough" are largely unknown.
      Whilst this is a handicap, there is sufficient justification
      to reach out to those in potential need.  There is a need,
      therefore, to establish the equivalent of the Kent "away"
      Team but with the limited role of referring those from
      outside the region to appropriate services across the
      country.  Basic tasks will be tos-

      *    COMPASS:   Counselling on Merseyside, Pastoral and
                       Supporting Services

           C. of E . ; Church of England

           Cruse:     National Organisation for the Widowed and their
                       Children

      **    Football Stadium of Liverpool Football Club, Anfield

      HLAAAG
      1.    Provide a central telephone line, e.g. an 0800
            (freephone) number;

      2.   Provide an assessment and referral service, whereby
           people are re-referred to Local Advice Services;

      3.   Co-ordinate referrals both from within and without the
           region;

      4.   Provide oversight of the different elements of
           specialist services, e.g. psychologists etc.

      5.   Identify key events and anniversaries which may effect
           individuals and consequently service provision (e.g.
           Inquests, future football games).

           Thus the differing needs of people will be identified
      and the appropriate resources matched up to meet those
      needs:  this will avoid duplication of effort and create a
      more efficient use of resources.

      DATABASE REQUIREMENTS

26.            The unit will require a database capable of recording
      information fed through to the 'helpline', 'drop.in' centres
      and other source points.          The majority of contacts will be
      within two broad categories, i.e. either requesting
      assistance or offering help.          Currently the 'Hillsborough
      H e l p l i n e 1 has separate systems dealing with these two
      elements.          At present, nearly 3,600 offers of help have been
      received from a variety of sources, including over 600
      through the 'Hillsborough Helpline'*          About 1,650 requests
      for help had          been received nationally after one week, the
      majority of these being through the 'Hillsborough Helpline'.
      With this level of activity occuring, it is clear that an
      effective database is essential to matching needs for
      assistance with the wide range of resources available.

27.        In respect of referrals for help, a manual database was
      established as a record of callers, pending the setting up
      of the computerised system.   It is suggested that this be
      retained and maintained as a back up in case of problems
      with the system.

28.           Information which is useful for the database, includes
      basic details such as names, addresses, local authority of
      origin, referral to district and agency, general
      practitioners, significant dates, (birthdays, anniversaries
      e t c ) . Each person has an individual reference number, and
      there is a facility for a group reference for people linked
      together.




      HLAAAG
29.        Staffing levels, which are currently based upon staff
      seconded from other duties should be formalised as soon as
      possible.  Minimum staffing i s e x p e c t e d to require a systems
      manager, two operators, and full-time clerical support.
      Once the system is up to date close links should be
      maintained with the 'Helpline', and other agencies involved
      in collating or investigating data.

      Staff Training and Support

30.        The need for on-going and carefully targetted training
      has been demonstrated via earlier disasters.  Clearly such
      training can and has already been 'bought in' from external
      sources.  So far this specialist training has been
      provided for local authority workers.  The regional unit
      would hope to adopt a policy of 'training the trainers' and
      thus by using expertise within the region attempt to reduce
      training costs.

31.        It is absolutely clear that those managing and working
      in post-disaster situations found the work very stressful.
      They need access to regular de-briefing and 'talking out'
      sessions.  Whilst for some workers this will in part be
      provided in their own agencies there is a need for an
      independent service which all helpers, whether paid or
      voluntary staff, can use.  The regional unit would aim to
      ensure these support systems were in place and make
      arrangements to co-ordinate offers of this 'care for the
      carers' (e.g. by BASW* and the Psychology Service).   The
      unit could also respond, in confidence, to direct requests
      from staff anywhere in the region.

      PUBLIC RELATIONS

32.         "Public relations" is an important and basic element in
      the success or failure of any venture.   This is complex and
      requires skilled and sensitive handling if its potential is
      to be realised.   It needs to be regarded as an explicit
      task, and as part of the management and objectives of the
      unit.   It can best be organised within the framework of a
      public relations strategy.

              Such a strategy will acknowledge that:-

      (i)      Interest in the disaster will be subject to
               fluctuation.  For example:  funerals, inquests,
               litigation, football matches, anniversary of the
               disaster etc.  Forward planning for the impact of
               these events is required.

      *     BASW:   British Association of Social Workers




      HLAAAG
      (ii)     Public Relations is heavily dependent on hard, factual
               and accurate information about the work of the unit.
               There w i l l , ’therefore", need to be direct links between
               the management and the public relations functions of
               the unit.

      (iii) Media interest can sometimes be aggressive and
            time-consuming.  This can be wasteful at best and
            damaging at worst.  Thus contact with the media needs
            to be carefully channelled and regulated separating
            local and regional issues.

33.        It is suggested that public relations can best be
      undertaken by the Head of the Unit along with substantial
      support from the Management Committee.

      COSTINGS

34.        Since "Hillsborough" is a national disaster, it is
      recommended that strenuous efforts are made to obtain the
      funding of the Unit from central government, the EEC and
      other sources.  Costs are estimated at around £350,000 per
      year for two years.  This may be generous or alternatively
      additional resources may need to be added on.

      CONCLUSION

35.        The advantages of co-ordinating all helping responses
      seem clear.  It is believed that a Regional Unit would, in
      the long run, be cost effective and more importantly would
      introduce a whole series of supports and checks which would
      mean a better service for those who need it, including the
      carers.




      29th April, 1989




      HLAAAG
            ESTIMATED COSTS "HILLSBOROUGH " SUPPORT UNIT


                                1989/90   1990/91    1991,

                                From      Full       To

                                1.7.89    Year       30.6

RUNNING COSTS                   £000      £000       £000

Salaries                         140       185            46

Volunteer Expenses                33        44            11

Office Accommodation, etc         26        34             9

Supplies and Services             12        14             4

Transport                             6      8             2

Telephone                         11        15             4

Printing,   Stationery etc.           8     10             2

Central Support                       8     10             3

Contingency                       30        30            15

                                 274       350            96



EQUIPMENT ETC

Typewriter, Wordprocessor
Computer Hardware
Software                         40
Phone System
Office Furniture



                                 314       350            96




HLAAAG
                                                      JOINT-AGENCY MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
                                                                     I
                                                                     I
                      Public                                    CO-ORDINATOR                             Secretary
                    Relations                                        I                          Finance and Admin. Officer




                                        I                                                  I                                  I
Data Base Manager                Team Leader                                       Helpline Organiser                 Training Officer
                        (Regional Co-ordination Team)                                       I
      I        i                         I                                                  I
    1.5 Clerical                       #I                                          Trained Volunteers
    Assistant                   4 x Social Workers
                                (Referrals Workers)




                                                       REGIONAL ASSISTANCE UNIT


          HLAAAC
