 C.c.   Mr P. Marley - for information.

        File*..



                                                                      225-3800

                                                                   Fm /m /m
 W.I. Murray, Esq,, Lt.B.,
 City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council,                         m m c
 P.O. Box Mo, 88,
 Mimic!pal. Buildings,                                             26th June, 1989
 Pale Street,
 Liverpool,
 L69 2DH.




 My dear Sir,

                             HE; HIU3BOBOOGH DISASTER


      I have today received a qopy of the•papers for the Working Party to' -
 be held on the 28th of June,'1989,

      •'Item ,3 on the Agenda is ah application for funding a ’-place of research,
  I have not had chance to sturif this in any detail or to discuss it with.
. the writer.             ^             ■

      As work on service developments to respond to Hillsborough have been
 developed, the issue of research has been considered.. The participating
 Local Authorities.who have workedtogether have agreed to co-ordinate research
 through Professor Howard Parker at Manchester University who has given
 us valuable assistance*• 1 know.there has- already been preliminary discussions
 with Department of Health, and I understand some contact has been made
 with research institutes.

      I am not able to comment in more detail at this stage* but would urge
 you to allow time for this proposal to be discussed with Professor Parker
 prior to any .agreement or commitment of resources.




                                 Yours faithfully.




                           DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES
                                                                                Difiecjixv ^
                                                                W. i. Murray, LL.3.
                                                                City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                                P.O. Box No. 88
LIVERPOOL                                                       Municipal Buildings
                                                                Dale Street

C*tyCeH»t+tU                                                    L IV E R P O O L L69 2DH
                                                                Telephone: 0 5 1 - 32?£89tK!>of&$-   225   242
                                                                Fax: 236 2047
                                                                D X 14206 LIV E R P O O L

                                                                Y our ref
 TO: All Members of the
                                                                Our ref     F&S/CM/VJ
     Hillsborough Work i n g Party
                                                                Date        23rd June      1989




 Dear Sir/Madam,

 Y ou are r e quested to attend a m e e t i n g of the HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

 WORKING PARTY of the Finance and S t r ategy Com m i t t e e to be held

 at 9.00 A.M. on WEDNESDAY, 28TH JUNE 1989 in C o m m i t t e e R o o m ,'C'

 in the M u n i c i p a l Annexe,         Dale Street,        Liverpool.       .


 Members          should note that the           first item to be c o n s i d e r e d at the

 meet i n g will be the 1 hour 50 m i n u t e c o m p i l a t i o n video of the

 D i s as ter made by W e s t M i d l a n d s Police          for submission to the Ta y l o r

 Inquiry and arr a n g e m e n t s have been mad e               for the W o r k i n g P a r t y to

 adjourn to v iew the v ideo at 9.15 A.M.                      in the Public Rel a t i o n s

 M e d i a Room, M u n i c i p a l Buildings.


 The Meeting will re-cominence at a p p r o x i m a t e l y 11.15 A.M.                      in the

 Mun i c i p a l A n n e x e   for c o n s i d e r a t i o n of the a t t a c h e d agenda.

 Yours     faithfully,

             /
              *

                  /'
                       ..   l/Uuuw

 C lerk to the Auth o r i
                    HILLSBOROUGH     WORKING     PARTY

                           2 8TH JUNE,    1989

                                 AGENDA



Hillsborough Video as c o m p i l e d by West Midlands Police
Inquiry Team.


Minutes of the m e e t i n g of the W o r k i n g Party hel d on
7th June, 1989 are su b m i t t e d for the i nformation of
Members.


A pplication for R e s e a r c h Funding for a proj e c t e n t i t l e d
"After Hillsborough".

                        (see e n c l o s e d Report)


Report on the f e a s i bility of suggesting alternative'
routes to Hillsborough.


Report of City Building Surveyor on visit to H i l l s b o r o u g h
- 1 9 t h May, 1989.’     V    •'                   .'y....

                          (Report'to follow)


Report of City B u i lding Surveyor on the licensing of
Football Stadiums.

                        (see e n c l o s e d Report)


Report on letters sent to Liv e r p o o l and Ever t o n Football
Clubs in relation to the Football S u p p o r t e r s f Legislation.
                                                                     HILLSBOROUGH



                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER W O R K I N G PARTY

                                     7th June,    1989



       PRESENT:      Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
                     Councillors W. Edwards, A. Jennings, Mary
                     Johnston, S. Ledwich, Peter Millea, K. Noon,
                     F. Roderick, Jacqueline Smith and I. Templeman.



                                       a ttended as an observer
                     representing the Football Supporters
                     Association.



13.   Minutes of Last Meeting

      Resolved. tha.t the Minute3 of the last m e e t i n g be approved.


14.   Visit to Hillsborough
      (CS/ 1 2 4 / 8 9 )

      The. Working Party c o n s i d e r e d Reports of- the Cit y Solicitor
      and Mr. Giles of the City Engineer's D e p a r t m e n t c oncerni ng
      the visit of the W o r k i n g Party to H i l l s b o r o u g h Football
      Stadium on 19th May, 1989.

      Resolved that -

      (a)   the Reports be approved;

      (b)   the City Building Surveyor be r e q u e s t e d to         prepare
             a Report on the visit to Hillsborough; and

      (c)   arrangements be m ade for Members of the Work i n g
             Party to view w h e n ava i l a b l e the v i d e o recording
             of the visit and the v i d e o of the D i s a s t e r p r e p a r e d
             and made available by the Football Supporters
             Association.


15.   Distribution of Leaflets

      The Chair    informed memb e r s that -

      (a)   30,000 leaflets p u b l i c i s i n g the w o r k of the Work i n g
            Party and giving details of the Public M e e t i n g had
            been di s t r i b u t e d at the F.A. Cup Final on 20th May,
            1989 a n d at A n f i e l d on 23rd May, 1989; and
HILLSBOROUGH



(b)   publicity had also been given to the Working Party
      on the Wembley scoreboard before the Cup Final and
      during the half-time interval..


Public Meeting
(CS/123/89)

The Working Party c o n s i d e r e d -

(a)   Report CS/123/8y of the City Solicitor concerning
      the Public Meeting h eld at St. George's Hall on
      25th May, 1989 to discuss the Disaster and the
      way forward for football; and

(b)   the Statement of the Chair made at,             and e n d o r s e d
      by the Meeting

Resolved that the statement be a p p r o v e d subject to the
deletion in p a r agraph 7 of the w ords "those responsible
for Hillsborough are e x p o s e d and brought to justice"
and their replacement with the w ords "the lessons of
the tragedy are learned and acted u p o n " .


Conference - Football        Supporters Bill

The Working Party consi d e r e d a Report from R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s
who attended the Conference on the Football Supporters
Bill held on 16th May, 1989 at H a m m e r s m i t h Town Hall,
London.



Councillor Peter Millea informed the Work i n g Party of
the advice, printed on the renewal forms issued by
Liverpool Football Club to its season ticket holders,
that they will be r e q u i r e d to com p l y fully w i t h any
legislation introduced by the G o v e r n m e n t or the
Football Authorities r e garding football m e m b e r s h i p
schemes.



Resolved that -

(a)   the Research Officer, when a p p o i n t e d be r e q u e s t e d
      to prepare a Report as a m a t t e r of urgency on the
      p r o p o s e d Supporters I.D. Scheme; and

(b)   Liverpool and Everton Football Clubs be c o n t a c t e d
      in order to determine their current p o s i t i o n in
      regard to the Gove r n m e n t le g i s l a t i o n on football
      supporters, p a r t i c u l a r l y in the light of the advice
      given by Liverpool to its season ticket holders.
                                                             HILLSBOROUGH



18.   Staffing and A dminis t r a t i v e Support

      The Chair informed the Working Party that following
      advertisement in the Liverpool Echo short-listing
      will take place on 8th June, 1989 for the post of
      Research Officer.


19.   Licensing of Football Stadiums

      Resolved that the City Building Surveyor be requested to -

      (a)   prepare a Report on the present arrangements for
            the licensing of Football Stadiums particularly
            insofar, as they apply to A n f i e l d and Goodison
            Park;and

      (b)   provide the Football Supporters Association, a s ■
            requested with a copy of the G r o u n d Safety
            Certificate for A n f i e l d subject to the consent of
            Liverpool Football Club.


20.   Lord Justice Taylor      Inquiry

      The Deputy City Solicitor r e p orted upon the, .further
      request w hich has been submitted to the L o r d Jus'tice
      Taylor Inquiry upon the re p r e s e n t a t i o n o f ■the City
      Council at the Inquiry.. A response to the request was
      expected imminently.
APPLICATION f o r r e s e a r c h f u n d i n g
PROJECT : "HILLSBOROUGH AND AFTER : THE LIVERPOOL EXPERIENCE"



                       Report of the City Solicitor
            (Officer Contact : |‘ -   ■   ^ Tel. No. 225-2334)


1.   Following the Hillsborough disaster Or. Phil Scraton, Principal
Lecturer in Criminology and Head of the Centre for Studies in Crime and
Social Justice at Edge Hill College, Ormskirk, approached the Leader of
the City Council with a proposal for a research project to be funded by
Edge Hill College and the City Council.

 2.   The Chair of the Hillsborough Working Party and the Chair of
■Finance and Strategy met with Dr. Scraton to discuss the proposed project.
 At that meeting Dr. Scraton emphasised that:-

        (i) the Edge Hill .Centre has established itself as a basis for
            advanced critical research into soccer-related issues
            including crowd behaviour, policing, financing and safety;

     ' (ii) his objective is to place the events at Hillsborough into
            their long-term historical', social and economic contexts;-

      (iii) that, the negative reputation of Merseyside in the media and
            ■national politics contributed to the disaster and its
            aft&rmath;                                         •'

       (iv) also, having published extensively, the work at Edge Hill
            on criminal justice processes, official inquiries'and
            controversial deaths provides the project with the .capacity,   '.
           ■facilities and resources to monitor the offical inquiries
            and media coverage.

3.   The basis for the research proposal is as follows:

      Hillsborough is the.most serious tragedy in terms of loss of life/
injury, to have occurred within 'organised leisure' in contemporary Britain.
It is the focus of world attention, projection and opinion. Within a few
days of the two inquiries being established there was a general concern in
Liverpool, shared by local politicians and political/academic commentators,
that the formal processes would neither have the capacity or the resources
to cover the broader issues relating to the Hillsborough Tragedy.   This was
compounded in many accounts by a purposeful emphasis on Liverpool's 'bad
reputation1 and the'violence1 of its people.   As with the events during
the Toxteth disturbances (1981; 1985) and Heysel there was an immediate
sense of 'isolation' within the City.   Clearly the sequence of events in
the first two weeks after Hillsborough emphasises this problem for people
and it became apparent that some would not give evidence to the inquiry
team.   The Hillsborough Working Party's remit to assist, encourage and
organise facilities for people to give evidence has responded to this
problem.   The Working Party's focus on the events around Hillsborough
will help to construct a broader picture, including media and governmental
reaction to the disaster.   The project will be more extensive in its
coverage of personal accounts than either of the official inquiries.
4.   The research project would and will cover issues more broadly
defined than those within the  remit of the Working Party. Apart from
taking in-depth accounts of the post-Hillsborough progression of events
within the City the main objectives of the project will be to:

       (i) consider the background and impact of 'hooligan hysteria1
           and its emphasis on controlling football supporters
           through police policies and practices;

      (3i) examine the significance of prejudiced attitudes held by central
           government and the authorities concerning Merseyside's
           negative reputation and the control of Merseyside supporters;

     (iii) moni tor all Inquiries, into'Hillsborough, providing a full
           evaluation of the adequacy of the Inquiries, and their
           selective use of evidence; and

      (iv) also, inquire into events related to Hillsborough which will not
           be covered by the official investigations (treatment of relatives
           by the authorities; intrusive journalism; impact on the Social
           Services, etc.).                                          .

5.    The research project intends to work alongside the Working Party., to
place this full range of material within the longer term'historical,
political and economic, developments of soccer and its recent emphasis on
control'and regulation - both 'from   the official bodies within the  sport
and from those with responsibility   for policing it.   Therecent projects
completed, published and to be published from the Edge Hill      centre
demonstrate their expertise in the fields of, criminal/civil justice,
police powers and accountability, soccer and media research.      It is envisaged
that the project will take approximately 12 months to complete from its
inception.: Dr. Scraton highlighted the academic, independence of his
research proposal and the Chair of the Working Party identified the brief
of the Working Party's Research Officer who would liaise closely with
Dr. Scraton to develop a comprehensive coverage of Hillsborough and related
issues.

6.   In order to develop the project the costings are estimated as follows:

     Staffing:

     Research Assistant (IB Scale)    inc. all   'on costs'        £13,500
     Research Assistant' (IB Scale)   inc. all   'on costs'        £13,500
     Project Secretary (Scale 1/2)    inc. all   'on costs'        £ 6,500

     Project expenses:

     Stationery/mailing etc.                                          £300
     Purchase of Reports etc.                                         £250
     Travel (Sheffield/London)                                        £600
     Discs/D Base Programme                                           £250
                                 - 3 -



Other expenses carried by the    Centre1: Project Director's salary;
Capital equipment (inc. word processor, D Base etc.,); library searches;
consultancies; office and telephone.   This would be worth approximately
£25,000 if fully costed.

7.   The College have requested that a grant of £34,900 be made available
to help finance the project.


8.   There is no budgetary provision for the proposal.
         THE LICENSING OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS
         (CBS/192/89)                                                       _
                                                                  .                 0
         REPORT OF THE CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR                                               -
         (Contact Officer : |       ~~| Tel. 225 3395)

         1.   The Working Party, at its meeting of the 7th June 1989, asked for a
              report on the existing procedures for the licensing of football
              grounds, which particular matter is controlled by the Safety of Sports
              Grounds Act 1975.   However, before moving into the detail of that
              subject, it is worth remembering that the development and alteration
              of most modern covered stadia is, or has been, subject to the Building
              Regulations, which set standards of design and construction relevant
              to the safety of users.   It is relevant also that parts of the stadium
              buildings are almost invariably subject to overlapping mandatory
              controls with regard to their use as workplaces (administrative
              offices) and places of assembly, or shops (restaurants).   In
              Merseyside and some other metropolitan areas, uncovered stands are
              controllable also under local Acts.   These other uses and their
              ongoing control frequently involve licensing for drinking and/or
              public entertainment, and in some cases (e.g. Anfield) as tourist
              attractions, involving the conduct of parties ajid the exhibition of
              historical films' using videos.  Thus Members will appreciate that a
              total stadium complex requires co-ordinated consideration and
              supervision, not -confined only to match day use, and that it is
              important for the .Local Authorities responsible to provide that.

         2; ’ In the case of Metropolitan District Councils such as Liverpool, such
               an approach is possible through’,its Building Regulation control
               department, and ''-this was provided from tfie onset of the', legislation.
            . I n the case of football grounds in non-Metropolitan Districts, the
            • County Council remains the authority responsible for the functions
              required by the Act of 1975 and that immediately poses some degree of
              difficulty in liaison.      The Act of 1975 is specifically directed to
              ensuring.a satisfactory standard of safety for the spectators
              attending football matches, but that itself involves a certain amount
              of use, or passage through buildings which have the other uses .
              mentioned above at other times.      For the purposes of the Working
              Party, this report will concentrate on the provisions and procedures
              of the 1975 Act, but Members will appreciate that this is not the
              total control medium.

         3.   The Act of 1975 permitted the Secretary of State to designate sports
              grounds, which have accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators
              (covered or uncovered), to require a safety certificate issued by the
              appropriate Local Authority.   Stadia have been designated in a series
              of orders, since 1st January 1977, starting with international and
              First Division grounds, and followed on with further orders bringing
              in Second Division grounds, and (following the Bradford disaster) all
              Football League grounds and some grounds used for other team sports
              have   been included in that process.   The safety certificate which has
              to be held is known as a "General Safety Certificate", and should be
              designed to cover all normal matches taking place at the stadium.     If
              someother activity, or different kind of competitive sport     is to be
              held   at the ground, the Act provides for a "Special Safety




NBCAAD
Certificate" to be issued for those uses (an example of that was the
use of Anfield by the Billy Graham Christian Mission some years ago).
The Local Authority has the power to amend a safety certificate, or to
replace it completely, with or without an application for that being
received from the Holder.  This effectively allows the authority to
review the certificate as often as it needs, in the light of
experience, and to alter any of the arrangements which it had
previously demanded or permitted, including the capacity of the ground
and its various enclosures, subject of course to a right of appeal by
the Holder against all actions of the authority, or conditions fixed
in the certificate.  Other "interested parties" also have a right of
appeal against provisions made, or not made, in a safety certificate.
Those "interested parties" include the Chief Officer of Police and the
Fire Authority, so that it is important for the Local Authority
dealing with the certificate to keep a close liaison with those
parties, although final decisions in any matter rest with the
certificating Local Authority.   In this connection, it may be noted
that where the Local Authority responsible is the County, the District
Authority which is the Building Control Authority is also an
"interested party".

 It is- worth noting the difference between a "Safety Certificate"
 issued to football grounds and a "Public Entertainment Licence" issued
 to places of other forms o f 'entertainment. The latter are renewable
 annually, which ensures-1 two things. .Firstly that the premises are
 reviewed and every party- concerned has its attention refreshed
 regularly, although even so, it is possible for a slipshod or poorly
 resourced authority to neglect detail.         Secondly, the cost of the work
 of performing all functions, whether -it be the grant or renewal, or
’enfbrcemerit of "1 icencfe'-'conditions, -in the case„of puhlic entertainment
 Licensing, can be recovered by the fees fixed for annual renewal.         The
 Safety of Sports Grounds Act, and the statutory instruments and
 guidance notes published for that Act, provide only for a fee on the
 issue of a Safety Certificate, (General or Special) and to any
 amendment made to it thereafter.        Thus, there is no financial
 provision for the cost of review or enforcement.         In the current Local
 Authority financially constrained climate, some authorities might pay
 less attention to the need for ongoing control than is healthy for the
 spectators using the grounds concerned.         This is a particular
 possibility where the clubs concerned are not very successful ones,
 and are not therefore spending money frequently on alterations at
 their grounds, demanding a review of the Safety Certificate's
 provisions.

The Act of 1975 permits the Local Authority to include in a Safety
Certificate any terms and conditions it considers necessary or
expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stadium.  Initially those
terms and conditions may lay down requirements for alterations or
additions to the stadium, and that was the practice when grounds were
first designated.  The effective sanction being that the defective
part of the ground either could not be used, or alternatively could be
used only by a reduced number of spectators, until such times as the
required improvements were completed.  That is unlikely to be the
situation at many grounds now, although fixing the maximum number of
spectators admitted to the stadium and admitted to different parts of
                                                - 3 -


               it, is the basic sanction in the compromises which have to be made
               between an excellent level of safety and one which is barely
               acceptable.  In addition to a general authority to fix terms and
               conditions, the Act of 1975 is specific, at Section 2 in requiring a
               safety certificate to cover certain matters.   Firstly it must state
               the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to the stadium, and
               the maximum number to be admitted to different parts of it.   It also
               requires the certificate to include terms and conditions about the
               number, size and situation of entrances to and exits from the stadium,
               and the means of access to any such entrances or exits.   It must also
               require those entrances and exits and means of access to be properly
               maintained and kept free from obstruction.   There is also a
               requirement to specify the number, strength and situation of crush
               barriers (on standing terraces).   The Safety Certificate must also
               include conditions that certain minimum records must be kept by the
               Holder, including records of' the number of spectators attending the
               stadium and records relating to the maintenance of safety.   Finally,
               Section 2 calls for a Safety Certificate to contain a plan of the
               stadium, by means of which terms and conditions in thfe Certificate
               which refer to locations, can be properly identified..

         6.     Safety .Certificates issued for football grounds have to be issued to a
                 person (called the "Holder")1 , who is likely to be in a position to
                 control the use of the ground, and to ensure compliance with its terms-
                 •and conditions.  That "qualified person" is generally the Club's 'Chief
                 Executive and/oj: Secretary, although some Clubs have'delegated the
                 holding of the Certificate fro- other special-, officers, often to those
               . concerned-with the care of the fabric of the ground. ■ There is a
                ,general provision that anyone'having anything to do with the
                 management of the ground ’(cal'led 'a "res'po’nsible person") must   - - • ;■
              • contribute .to and not obstrutt compliance with the conditions o f .'the
                 Certificate.   That requirement is qualified by the usual plea of''due
                 diligence' in the event of an. alleged offence.      A person guilty of an
                 offence is liable, on summary conviction, to a fine of not exceeding
                •£400, or on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for not more than
                 two years, or a fine, or to both.

         7.    Matters relative to the safety of Spectators at football grounds are
               of course legion.   The fundamental essential is that- the design and
               layout of the ground and its general fabric and structural ability to
                fulfil its use, is reasonable and sufficient to ensure safety.   In
                that respect, it shares most of the features essential to any place of
               public resort, particularly those used for entertainment, although the
               needs are heightened at football grounds by the competitive nature of
               the event, by the provision for standing spectators, and for
               considerably greater numbers than are commonly experienced at any
               other entertainment event, except perhaps for pop concerts,
               Conseqently the next most important provision is to ensure that the
               numbers using the ground, or various parts of the ground, are strictly
               controlled.   Thirdly, one must provide for thorough ongoing
               maintenance of features essential to safety at the ground.    Fourthly,
               under these broad headings, each of which covers many matters of
               detail, the certificate should require a level of management and
               stewarding appropriate to the ground conditions and the numbers of
               spectators permitted.

NBCAAC
                                             - 4 -




         8.   Whilst those matters specified in Section 2 of the Act (identified
              earlier) have to be covered in the Safety Certificate, to what extent
              and in what detail they are covered, and what other matters are
              covered by means of terms and conditions, or taken into account before
              deciding whether to issue a Certificate or not, are left to the
              expertise and discretion of the Local Authority responsible for
              implementation of the Act.  Thus there will be a wide difference in
              the quality of both initial attention, attention to alterations and
              additions, and also in the monitoring of a club's   compliance with and
              enforcement of the conditions attached to the Certificate, as is usual
              in many matters entrusted to Local Authorities.   The usual method of
              dealing with this predominantly technical and regular ongoing duty has
              been to delegate the function to one or more officers of the
              responsible authority, which is most effective, provided that officer
              understands that he is unequivocally responsible and that he is
              provided with adequate resources to.carry out his task,

         9.   It should be remembered that many football grounds are situated
              outside metropolitan district areas, and the work falls to'the County
              Council in those cases.   It was the original intention of Lord Justice
              Wheatley, who- carried out the Inquiry into the disaster at Ibrox Park
              and reported in 1972, that Chief Building Control Officers should be
              the principal officers responsible for this work in consultation with
              the Police and Fire Authorities.   The history of what happened in fact
              was explained in paragraphs 4 to 7 of the City Building Surveyor's
              report ;on the F.A. letter to clubs i'.dated 17th Ap-ril, 1989, which this
              Working Party received on the 19th May last (CBS/159/89). That report
              also explained how the County Authorities responsible outside
              metropolitan districts sometimes failed to harness the Building
              Control expertise- of district councils, with disastrous consequences,
              in the case of Bradford.   At that time,=West Yorkshire County was
              responsible (prior to its abolition) and the .Bradford Chief Building
              Control Surveyor had not been consulted on the subject,

         10. In contrast to that calamitous neglect, the Merseyside County
             Authority, which issued the original Safety Certificates for both the
             Liverpipol grounds, deliberately performed only an administrative
             function, which was delegated to the County Solicitor, and he relied
             solely on the City Building Surveyor in Liverpool' for the necessary
             input throughout the period of their control from 1976 to abolition in
             1986,   That was partly because both the L iv erpool•clubs had previously
             consulted and taken advice from the City Building Surveyor in matters
             of safety at their grounds since 1971.   The Football League had, for
             many years, required clubs to provide it with a form of guarantee of
             safety at their grounds, but the matter was dealt wth very nominally
             and certified generally by Club Secretaries or Chief Executives up to
             1970.   The League then requested a technical input with guarantees
             from appropriate consultants employed by clubs, and recommended clubs
             to consult Local Authority Building Control experts who were generally
             responsible for safety in places of public resort and frequently had
             local powers over the design and construction of uncovered stands
             (i.e.   not being buildings) also.  It is relevant to mention here that
             Liverpool City Council has always held the need for building design


NBCAAD
                                            - 5 -



             and construction safety, and the suitability of buildings for safe
             use for public and other special purposes to be very important.   The
             City Building Surveyor, to whom this work has been delegated, has
             been unable to maintain the application of adequate resources to these
             public use safety functions to date, despite delays and difficulties
             in filling an increased incidence of vacancies generally in the
             department.

         11. Guidance on what ought to be covered by football grounds' safety
             certificates, and good standards for these matters, is given to all
             concerned in the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" booklet, which is
             published by H.M. Stationery Office.      This started life as a technical
             appendix to the Wheatley Report in 1972, and the City Building
             Surveyor, Liverpool University and both the Liverpool football grounds
             assisted in consultations on its contents', particularly in respect of
             the layout, design and strength of c r u s h •barriers. The Home Office
             carried out physical tests of loadings at full capacity matches on the
             then existing crush barriers on the Kop at Anfield, and the Gwladys
             Street Terrace at Goodison Park.     The current Guide was revised ip
             1986 following the Popplewell Inquiry concerning Heysel,
             Birmingham and Bradford,1 which included recommendations for that ■
             update.  The Guide sets out good standards, but it is a voluntary
             Code, and has' no legal force.   Having regard to the general age of
             football grounds, and their associated terraces and stands, throughout
             the country, Compliance with those ideally good standards is
             impracticable, in many respects.   Compromis.es or alternative measures
             of achieving suitable standards of safety have to be found.      The
             chapter headings for subjects covered by the Guide are l’isted below,
             in order to illustrate ’its C'omprefiens ive'Cs-CopS.   ■ .         •

                  Chapter    2    Management Responsibilities                 ‘
                  Chapter   -3    General Fabric and Structural Matters
                  Chapter   ’4    Inspections and Tests
                  Chapter   .5    Ingress
                  Chapter   .6    Egress
                  Chapter    7    Stairways and Ramps
                  Chapter    8    Terraces and Viewing Slopes
                  Chapter   '9    Crush Barriers and Handrails
                  Chapter   •10   Roofed Stands with Seated Accommodation
                  Chapter    11   Fire Safety
                  Chapter    12   Communications
                  Chapter    13   Stewarding
                  Chapter    14   Crowd Control
                  Chapter    15   Pitch Perimeter Fence/Wall
                  Chapter    16   Estimation of Safe Ground Capacity
                  Chapter    17   Recommended Flow Rates (for evacuation purposes).

            In addition, there are annexes to the Guide covering in further detail
            the subjects of (B) - Stewarding, and (C) - Testing of Crush Barriers
            and Handrails.

         12. The advent of the new "Green Guide", coupled with the Popplewell
             Report recommendations and the transfer of responsibility, for the
             implementation of the 1975 Act, to Metropolitan District Councils,
             prompted a review of Safety Certificates and procedures for monitoring

NBCAAD
                                                - 6 -



                and enforcement in 1986, by responsible authorities.  In Liverpool,
                that duty was carried out by the City Building Surveyor, in respect of
                both this City's designated grounds.  The Certificates were totally
                rewritten and all the drawings forming part of the Certificate were
                completely updated and annotated, in order to relate the terms of the
                Certificate to locations at the grounds.  The total documents are
                extensive.  The office copy of both the current Certificates for
                Anfield and Goodison Park will be on the Table at the Working Party
                receiving this report, should any Members wish to examine their
                general format etc.

             13. There is a small degree of nationwide exchange of information between
                  officers responsible for this work, through occasional meetings held
                  by the County Engineers Association, and also through Council meetings
                  of the Society of Chief Building Regulation Officers.    Without
                  examining the many documents produced and the details of functions
                  performed by those various officers responsible,, it is not possible to
                  say generally how good i s 'the quality and standard of attention given
                  to this matter.   How many of them match the thorough attention given
                  to the duty in Liverpool, it i.s difficult to say, but the City
                  Building Surveyor suggests that the Anfield and Goodison Park
                  certificates are amongst the best in the country.    These two
                 •certificates include schedules of conditions with the following
                 headings                                       ■        '

                         Schedule 1      General conditions
                         Schedule 2      Capacity of Stadium (inc.. recording and\
                                              controlling numbers attending)
                        .Schedule .3..   General. Safety Provisions.
                         Schedule 4..:    Lighting and Emergency Electric Supply^-
                         Schedule 5 ••.: Fire Safety
         •               Schedule 6 ' : Stewarding                   '
                                                                     •
                         Schedule 7 .: Locations (of Stewards)
                         Schedule 8 : Inspections and Tests

         14. Adequate and sufficient stewarding was highlighted by the Popplewell
             Report to be a matter for careful attention, and it was noted earlier
             that the "Green Guide" includes an annexe B on the subject.  Schedules
             6 and 7 of the Safety Certificates issued to the Liverpool and Everton
             Clubs devote some 9 pages to the subject, in which every steward (116
             at Anfield and 115 at Goodison Park) is identified with a title and
             number, given a job specification, and assigned specifically to a
             location or  area of the stadium.

         15. A Member of   the Working Party asked, on 7th June last, with what
             frequency the grounds are checked for maintenance of safety features,
             or with regard to enforcement, in the case of the two Liverpool
             grounds.  In detail the frequency varies according to the subject
             matter, and for Members' further information, a copy of the Schedule
             covering this matter in the Certificate for the Anfield Ground is
             appended to   this report as Appendix A.From that it will be noted
             that the City Building Surveyor's officers join in those inspections
             (1), (2), (6) and (7) listed in the condition to Table 8.2, in
             addition to monitoring the other items in the Table to condition 8.5.
             Monitoring of the full provision of stewards and their compliance with

NBCAAD
                                             _   7   -




             the conditions attached to the Certificate are carried out by spot
             checks, immediately prior to and during the use of both stadia.

         16. In all the above work, very good co-operation is enjoyed from both the
              Liverpool clubs.   It should be appreciated that these are two
              successful football clubs, enjoying many full or near capacity
              attendances during the season, which places them financially in a
              strong position to comply with safety requirements as well as putting
              them in need of such compliance at all times.        Elsewhere in the
              country, the attention given to safety at sports grounds is not only
              dependent upon the resources allocated to the matter by the Local
              Authority responsible, but must be strongly influenced by the
              financial position of the football clubs concerned, and also by the
              relative demand for attention to. safety as dictated by regular
              attendance figures.   These aspects of the matter are'probably relevant
              to the apparent failures which caused the Hillsborough disaster.
              Clearly where a ground is regularly used to partial capacity only,
              practices and standards of safety can become attuned to that need, so
              that any full capacity match which uses only the regular habitual
              practices relevant to safety may present risks.        Hillsborough also
              highlights the difference between matches where one of the teams i s •a
              home team and therefore the majority.of those attending are regular
             .supporters, with a detailed knowledge of the ground and the crowd
              Safety practices, and those ma t c h e s 1where both teams and spectators-
              are visitors,, with a limi'-ted, or no knowledge of the ground.      It is
              intended to amend the General Safety Certificate for-.-the two Liverpool
              grounds during this year\s annual closed season review, accordingly.
              A Special Safety Certificate would be required in future in the event
              .of either of these two grounds*-'being used for' a footb'all match between
             .two visiting teams, suc-h -as an F.A. Cup Semi-final.

         17. The position of the Police as an "interested party" in the issue or
             amendment of any Safety Certificate was mentioned earlier.   Such
             Certificates generally include a requirement that the Holder shall
             arrange for the attendance of an adequate number of Police Officers
             within the stadium to secure orderly and decent behaviour.  The number
             of such officers for each certified'use generally will need to be
             agreed with the Police at least 14 days beforehand.  That condition is
             contained in both the Liverpool Clubs' Certificates.  The cost of such
             in-ground policing has to be met by the football clubs.  Policing
             outside the ground and traffic routing is a matter wholly for the
             Police Authority, which ought to be co-ordinated with the needs of
             ground safety.  The Police therefore maintain a very close liaison
             with football clubs, especially those whose matches are heavily
             attended and are in built-up areas, in order to organise the necessary
             traffic and crowd controls approaching and around the grounds.    These
             Police duties are a full-time job for a Police Inspector in respect of
             the two Liverpool grounds, and in many other towns.  Information is
             generally collected from clubs and corresponding Police officers,
             about estimated attendances of both home and away supporters and also
             about their likely behaviour.  The numbers of Police officers
             allocated to outside ground duties, and for escorting and checking
             upon visiting supporters, is adjusted accordingly for each match.    The
             City Building Surveyor and his responsible officers maintain a close
             contact with the Police at all times.  That is a matter of necessity

NBCAAD
            owing to the regular high attendances at the Liverpool grounds, but is
            not necessarily universally the case for all football grounds
            throughout the country.  Where a local authority and/or a football
            club responsible for safety at the ground, neglects its ongoing duties
            in that respect, the Police may be faced with problems to be solved,
            possibly in the absence of adequate experience in their own service.
            This was brought to Members' attention in paragraph 8 of the City
            Building Surveyor's report on the F.A. letter to clubs, which was
            mentioned earlier (CBS/159/89).

         18. The above covers the current position of certification of safety at
             football grounds.   Its extensive overlap with other legislation
             operated by district councils, the difficulties of liaison with County
             authorities responsible in shire districts, the risks of poor
             attention to the duties by financially constrained local authorities,
             the risk of local loyalties producing overtolerance with poor clubs
             with poor grounds, undoubtedly will be considered by the Hillsborough
             Inquiry.   Its earliest possible recommendations are awaited with
             interest.-




NBCAAD
