             SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT MEMORANDUM



FR O M :                                           Your Ref
  TO   J                                             M y Ref
           Assistant Director (Admin),
                                                   Date Ref        15th May 1989.


  RE :     Hillsborough Database - Supervision of input.




       Further to our conversation earlier this week concerning the above,
  I now wish to provide an update statement on the situation in relation to
  the input of information onto the database and the supervision of that task.

      Supervision of the Input Team:    This role is currently being undertaken
 by               ~ which has resulted in her not attending to her own work
 for some four weeks.   It had been hoped that              (Child Protection)
 would be able to act as a deputy to cover        absences (which to date have
 only been her day release on a Thursday) but this has not been possible due to
 the workload in the Child Protection Section.   Thursday's are therefore,
 currently being covered by myself.

          The role required is to supervise the work of the other keyboard operators
 and to deal with queries from the data base admin team and the helpline co-ordinator
 There is a general co-ordinating function in lias ing with the admin supervisor
 on work passing between the two teams.       A balance of skills is required between
 someone with keyboard skills, a knowledge of the database and a general
 knowledge of Social Services routines.       The latter is now needed more as we
 move into a changing situation.       Having caught up the backlog of referrals there
 is now a requirement to refine the information on the database utilising the
 grouping and connections facilities.       There is also a need to review the data
 ei»fc*r«-,|   We have already found a number of duplications which will be
 amalgamated under one reference.       The workload in terms of referrals may be
 somewhat sporadic from now on depending on details coming in from other Local
 Authorities and agencies.       Certainly within the short-term there is still a
 considerable degree of work to be done in refining the information on the
 database.

      I have previously highlighted difficulties which will be encountered from
 26th May - 19th June when                   is on leave (Exam, Study and Annual Leave).
 I am also on leave from the 26th May to 6th June inclusive.        A solution to this
 staffing issue needs to be found soon.       I have pursued with                the
 possibility of                   moving into this area.   Jim's view is that this
 person is still required to deal with the offers of help.        I have to say that on
 reflection my own view is that the task required could not be undertaken by a
 Scale 1 and I am not sure that the person concerned would have the necessary
 background to deal with all aspects of the supervisory role.         The situation
 therefore, still remains unresolved.       One possible option may be to discuss the
 feasibility of ^ ■ d H M H M P i’continuing in this role with a temporary
 replacement being appointed to work on the Mental Handicap Register.         I have
 tentatively raised this option with 4HR.        She would require clarification on
 the role to be undertaken, terms of such an appointment and future employment
 following the cessation of the Hillsborough Unit, before she could consider the
 matter fully.




                                                             /continued
     On a more general level I think there is a general degree of uncertainty
and concern amongst staff who are still involved in the Hillsborough situation.
The concern being whether their involvement should continue or not. Decisions
on whether to withdraw (or try to withdraw) from the Hillsborough work seems
(in many cases) to be left to the individual.   So far as Joan is concerned
she has received no indication as to how long her involvement is to continue.
Anxiety is created when there appears to be a management view that work being
left because of Hillsborough related tasks is perhaps not needed at all.

     Input of Information onto the Database;   In recent weeks keyboard input
has been undertaken by staff provided by other authorities/agencies (Trafford
and Royal Life).   I am hopeful that the Royal Life staff will be available
for some time to come, even if this is on a "phoning when we need them" basis.
We should perhaps have own own contingency plan should we have peaks in demand
when outside assistance is not available.

      Admin Support;   The pressure on the admin side of the database has eased
through this week.    We have arrangements with other local authorities and our
own staff to cover this area up to and including the week commencing 5th June
1989.    Depending on the level of referrals from other local authorities, it
may be necessary to scale down this side of the operation.    This will be
reviewed on a regular basis.

     I hope that the above comments are viewed as constructive.   I accept that
dealing with long-term issues is perhaps more problematical than responding to
the immediate short-term crisis, but I am concerned that some situations appear
to be drifting.




                                            Principal Assistant (R.D.I).




Footnote;

As at the start of Friday (12th May) 1270 persons have been put onto the
database and 99 are ready for input, with non waiting to be processed by the
admin team.
