              SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT MEMORANDUM



FROM : P. Marley.                                Your Ref •
  TO : See below.                                  My Ref : PM/BP.
                                                 Date Ref : 3rd May> 1989.


  RE




     Now that the events following Hillsborough are beginning to settle
into a more planned situation, I want to take the opportunity of expressing
my own personal gratitude to all the administrative, clerical, secretarial
and typing staff, drivers and printers in the Department, for their
tremendous efforts in coping with the effects of the tragedy. ,

     Of necessity staff were removed from their normal duties without notice
and were transformed into social workers, porters, 'vein drivers, or any other
type of occupation which the circumstances demanded. During the last 2 - 3
weeks I have been amazed at the ingenuity of staff and requirements which
normally would have taken months to arrange were being done overnight.
This commitment has brought numerous expressions of praise from Councillors,
officers of other local authorities and voluntary agencies and, just as
important, our colleagues in the caring professions. Social Workers have
been in the forefront of praising the administration and have also gone
out of their way to ensure that the administrative staff have not been
allowed to over—commit themselves with the risk to health involved. In
this connection the expressions of concern have also been directed to those
unfortunate staff who were left to pick up the pieces in the Department
and maintain a normal service which they achieved without the normal
complement of staff.

      To all concerned, both those directly involved and those who maintained
 the normal service, I can only say that I am extremely grateful. Regrettably,
 or perhaps fortunately from a personal viewpoint, I can1t buy you all a
 drink but at least the thought did cross my mind.

       Thanks again.




                            Assistant Director (Administration).



 To: Section Heads.
     District Admin. Officers./H.Q. Admin. Staff.
     Secretaries.
     Typing Pool.
     Printers.
     Drivers.
