                                                                                          SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
                                                                                          David Mason
                                                                                          Director of Social Services
                         City                                                             The Hillsborough Centre
                         off                                                              Stanley Park
                                                                                          1 Anfield Road
                         Liverpool                                                        Liverpool 4

                                                                                           Telephone: 051 263 5366


                                                                                           Your Ref:
                                                                                                                         5/4/91
                                                                                           Our R e f :

                                                                                            Date:



  To all Members of the Hillsborough Working Group

  D ear

  I am writing to you on behalf, and at the request of the Hillsborough Team in your
  capacity as a member of the Hillsborough Working Group.

  As you may be aware, it was hoped that
  I      J   W W   111    —* ■ —• 7                 I-
                                                            the Youth Worker seconded to
                                                            I------------------------------------------------------- 1

  us from the Methodist Centre would be staying with the team beyond April. It is now
  clear that he will be returning to the Methodist Centre as from April 8th.

  This will cause a serious deficit in the service provided by the Hillsborough Centre.
  Since w
        Julyv 1990        ]has been Identifying issues relating to young people that would
  benefit from the input of a full time Youth Worker. Lately the team have been drawing
  up their own brief for their future work.

  It is clear from both the team ’s work and that of        hat Hillsborough raised many
  issues for young people that are not being met. The work that             and the team
  planned to undertake was to identify and respond to some of the needs of young
  people that are due to not only to Hillsborough, but to other traumas in their lives,
  resulting from death or other forms of loss and separation.

  The departure of I                  krill create a gap that will be difficult to fill.

  I am aware that the working group are sympathetic to the nature and area of
  work. I am aware also that at this time the Youth and Community Service is being
  forced to make considerable cuts in its services. Nevertheless, I would be grateful if
  you could give this matter relating to |^ ^ y o u r urgent and serious attention

      I know that as a group you are due to meet on April 26th. I wonder if it would be
      possible to bring this meeting forward, in order to discuss the matter relating to youth




When calling or telephoning please ask for
service provision in this area of work.

Obviously as a team we are loathe to loose                   and would like to explore
any possibility whereby it may be possible for f   *° return to us.

Alternatively we would like to explore with you ways of continuing the work which was
begun by

I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours sincerely




Gerry Flanagan
Senior Social Worker
