                WT             d   W f |   , - K H-C-   j      CUwtv-i.   I^   'J   ( J ^   I^   I      ^


                  SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT MEMORANDUM



FROM :         Mr. R.J. Marriott.                           Your Ref :
     TO :      District Personal Services Officers,          My Ref :               RJM/PD
               Principal Hospital Social Workers,
               Principal Social Worker, F.C.E.A.C.,         Date Ref :              29th April, 1989.
               Emergency Duty Team.

     RE :      Hillsborough Disaster - Referrals/Database




1.     You will know that a computerised database is being established within
       the Hillsborough Helpline Centre, Johnson Street, and the Kent County
       Council systems staff have assisted in setting up and adapting the
     • Herald Database, which was used in connection with events after the
       Zeebrugge ferry disaster.                                 «
                          •t
2. In the initial aftermath of "Hillsborough" most referrals were taken
    (locally) as follows

       (i)      directly at Helpline;

       (ii)     at the Drop In Centre (Vernon Sangster);       and

       (iii)     at Liverpool F.C., Anfield.

3. Copies of referrals taken at "Drop In" and "Anfield" should have been
    passed to "Helpline", and "Helpline" should then have passed copies
    of both direct and indirect referrals to District Offices.

4. There is a need to commence the gathering of information/data from
    many other sources, and as a first step it is intended to collect details
    of referrals received directly at Districts, Hospital Social Work Officers,
    E.D.T. and F.C.E.A.C. (i.e. exclude referrals received at "Helpline"
    and copied to Districts etc.).

5. Will you, therefore, please let me have - as soon as possible - a photocopy
    of all "Hillsborough" referrals which you have received directly at
   your office up to 28th April, and mark your file copy to show that
    it has been copied to H.Q. This information will be fed into the database
    as soon as possible thereafter. A ’NIL1 return should be submitted
    if this is appropriate.

6.    There will be subsequent requests for co^iffof other "Hillsborough"
      related material but there is a recognised need for discussions and
       decisions about the extent to which all "Hillsborough'' related District
      etc. records are to be fed into the database. In due course, therefore,
       there will be clearer parameters set concerning the scope, content
      and use of the database, and you will obviously be involved with such
       deliberations. It will, I am sure, be appreciated that, at the moment,
       the supply of answers will not meet the inevitable number of questions
      which come to mind, and that the scale of the disaster and disposition
      of affected families etc. poses a significant problem.




                                                                           /Cont'd
May I, therefore, seek your usual co-operation in these difficult circumstances
and ask for the information as per paragraph 5 quickly. In addition, may
I take this opportunity to ask that you pass my thanks to those members of
your "admin/c^.erical/typing" staff who assisted at the "Helpline" and
"Drop In" Centres, either by actual help or "holding the fort" whilst
other members of the office were or are at the Centres.




                   Principal Assistant
                   (Administration)
