                                                                 3779




Mr. N. J. T. Butler,                                    DM/EP
(Secretary, ADSS Research Committee),
Director of Social Services,                            16th April 1991*
Hampshire County Council,
Hie Castle,
Winchester S023 8UQ.



Dear ferry,
              Hillsborough Stadium Dlaaater Research Project

     I have received a copy of Tim Newburn's letter of the 26th March
to you and would like to support the work that HIS* are doing. I hope
the Research Committee will be prepared to recommend that Local
Authorities co-operate with this project*

             we were setting up services after Hillsborough one of the
difficulties we found was that although people had written anecdotal
articles about their experiences during previous disasters there was
little or no systematic research into the responses of Local Authorities.
After a lot ©f effort we were successful in obtaining the services of
fjTfsut and financial support from the Rowntree Trust for this project
yrhiith may be of use to Authorities who are faced with providing a
disaster response in the future.
     I realise that many requests are made to the Research Committee
but would like to particularly commend this one to you.

                                Yours sincerely,




                         Director of Social Services
                                    rvei n w w i

                                     27 MAR 1991       <"]/) ^   (^omhCimmh


X Uxc                to                     Jr¥r& ? o l w 4 t t WvO» ft.
                   Oi^KTVCtt of                  W9/K€T$* di fwfc'of
H e fUA$boa>0aU> w y c c * . X ^ » ‘t I6mwi w k t h e r
btcu WvH                            b u t I t)«otf«jW4r I                   ^°PJ)
fc>a? t e * c r   to J O K   *o    tH rtJlr^jou W o o ld         U om     «al%a.*r

w ^ o i^ o * .               Ce^arj* 1^M<wUuw-
         NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL WORK
                  Mary Ward House, 5-7 Tavistock Place, London WC1H 9SS
                                Telephone: 0 1 -3 8 7 9681
                             Limited by guarantee; Registered No. 726022 England


                             NATIONAL INSTITUTE
                             FOR SOCIAL WORK
                             Registered OfRce:

                             5-7 TAVISTOCK PLACE
                             LONDON WC1H9SS
                             Telephone:   071-387 9681




N.J.T.Butler
(Secretary, ADSS Research Committee)
Director of Social Services
Hampshire County Council
The Castle
Winchester S023 8UQ                                                     26 March 1991




Dear Mr Butler,


HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER RESEARCH PROJECT


I am writing in connection with a piece of research that is being
conducted at NISW. We are currently being funded by the Joseph
Rowntree Foundation for a period of two years to evaluate the
social work response to the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. The
Institute was asked to carry out this research by a committee
known as the 'inter-agency group' on Merseyside, on which the
Directors of the Social Services Departments directly involved in
the disaster response (Liverpool, Sefton, Knowsley, St. Helens,
Wirral, Cheshire, Lancashire, Sheffield and Nottingham) were
represented. We have their support for this research project and
their permission to involve staff from their Departments in the
various aspects of the work being undertaken.

There is, however, one aspect of the research project that would
be considerably enhanced by using a wider focus than the Hills­
borough Disaster alone. One of the aims of the study is to con­
sider the impact of providing care in the aftermath of disaster
on social work staff. Whilst I feel that we could go a considera­
ble way to meeting this objective simply by concentrating on
'Hillsborough' workers, we would be able to draw rather wider
conclusions if it were possible to go slightly further back in
time to include workers who had been involved in the responses to
some of the other disasters that have occurred in recent years.
I'm thinking in this regard of disasters such as the Bradford
fire, Lockerbie, Marchioness etc.

What I should like to do is to approach, say, six Departments for
permission to send a short postal questionnaire to those members
of staff who were involved in providing support for the 'victims'
of the disaster that occurred in their locale. This would include
a small number of questions about their experiences of providing
post-disaster care, as well as inviting their views about their
own need for support. I would not anticipate that this small
piece of research would be burdensome for staff, and I am con­
vinced that this is an important area that needs to be responsi­
bly researched.

I would be grateful for your views or those of the Committee as
to whether you feel you can support this proposal. The survey of
the 'Hillsborough' workers should begin in early May. If the
comparative element of the survey is to be included as I have
proposed above, then I should like to begin approaching the other
selected Departments during April. I will not make direct contact
with those Departments until I have heard from you. Naturally, I
will be happy to supply any further details of this research
project that you feel you need. I enclose a copy of the final
research proposal that was approved by Rowntree.

I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours sincerely




Dr Tim Newburn
Hillsborough Project Co-ordinator
Practice and Development Exchange
