                                 AFTER HILLSBOROUGH

                   DISUCSSION PAPER FOR ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES

                             MEETING 6TH SEPTEMBER, 1989




Introduction

Representatives of the Authorities directly affected by Hillsborough met in
Liverpool on 29th April, 1989 and agreed the following:-

     "This meeting of leading Local Authority members of the areas which are
      affected by the tragic events of the "Hillsborough Disaster" agrees the
      following resolution

     1.   There is a need for long-term co-ordinated help to all the people
          affected;

     2.   Agrees in principle the requirement for a Regional Unit to be established
          to give effect to this;

     3.   Officers of the constituent local authorities are asked to prepare a
          further report on the alternative sources of funding for this Unit; and

     4.   Officers are further requested, as a matter of urgency, to report back
          to a further meeting of appropriate members."


As reported at that meeting Directors of Social Services, together with representatives
of other Agencies, set up an Inter-Agency Group to co-ordinate response to the disaster
and to strive to attempt to achieve a one response situation in that survivors received,
irrespective of the Authority in which they, lived.  This group is attended either by
Directors personally or their senior representatives and it is believed has achieved its
goal in this respect.   There is no doubt whatsoever that the exchange of information
and experience has benefitted considerably the response standards that have been
achieved.   It has also facilitated the many managerial and organisational aspects which
inevitably occur in such a major incident.

The Group has made strenuous efforts to obtain financial support from outside sources
to meet the expenditure incurred.   Many avenues have been explored including the
following:—

     1.   Government

     2.   E.E.C.

     3.   Football Association - including Charity Shield

     4.   Football League

     5.   Football Charity

     6.   Liverpool F.C.

     7.   Dubai Football Club

     8.   Chamber of Commerce

     9.   Rotary Clubs

                                                            /cont1d
     10. Round Table

     11. Lions

     12. Record — Ferry Cross the Mersey

     13. Pop Concert - Milton Keynes

     14. Individuals




The results have been disappointing in that the only positive responses have been
an offer from Central Council for Education in Training in Social Work of £20,000
towards training expenses.  The most disappointing response, however, must be that
from Central Government and Members have received, with a notification of the meeting,
a letter received in response to that signed by the leaders of the "Hillsborough
Authorities" from the Secretary of State for Social Services and it is clear that
pursuing a course of application under the Bellwin formula would be fruitless.

The requirement to support those casualties already identified by the several Agencies
involved is inescapable.   These casualties clearly fall within the -requirements.and
duties of the Social Services Act 1972 and are already considered by Social Services
Departments to be part of their caseload.      Each Authority has taken its owri .decision
as to the needs for additional resources (staffing, etc) although it should be noted
that the scale of the disaster is such that the level of services required is beyond
the normal budgetting capacity of rfto'st of the Social Services Departments affected. It
is suggested however that this aspect of response is best left to each Authority on an .
individual basis and is not a proper subject for discussion at this meeting.

Members will recall however that the report they received in April from the Team led by'
Professor Howard Parker strongly advised the need to set up a "Regional Unit" to deal
with three main aspects in the aftermath of the disaster, these were:—

     i)     The running and organisation of the Helpline;

     ii)    Theprovision and maintenance of a computer database;   and

     iii)   The organisation of research and evaluation into, the efficiency of the
            response to the disaster and the work undertaken with survivorsand casualties.

In addition it was anticipated that a Regional Unit could ensure that outreach work
was offered to those survivors who were not immediately and easily picked up by a Social
Services Department or another Agency.

It had always been hoped that funding, for this Unit, at the time estimated to be
£350,000,  could have been met from outside sources.

The Chief Inspector, SSI, visited several of the Merseyside Authorities on 1st August,
1989 and met with core teams working with survivors and those affected.   The
opportunity was taken by Directors to advise him of the need for an independent
evaluation.

The Directors of Social Services are firmly of the view that the experience gained
would be extremely valuable if it was evaluated and researched by an independent
Agency to enable a more effective response to be made to future disasters. As recent
events have shown there is a continuing need to be prepared to provide an effective
response in the immediate aftermath of a disaster.

                                                                    /cont1d
With regard to helpline, understandably the demands on it have reduced since the
first few weeks. It has to be noted, however, that it has been a considerable drain
on resources of the Authorities and other Agencies to staff it on a 24 hour basis,
and all the staff and volunteers are to be applauded for their efforts.   Accordingly
the Inter-Agency Group decided that negotiations should be opened with the Walton
Support Group who offered, very readily, to undertake the staffing of the Helpline.
However it will still be necessary to arrange some funding on a smaller scale than
originally envisaged to meet their expenses.   Because there are several traumatic
incidents for survivors still to be overcome (eg the West Midlands Police enquiry into
possible criminality, and the 95 inquests due to commence in early 1990) the demand
on Helpline may well increase and it is considered essential that a close oversight
is maintained on its running.

It is essential that the activities which are continuing intensively, to respond to
the disaster's aftermath, are co-ordinated to ensure an even handed response.    The
experience of the last four months has demonstrated that if services sire to meet the
needs of people affected by Hillsborough this can only be done by the co-operation of
the several Authorities which is extremely time consuming for senior staff and can be
detrimental to the day to day on-going work of the Departments.   It is clear that it
should be one person's task to concentrate exclusively on this co-ordination to ensure
a satisfactory response of services to counteract the disasters effects.

In view of the scale of the disaster there is no doubt that information stored on
computer would be by far the most beneficial to enable service delivery to be effected.
Whilst basic information was recorded on computer from the outset, there -is a need for
this, arrangement to be reviewed and if necessary transferred to more sophisticated
equipment.    Preliminary work has been commenced on this review.

Options

It will be seen from the above that the lack of progress in establishing the
Regional Unit is now inhibiting further work on Hillsborough other than the response
already being achieved by eiiach of the Authorities, and the time has come for a decision
to be taken.   The alternatives are:-

     1)     In view of the external resources being unavailable at the present time,
            abandon all attempts to create and maintain any form of regional and
            national response to the disaster,

            or

     2)     To authorise the officers to continue to maintain a minimalist regional
            response until such time as all possible financial avenues have been
            explored and to underwrite the costs,

            or

     3)     For the Authorities to undertake to meet the costs of the Regional Unit
            themselves, (it will be necessary to agree a method of apportionment),

            or

     4)     An approach to be made to the Trust Fund to seek assistance in meeting the
            costs of direct services to victims provided by the Local Authorities.

In order to assist Members in coming to a view as to what to recommend to their
Authorities, attached is the original report of Regional Unit and revised estimates.

W J TWIST
1/9/89
