m Promotion and News Unit, P.O. Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.

                           M Fax No.


            STATEMENT BY COUNCILLOR HARRY CHASE, CHAIR OF HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY




            "The truth will come out, we are not going to let the establishment
            cover-up".                                          •

            This promise was made to the people of Liverpool by the Leader of the
            Council immediately following the appalling disaster at Hillsborough.

            Set up to assist in finding the truth of what occurred at Hillsborough
            this Working Party welcomed the substantive findings of Part 1 of the
            Taylor Inquiry in apportioning responsibility for the tragedy.

            Since Lord Justice Taylor published his Interim Report there has and
            continued to be a clear failure on the part of those organisations and
            individuals responsible for the tragedy to accept blame for their
            actions.

            The decision by the D.P.P. to not proceed with criminal prosecutions
            reflects a clear failure by the establishment to administer justice
            given the sheer weight of evidence against individuals and organisations
            responsible for the deaths of 95 Liverpool supporters and over 700
            injured.

            This Authority unequivocally condemns the D . P . P . ’s decision.
            Furthermore, football supporters can have little confidence in the
            judicial system and undermine whatever confidence supporters have in the
            p o l i ce ’s approach to crowd safety in the light of this decision.

            This Working Party remains committed in its opposition to a cover-up and
            establishment whitewash.  We shall immediately be challenging this
            decision with both the D.P.P., the Home Office and all other relevant
            bodies.

            Every assistance will be offered to the Hillsbo
            Group in their continuing efforts to secure jus




             For further information contact Tom Farrell on
