  '^   \   c, \            Nottinghamshire                 County Hall
- r v*3 > \
     v \ ,                 County Council
                                                           W est Bridgford
                                                           Nottingham NG2 7QP
                                                           Telephone
                           Social Services                 Nottingham (0602) 823823
                                                           Telex 37485 call back code NCC G
                           Director David R. White M A.    Fax (0602) 817945
                                                           Direct Line (0602)


Mr\^«Mason,                                                Your ref
Director,
Social Services Departme                                   Our ref           DSS/CMC
26 Hatton Garden,
Liverpool,                                                 Please ask for
L3 2AW                                                     Tel extension
Personal
                                                           Date              19th June, 1989




Dear David,

I thought you may be interested in the attached Committee report which was
well received at the last Social Services Committee meeting on 15th June.
As we have not been in touch with each other for a while I was wondering
whether you had any news to report on the financing of the Support Unit?

Keep in touch.

   t wishes.




Director




                      pi4k                                fry**t
                                                 Lf~
report



meeting         SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE


date            1 5 th J u n e , 1989       agenda item number   ia




                    REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR OP SOCIAL SERVICES


                                   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


(1) Following the tragedy at the Hillsborough Football Ground,
     Sheffield, on the 15th April, 1989. I reported to Members verbally
     on the Involvement by the Department at the last Social Services
     Committee on the 17th April. Although no Nottingham Forest
     Football supporters were killed In this Incident, several were
     Injured, and substantial numbers traumatlsed by their experiences,
     both at the ground and subsequently by media coverage of the
     event. There were also several Liverpool supporters who live
     within Nottinghamshire who were similarly traumatised and Injured
     at Hillsborough. This report updates Members on action which has
     been taken and discussions which have been entered Into.

(2)    On Monday, 17th April the Department approached Nottingham Forest
        Football Club to offer advice and assistance, and following
        discussions with them. It was agreed we would set up a "help line"
        to deal with members of the public traumatised as a result of the
        disaster. The Help Line was established In the Executive Stand at
        Nottingham Forest Football Club during the afternoon of Tuesday,
        18th April, and became operational at 9*00a.m. on Wednesday, 19th
        April. The Help Line offered a facility either for members of the
        public to make telephone contact with Social Workers at the
        Ground, or to come to the Ground to see them personally. The Help
        Line was operational at the football ground until Monday evening
        the 24th April, at which point, due to a fall In referrals, the
        line in service was transferred back to the Social Services
        reception area in County Hall. A Help Line facility was available
        from this point until Tuesday 2nd May, 1989 when on the basis of a
       dramatic drop in the number of calls received, this free phone
       service was finished.

(3)       During the time the Help Line was based at the Football Ground,
          three Social Workers, an Admin. Officer and the Group Principal
          Social Worker, Queen's Medical Centre, were constantly available
          to deal with enquiries from the public, and from the media.
          Approximately 700 contacts were made with members of the public,
          and although some of these were fairly brief encounters, evidence
          of major disasters suggests that these would, nonetheless, be very
          significant to those concerned. Approximately 150 people were
          counselled for more intensive periods of time, and for some of
          these the process will continue in the months ahead.
1




    (4)    Staff of the Department were supported by a consortium of
           voluntary sector organisations, who were originally established to
           help with victims of the Kegworth Air Disaster. It was possible to
           refer on to this consortium, a number of individuals who required
           ongoing assistance. Members of the Chaplaincy Department of the
           Queen's Medical Centre were also available to offer spiritual
           comfort and counselling.

    (5) The experience of responding to the Air Crash earlier this year,
         resulted in the Department being able to provide a swift and
         efficient response to this disaster. The leaflet, "Coping with a
         Major Disaster", which was produced for victims of the Air Crash,
         was reproduced and personalised for this incident, and the cost of
         printing borne by Nottingham Forest Football Club. In the light of
         the Department's experiences gained from involvement in two recent
         disasters a revision will take place of our emergency planning
         procedures.

    (6)   Throughout this period, both myself and other Senior Officers of
          the Department have maintained close contact with colleagues in
          Liverpool to ensure a co-ordinated, tripartite response to the
          disaster, and this has involved meetings in both Liverpool and
          Sheffield. We have agreed that information which we have collated
          to be shared with staff in Liverpool as this will enable a total
          picture to be compiled of the work of all Local Authorities
          involved in responding to this tragedy.

    (7) On the 28th April the Chairman of Social Services, the Group
         Principal Social Worker, Queen's Medical Centre, and myself
         attended a series of meetings in Liverpool to consider a way
         forward for co-ordinating and delivering services on Merseyside
         for those effected by the tragedy. The attached report "After
         Hillsborough" (Appendix A) was considered and formally agreed at a
         meeting attended by the leader of the Council, Chairman of the
         County Council, Chairman of Social Services, Opposition Spokesman
         on Social Services, and the Chief Executive at a meeting in
         Liverpool on 29th April, 1989.

    (8)   The main recommendation of the "After Hillsborough" report is that
           a Support Unit be established for a minimum period of two years.
           The Unit should have an executive officer, and support staff;
           operate the central Help Line; set up an efficient database;
           oversee the pattern of services to enable resources to be used
           effectively; see that districts provide systematic support and
           training for all staff; develop clear channels of communication
           and form partnerships with all relevant authorities and non-
           statutory agencies in the region; set up monitoring, evaluation
           and performance review systems.

    (9)   Support has been given by the County Council to the Merseyside
          Authorities in seeking funding from Central Government for the
          establishment of this Unit. Once the funding arrangements have
          been secured, it is likely that the Authority will be asked to be
           represented on the Unit's Management Committee.

    (10) I will keep the Members informed on developments.


                                      -   2   -
It is

RECOMMENDED:

               that the action of the County Council be noted.


County Treasurer's Comments

The County Council's involvement with the aftermath of the Hillsborough
Disaster has not led to any additional expenditure being incurred. The
additional workload has been accommodated within existing staff
resources. At this stage, the impact for the future cannot be predicted
although the continuing involvement of Social Services Department staff
is anticipated. The Director will be reporting further on developments
which will include the Government ’s response to the request by the
Merseyside authorities for special funding.




DAVID R. WHITE
Director of Social Services


Background Papers available for Inspection
None.


389/dss /jfg




                                     -   3   -
                                                  APPENDIX 'A'.




          A F T E R     H I L L S B O R O U G H




    A Report and Recommendations for Co-ordinating and

             Delivering Helping Services of the

               Directors of Social Services

                   of the areas affected




 Prepared by Officers from Cheshire, Knowsley, Lancashire
 Liverpool, Sefton, St. Helens and Wirral in consultation
 with Merseyside Probation Service, the Voluntary Agencies,
 Mersey Regional Health Authority and Merseyside Emergency
 Planning Unit, under the Chairmanship of Professor Howard
 Parker.


                         APRIL 1989




HLAAAB
      AIM

1.         To consider the feasibility including costings of
      establishing a regional unit in order to marshall and
      organise the allocation of a variety of resources so that
      help can be made available in the right place at the right
      time to people affected by the "Hillsborough" disaster.   In
      this context "Region" is the seven local authorities.

      METHOD AND FORMAT

2.         A working party of senior staff, drawn from statutory
      and voluntary agencies in the region was established to
      report on the potential for an Assistance Unit built upon
      the service structure created after "Hillsborough". The
      group was chaired by Howard Parker, Professor in Social Work
      at the University of Manchester.

3.         The report uses the experience gained from the disaster
      at "Hillsborough" and other recent tragedies, and sets out
      recommendations for dealing with the organisational,
      information and co-ordination issues which have arisen.
      Specifically, this consists off a synopsis of the key
      elements required to operate a service which is responsive
      to need and has an outreach capability, including the
      provision of a helpline, counselling, specialised work,
      database, staff training/support and public relations.   All
      of these elements are included within the broad aim as
      stated above, and the role of i.he unit as perceived by the
      group.

      INTRODUCTION

4.         The events at "Hillsborough", Sheffield, on 15th April
      1989, are a graphic illustration of the extensive damage to
      personal well-being which can be precipitated by the trauma
      of a major disaster.  This applies to those directly
      involved, through injury or bereavement, their helpers,
      onlookers, and people suffering shock due to publicity or
      association with similar events.  The effects are often
      long-term and can have a profound impact upon family life
      and on individual ability to cope with everyday living.

5.          "Hillsborough" is the latest in a tragic line of
       disasters.  Manchester Airport, Bradford, Piper Alpha,
       Zeebrugge, Kegworth, Clapham and Lockerbie have all
       illustrated how a major unexpected disaster affects the
       lives of ordinary people and the agencies which must provide
       them with assistance.  We have learnt a great deal from
     i these earlier tragedies, particularly how large scale
       disasters produce trauma and grief much further and deeper
       than common sense would expect.




      HLAAAB
     Following the disaster, there was a rapid mobilisation
of resources from a variety of authorities, and
non-statutory agencies.  It became apparent from the outset,
that a mechanism was necessary to ensure that these
resources were properly co-ordinated to reach people and
families in need in the most effective and speedy manner.
Drawing from the experience of those involved in the
response to earlier disasters, and from the current
situation, it is considered essential that an infrastructure
is established which can consolidate the effort currently
under way, and develop and adapt it to meet the changing
needs of the region for a minimum period of two years.

BACKGROUND

     The services and resources available for assistance
are, in the main, already in place though not always on the
scale required.  These services are provided by a
multiplicity of organisations.  They must respond to those
who have asked for help, but also reach out to those who
have not come forward spontaneously.  It is important that
services are available quickly, are easily accessible,
approachable and able to deal with a whole range of
emotional and practical needs.  Some of these needs will be
immediate, some short-term, some of a more permanent nature
and in many cases needs will remain hidden for months, or
even years.

     Localised services, well publicised, are of course,
most important but these should be seen in the context of a
regional network of centrally co-ordinated resources.   In
addition, regional co-ordination can mobilise resources in
particular areas which would perhaps be overwhelmed by
demand, if left to cope alone.

KEY CO-ORDINATION FUNCTIONS REQUIRED AREi-

(± )     Receipt and analysis of all requests for help both
          locally and nationally to ensure a co-ordinated
          response is made;

(ii)     provision of an outreach service to track those who
          need help, but who have not yet come forward;

(iii)    promote quality assurance of services, through
          monitoring and review;

(iv)     establishment of criteria for staff training and
          support patterns which are common across the region;

(v)      advise on the public relations function;




HLAAAB
(vi)      guidance and assistance in the establishment of
          appropriate local databases which are compatible with
          the central system, to ensure speedy, reliable and
          accurate information;

(vii)    promotion of liaison and co-operation between all
         relevant agencies in the region;

(viii) review action already taken in other regions (e.g.
       Sheffield, Nottinghamshire).

COUNSELLING SERVICES - CONTINUING REQUIREMENTS

     It is clear from the information from previous
disasters that continued access to practical and counselling
services is required by some victims for a considerable time
after the event.  It cannot be assumed that individuals
needing help will be requesting or needing it now and
arrangements must be made to ensuris that help is accessible
and readily available in the medium and long-term.

     The extent of future service requirements is difficult
to predict though some indications of the range of problems
presented, the location of people needing help and the form
of help they require should be available when data collected
so far, has been analysed.  Some patterns of service
requirements will be discernible and inform the detailed
planning of provision.

     Meanwhile it is possible to identify in broad terms the
kinds of services that will ba needed and the ways in which
they may be provided.  A co-ordinated mix of centralised and
local services from the statutory and voluntary sector is
likely to provide the greatest flexibility in the use of
resources;  such flexibility will be necessary given the
difficulty of identifying the extent and type of need, and
ensuring that deployment of resources is appropriate and
adequately monitored.

Philosophy

     It is important to ensure that the service response
meets with an overall philosophy agreed by the participating
agencies.

        For the consumer this will mean that:

(i)      There are clear avenues for seeking help (locally and
         regionally).

(ii)     The response to their requests will be quick and
         appropr iate.




HLAAAB
            (iii)             Help is easily accessible (i.e.  help is not
                              dependent upon where people live).

            (iv)              Help should be non-labelling and non-stigmatising.

                 For the participating agencies this will mean that
            services:

            (i)               Should be well co-ordinated and consistent.

            (ii)              Should be quality assured.

            (iii)             Cost effective.

            (iv)              Keep the consumer as the primary consideration.

  14.            In addition, the agencies will need to contribute to
            the wider body of knowledge that can be drawn upon in this
            event of further disasters. Funds to mount an evaluation of
            the response to this disaster are being sought
            independently.  The feedback from such research could be
            invaluable regionally and nationally in e me r g e n c y planning.


            Specific Service Requirements

  15.             Theprovision of services as a response to disaster can
            be considered along a continuum with practical help at one
            end, and long-term counselling at the other.  Figure 1
            attempts to show this continuum in more detail.

            Figure 1 r A Service Continuum
Practical                          A d v i c e / _________________                         Counselling         '         ;__           tong-ter*
Help                                       Guidance                                                                        - - - - - _Support
            I     I       I          I       I        I   II   I       I          .   I      II   I       I          1      1   1
        Transport |           Legal I Information |    A   | Physical | Sharing I                     I Mourning I Bereave- |       PTSO
                  |                  |           : Listen-!            I feelings |                    I        |>ent      I
                  |                  |           | inig ear |          I          I                    I        I          I
                      I                  I        I                I          I              I        I         I           *
                  Finance         Medical        Referral Support          Medical        Relation-1           Stress    Stsff Support
                                                   on      Group                          ships     I
                                                                                                  Grief

  16.            It can be seen that the services along the continuum
            reflect particular post disaster time phases, the possible
            different modes or models of service provision and,the
            possible locations where services are received.  Many of the
            services are best left at the local level where resources
            are familiar and can easily be adjusted in response to
            changes in need.




            HLAAAB
17.        However, some, can be provided more effectively at a
      Regional level, e.g.   Helpline, central information.  In
      addition, some services can best be monitored, evaluated and
      co-ordinated at a regional level.   A 'network* of specialist
      skills can be developed by a regional unit.

18.        The Inter-Agency Planning Group recommends that a
      co-ordinating body, known as the "Hillsborough Support Unit"
      be established for a minimum period of two years.   The Unit
      should have an executive officer, and support staff;
      operate the central Helpline;   set up an efficient database;
      oversee the pattern of services to enable resources to be
      used effectively;   see that districts provide systematic
      support and training"for all staff; develop clear channels
      of communication and form partnerships with all relevant
      authorities and non-statutory agencies in the region;   set
      up monitoring, evaluation and performance review systems.

19.        The lead authorities responsible for the Unit could be
      represented through a Committee comprising local authority
      members and officers* representatives of Mersey Regional
      Health Authority, Merseyside Probation Service, Voluntary
      Organisations, and the Disaster Trust Fund.

      Suggested ‘Regional Services'

           The services outlined below will need to be linked to
      each other through the proposed Regional Unit.

      HELPLINE

20.        This service currently operates on a 24 hour day, 7 day
      week basis and is staffed by officers of the Social Services
      Departments and a variety of other organisations. Given the
      nationwide 'catchment1 of potential users of the service it
      will be cost-efficient to retain this centralised service at
      its currr-nt level for a period of weeks to come and will
      ensure a ready access point for assistance while medium to
      longer *.»rin a rrarigmnents are effected. It is envisaged that
      the Helpline will become a national 'one number' service run
      by the regional unit with calls then referred to local
      services as appropriate.

      Co-ordination of Counselling Services

21.        Whilst counselling will usually be offered very
      'locally' it will be necessary to ensure that individuals
      are referred to the most appropriate agency; that their
      needs are met, and the services are monitored.   In addition




      HLAAAB
      there will hr- people needinq help from outside the 'region*
      whose needs must be assessed and referrals made.   This will
      require a team of 4 headed by a team leader.

22.        It is important that referrals to and from statutory
      agencies across the country are properly co-ordinated.
      There are a number of voluntary agencies on Merseyside and
      in the region for whom counselling is already the major, or
      a significant part of their work; these should be used
      wherever possible.  These include COMPASS, Personal Social
      Services, C. of E. Board of Social Responsibility (through
      the clergy and national organisations with local bases, such
      as Cruse).  The regional unit would aim to co-ordinate
      referrals to and from these agencies where appropriate.

      Drop-in Centre

23.         The Anfield Advice Centre has already allowed a large
      number of 'survivors' to describe and share their experience
      of being at Hillsborough.   It has offered other services as
      well.   It is likely that this Centre will continue via
      funding from other sources.   However, because of the
      symbolic importance of Anfield we recommend that it is used
      as a referral point for Helpline on Match Days. We believe
      that many new referrals will be obtained on Match Days.

      OUTREACH AND CO-ORDINATION

24.        Whilst the 'majority or people affected by Hillsborough
      reside within or just outside the Merseyside region it is
      known that a significant number reside elsewhere.         This
      problem was found by Kent following the Zeebrugge disaster
      where survivors and others lived long distances from the
      centre of help.        An "away" Team was established to initiate
      and provide assistance outside the Dover area.         Zeebrugge
      also demonstrated that 'Tiany people required specialist help
      from Couns':' 11 or s , Psycholoqif!.s and Psychiatrists etc., and
      that a mec'ianism was n.i'ded to co-ordinate their services.
      Thus problems were both i'•lent i.fied and met by the Kent
      "away" Team.

25.        Unlike Zeebrugge, however, the identity and location of
      people affected by "Hillsborough" are largely unknown.
      Whilst this is a handicap, there is sufficient justification
      to reach out to those in potential need.  There is a need,
      therefore, to establish the equivalent of the Kent "away"
      Team but with the limited role of referring those from
      outside the region to appropriate services across the
      country.  Basic tasks will be to:-




      HLAAAB
      1.   Provide a central telephone line, e.g. an 0800
           (freephone) number;

      2.   Provide an assessment and referral service, whereby
           people are re-referred to Local Advice Services;

      3.   Co-ordinate referrals both from within and without the
           region;

      4.   Provide oversight of the different elements of
           specialist services, e.g. psychologists etc.

      5.   Identify key events and anniversaries which may effect
           individuals and consequently service provision (e.g.
           Inquests, future football games).

           Thus the differing needs of people will be identified
      and the appropriate resources matched up to meet those
      needs:  this will avoid duplication of effort and create a
      more efficient use of resources.

      DATABASE REQUIREMENTS

26.        The unit will require a database capable of recording
      information fed through to the ‘helpline’, 'drop.in' centres
      and other source points.  The majority of contacts will be
      within two broad categories, i.e. either requesting
      assistance or offering help.  Currently the 'Hillsborough
      Helpline* has separate systems dealing with these two
      elements.  At present, nearly 3,600 offers of help have been
      received from a variety of sources, including over 600
      through the 'Hillsborough Helpline'. About 1,650 requests
      for help have been received nationally, the majority of
      these being through the 'Hillsborough Helpline'.  With this
      level of activity oeeuring, it is clear that an <;ffective
      database is ossontial to matching needs for assistance with
      the wide range of resources available.

27.        In resp^c1; of referrals for help, a manual database was
      established as a record of callers, pending the setting up
      of the computerised system.   It is suggested that this be
      retained and maintained as a back up in case of problems
      with the system.

28.         Information which is useful for the database, includes
      basic details such as names, addresses, local authority of
      origin, referral to district and agency, general
      practitioners, significant dates, (birthdays, anniversaries
      etc).   Each person has an individual reference number, and
      there is a facility for a group reference for people linked
      together.




      HLAAAB
29.        Staffing levels, which are currently based upon staff
      seconded from other duties should be formalised as soon as
      possible.  Minimum staffing is expected to require a systems
      manager, two operators, and full-time clerical support.
      Once the system is up to date close links should be
      maintained with the 'Helpline', and other agencies involved
      in collating or investigating data.

      Staff Training and Support

30.        The need for on-going and carefully targetted training
      has been demonstrated via earlier disasters.  Clearly such
      training can and has already been ‘bought in' from external
      sources.  So far this specialist training has been
      provided for local authority workers.  The regional unit
      would hope to adopt a policy of 'training the trainers' and
      thus by using expertise within the region attempt to reduce
      training costs.

31.        It is absolutely clear that those managing and working
      in post-disaster situations found the work very stressful.
      They need access to regular de-briefing and 'talking out'
      sessions.  Whilst for some workers this will in part be
      provided in their own agencies there is a need for an
      independent service which all helpers, whether paid or
      voluntary staff, can use.  The regional unit would aim to
      ensure these support systems were in place and make
      arrangements to co-ordinate offers of this 'care for the
      carers' (e.g. by BASW and the Psychology Service).  The unit
      could also respond, in confidence, to direct requests from
      staff anywhere in the region.

      PUBLIC RELATIONS

32.          "Public relations" is an important and basic element in
      the success or failure of any venture.     This is complex and
      requires skilled and sensitive handling if its potential is
      t o be realised.   I t needs to be regarded as an explicit
              and as part of the management and objectives of the
      un- t.   It can best be organised within the framework of a
      public relations strategy.

            Such a strategy will acknowledge that:-

      (i)      Interest in the disaster will be subject to
               fluctuation.  For example:  funerals, inquests,
               litigation, football matches, anniversary of the
               disaster etc.  Forward planning for the impact of
               these events is required.




      HLAAAB
      (ii)   Public Re Int. ions is heavily dependent on hard, factual,
             and accurate information about the work of the unit.
             There will, therefore, need to be direct links between
             the management and the public relations functions of
             the unit.

      (iii) Media interest can sometimes be aggressive and
            time-consuming.  This can be wasteful at best and
            damaging at worst.  Thus contact with the media needs
            to be carefully channelled and regulated separating
            local and regional issues.

33.        It is suggested that Public relations can best be
      undertaken by the Head of the Unit along with substantial
      support from the Management Committee.

      COSTINGS

34.        Since "Hillsborough" is a national disaster, it is
      recommended that strenuous efforts are made to obtain the
      funding of the Unit from central government, the EEC and
      other sources.  Costs are estimated at around £350,000 per
      year for two years. This may be generous or alternatively
      additional resources may need to be added on.

      CONCLUSION

35.        The advantages of co-ordinating all helping responses
      seem clear.  It is believed that a Regional Unit would, in
      the long run, be cost effective and more importantly would
      introduce a whole series of supports and checks which would
      mean a better service for those who need it, including the
      carers.




      29th April,   1989




      HLAAAB
