                                                                    xxxxxxxxx
                                                                    225 3800



To:   All Staff of Liverpool Social
          Services Department.
                                                              18th April, 1988.




Dear Colleague,

                                Re: Hillsborough Tragedy

     pan I thank sincerely everyone in the Department for their tremendous
amount of support and work over recent days.   The level of commitment of people
in the Department has been overwhelming and many staff have volunteered to do
additional work.   It should not be forgotten that that has been possible because
so many other colleagues have maintained mainstream services and whilst I am sure
we would all wish to contribute some people's contributions will inevitably be in
the form of maintaining our service and commitment to existing clients.

     We are at the centre of a service which will be established to provide help
for people throughout the Region. We are working closely with all the Social
Services Departments within this area and are in contact with many many more.

     I am aware that over the last few days there have been more than the usual
number of breakdowns in communication and at times things may have seemed less
than organised. I also anticipate that this state of affairs will continue for
some short while to come.

     Given the scale of the tragedy everyone is likely to have some friend or
relative who was personally involved.   People react in different ways and we should
not assume that we are immune from the effects of what happened because of our
position in the Department. No-one will know for some time to come what the total
consequences are, but could I please encourage everyone to seek personal help and
help for friends and colleagues where they know people are in difficulty.

     The people most directly involved in providing services as part of the        various
operations that have been set up it is perhaps in some ways a littleeasier for us
our time is occupied with activity directed towards helping with theproblems. We
must realise the pressure on other people who are maintaining the mainstream services
and trying to keep everything running normally.


                                                              /cont'd
To All Staff of Liverpool Social                           18th April, 1989
           Services Department,:



/cont'd




     I shall try to ensure that everyone is kept informed and aware of what
we are doing as part of the development of services, and would like to again
thank everyone in the Department for their tremendous support.

                                   Yours sincerely,



                                   Director of Social Services*
