EMERGENCY MEETING WITH DIRECTORS OF SOCIAL SERVICES



Present: Superintendent P.A. Clare - Merseyside Police Liaison Officer
         Mrs. M. Gibson - Department of Health, Social Services Inspectorate
         Mr. R.4. Marriott - Liverpool Social Services Department
         Mr. Ken Black - St. Helens Metropolitan Borough Council
         Mr. Alan Guthuie- St. Helens
         Ms. C. Wilkinson — Liverpool Social Services
         Mr. Rory Duff — Liverpool Health Authority
         Ms. Helen ©lack - Cheshire Social Services Department
         M s . Val Sheldon - Knowsley Social Services
         Mr. Derek Evans — Wirral Social Services
         Ms. Pauline Farrell- Sefton Social Services Department
         Ms. Y. Nolan - Wirral Metropolitan Borough Council
         Mr. Keith Rimmer - Wirral Metropolitan Borough Council
         Mr. Michael Stewart - Centre in Crisis Psychology
         Mr. Peter Hodk;inson - Centre in Crisis Psychology
         Mr. David Rimmer - Knowsley Social Services Department



Update

1.    Details given to Press 12.00 and 4.00 p.m.

2.    Further briefing 12.00 tomorrow for Press.

3.    Group information briefings with factual information as it comes in.

4.    Co-ordinated response by Merseyside Social Services Departments, to
      ensure speedy action.
5.    Help Line operational 24 hours:-

      15 requests for direct help
      60 people oiffered assistance, 21 Social Services staff on standby for
      night duty.

 6.   Seeking to set up outreach facility.   Potential use of Supporters Club.

 7.   People have been contacting Broadgreen Hospital seeking information
      and help.

 8.   Immediate problem is to identify level of need; needs proper co­
      ordination. We need to make the most effective use of the offers
      of help and goodwill we have received.

 9.   Offers of help have been received from other Social work Departments
      and other agencies we need to set up meetings to determine how we can
      co-ordinate joint action.

10.   Rory Duff offered the services of the Health Authority Volunteer
      Co-ordinator. Pauline Farrell, Sefton Social Services , to act as
      co-ordinator for local authorities with base in Liverpool.

11. • Need to establish a pan Merseyside base.

12.   Alan Dean, Deputy Leader, to contact Leaders of other. Mersey Authorities
      for a meeting tomorrow to try and create a coherent response.
                                       -   2   -




13.   Crisis Psychology Presentation

      We get together a group of people (there are 16 people in the group)
      and work closely with them and given them the opportunity to familiarise
      themselves with the tasksand problems they are going to face. We also
      spend around about 3 days presenting a 3 day workshop.

14.   From Liverpool's point of view, because of the early stages,   we recommend
      that the groups should not exceed 12.

15.   Training Groups should remain constant throughout.

16.   The staff at Alder Hey Hospital have expertise in dealing with the
      bereaved.

17.   Wirral Social Services take responsibility for training.

18.   A meeting has been arranged for 4.00 p.m. tomorrow with Directors of
      Social Services.

 Help Line

19.   Identify members of staff who are prepared to contribute.

20.   24 of the dead have been identified by relatives.
