The City of Liverpool
 Social Services Directorate
Head of Social Services Operations
Carole Wilkinson
26 Hatton Garden, Liverpool L3 2AW.
Tel: 051 -225 3773 Fax: 051 -225 3916
Mr                                                 Our ref:   CW/EP

                                                   13 October 1994

                                                  (Dictated7.10.94)




Dear

HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE:    EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS

Further to my letters of 10 May and 9 June 1994, and
conversations with a number of people, the concensus seems to be
that the equipment should be divided between the Football Arts
Initiative (items 1, 2, 3 and 7) and the Children's Society
Project (items 4, 5 6, 8 and 9). The books, videos, etc. will
be placed in the departmental library. The basis of the division
is that the materials will be available and accessible to others.

Arrangements will be made for you both to collect the equipment
by prior arrangement with the Centre. You should contact
      '       at the Centre in this connection.

Thank you for assisting in this task.    I hope the equipment and
material help you in your work.

Yours sincerely




Carole Wilkinson
Head of Social Services Operations




CC:               (Divisional Service Manager, Mental Health)
                  (Senior Manager, Staff Development Unit)
                      (Hillsborough Centre)
                                                    Our ref:   CW/EP
Project Leader
The Children's Society                               13 October 1994
Liverpool Children's Project
St Bride's Church                                 (Dictated 7.10.94)
PO Box 83
Liverpool L69 8AN




Dear

HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE:    EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS

Further to my letters of 10 May and 9 June 1994, and
conversations with a number of people, the concensus seems to be
that the equipment should be divided between the Football Arts
Initiative (items 1, 2, 3 and 7) and the Children's Society
Project (items 4, 5 6, 8 and 9). The books, videos, etc. will
be placed in the departmental library. The basis of the division
is that the materials will be available and accessible to others.

Arrangements will be made for you both to collect the equipment
by prior arrangement with the Centre. You should contact
              at the Centre in this connection.

Thank you for assisting in this task.    I hope the equipment and
material help you in your work.

Yours sincerely



(_<.'* - • i(     (.•. ( llA
Carole Wilkinson
Head of Social Services Operations




CC:                Divisional Service Manager, Mental Health)
                  tSenior Manager, Staff Development Unit)
                  -“ ^(Hillsborough Centre)
                    ~~1                    Our ref : CW/ JB
Hillsborough Survivors Group
55 Segars Lane
Ainsdale
Southport                                  1st June, 1994.
PR8 3JA.



Dear

Hillsborough Centre: Equipment and Materials

Thank you for your letter of 23rd May, 1994.       I propose to
circulate your suggestions to the other people I wrote to and to
elicit their views.

In response to your question about files, you need to advise
people to consult              |, Team Manager, Granton Road (Tel.
No. 263 3421) who will be able to respond to queries and requests
for access to files.    The files will be stored in the Granton
Road Office.

You are welcome to continue your meetings at the Centre and you
need only to confirm with the staff at the centre the
arrangements and any alterations or changes you wish to make.

If anyone requires assistance form Social Services they should
contact their Local Area Office.    After Ken's retirement the
Centre cannot receive referrals, if anyone refers themselves to
the centre they will be diverted to the local office or a
voluntary organisation offering counselling services.

I hope this is helpful.


Yours sincerely,




Carole Wilkinson
Head of Social Services Ops.


Copy:     Hillsborough Centre
                                                             t2 4 my
Carole Wilkinson
Head of Social Services Operations
26 Hatton Garden
Liverpool L3 2AW

                                                                                23 May 1994

Dear Carole

HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE: EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS

Thank you for your letter of 10 May 1994 regarding the disposal of equipment and materials
from the Hillsborough Centre. The Hillsborough group that regularly uses the Centre on
Wednesday evenings has met and would like to suggest the following:

1)      That the nine items listed on the inventory of resources available at the Hillsborough
        Centre be kept in one location if possible. If this cannot be the Hillsborough Centre
        then we would suggest the items be kept by the Football Arts Initiative, who as well as
        making use of the items would provide access to the equipment to others.

2)      Other material and resources that were not part of those donated by John Moores also
        concern the group. These include video and audio tapes, newspapers, photographs and
        books which have been available from the Centre. We have been told that these items
        are the property of Social Services and will be moved to the training unit at Ebony
        House as part of a Hillsborough library. If thisis the case we would ask that the
        material be fully documented and be made readily available to any group still
        maintaining an interest in Hillsborough. If any material is to be disposed of could the
        relevant groups be informed.

3)      The question of files also needs attention. Many people have not had their files
        destroyed and there is concern about the movement of files from the Centre. Could we
        have information on the disposal of these files or details of their new location. Access
        to files if they are relocated and details of who will be the new contact regarding
        Hillsborough is also requested.

4)      As              is to retire at the end of May we are also concerned about the future of
        the Hillsborough Centre and our access to the rooms. We have been meeting
        fortnightly in the Centre for over four years and wish to continue our meetings. Could
        you clarify the position of the Hillsborough Centre and any new procedures that may
        exist regarding new referrals related to Hillsborough.

I look forward to hearing from you.


Yours faithfully      f

On behalf of the Hillsborough Survivors Group


CENTRRDOC
