                LIVERPOOL SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT

                MANAGEMENT MEETING.

                TUESDAY, 25TH APRIL, 1989.



     PRESENT;       Mr. D. Mason, in the Chair.
                    Mr. V. Citarella, Mr. A. James,
                    Mr. P. Marley and Ms. C.Wilkinson.




1.   Disaster/Departmental Management.

     Mr. Citarella presented to the meeting two alternative temporary
     Disaster/Departmental charts to take account of the anticipated structure
     of the planning group and also the need to carry on the day to day running
     of the Department.

     The first chart showed a structure based on the existing resources within
     the Department whilst the second chart showed a structure indicating a
     need for a new post of Assistant Director which would require additional
     resources. The meeting decided to proceed using the second chart and
     in this connection it was agreed that —

     (i)     arrangements be made for the post of Assistant Director to be
             advertised in the full page of vacancies which had been donated by
             "Social Work Today";

     (ii)    Mr.Citarella would reproduce the second chart together with a
             one sheet version of the suggested duties and responsibilities of
             each of the Assistant Directors; and

     (iii)   Mr. Citarella would raise the issue at the meeting with N.A.L.G.O.
             on 26th April, inform them that the situation would be reviewed on
             a monthly basis.

             It was also agreed that in the event that at the meeting on the
             26th April, N.A.L.G.O. raised the issue of staff doing extra
             hours Mr. Citeralla would inform them that the seven local
             authorities were considering a joint approach to this issue and
             that it was a matter which was high on their agenda. Mr. Citarella
             was also asking N.A.L.G.O. for their views on the matter.

2.   Social Services Committee - Interregnum Meeting - Week commencing
     2nd May.

     It was agreed that the following <X&ms would be placed on the agenda for
     the Interregnum Meeting of the Social Services Committee to be held
     during week commencing 2nd May, 1989, viz:—

     1.      Temporary Disaster/Departmental Management -
             Mr. Citarella to do interim report.

     2.      Financing of Mental Health Hospitals —
             Mr. R. James to do report in consultation with Ms.M.Rigley and
             Mr. D.Bridge.
                                   -   2
                                       -




     3.     Access to records —
            Ms. C. Wilkinson to report in consultation with
            Mr. K. Johnson.

     4.     Community Parenting -
             Mr.A. James and Ms. C. Wilkinson to report in consultation
             with Mr. A. Copp.

     5.     Allowances/Leaving Care.

            Mr. F.Flynn to report.

—   6 . - Costed -New Hall Action Plan.
__________ Mr. M- Rygate to report in consultation with Mr. R. James.______

     7.     A.I.D.S./H.I.V. Grant.
             Mr. Purvis to report.

     8.     Guardians ad Litem.
             Mr. R. James to report.

     9.     Teachers Incentive Post.
             Mr. A. James to report.


     It was also agreed that Mr. Citarella and Mr. G. Davey would brief
     the Leader of the Council and the Chair of the Social Services
     Committee on the above matters prior to them being considered by the
     interregnum meeting.

3.   Social Servicies Committee —          14th June, 1989.

     It was agreed that a meeting of the Management Team would meeton
     Tuesday 2nd May, at a time to be arranged in order to discuss matters
     for inclusion in the agenda for the meeting of the Social Services
     Committee to be held on 14th June. It was also agreed that following
     that meeting a larger group of representatives of the Social Services
     Department would meet to discuss the agenda items in more detail.
     Mr. Citarella agreed to notify the persons concerned as soon as a time
     for the meeting on 2nd May could be arranged.

4.   Management Meeting — 28th April, 1989.

     It was agreed       that a meeting of the Management Team   would be arranged
     for 8.30 a.m.       on Friday 28th April to discuss -

     (i)     issues related to the core teams at the Vernon Sangster etc;
             and
     (ii)    the recommendations of the Planning Group.

5.   Weekend Rota for Management Team.

     It was agreed that the weekend rota between the hours of 10.00 a.m.
     and 4.00 p.m. for the Management Team would be as follows, viz: —

     Saturday    — Ms.     C. Wilkinson.
     Sunday      — Mr.     A. James.
     Monday      - Mr.     V.Citarella/Mr.       P.Marley.

     Members of the    Management Team   canalso be contacted outside of these
     hours via their radio 'phones or their bleepers.
                       -   3
                           -




6.   Meetings attended by members of the Management Team.

     It was agreed that the board in Room 65 would indicate as far
     as possible the meetings to be attended by individual members of
     the Management Team up until Friday 28th April.
