                                                              CONFIDENTIAL



                      INTER-AGENCY MEETING

                    WEDNESDAY, 26TH APRIL, 1989.




PRESENT:


      D. Mason (in the Chair), Director of Social Services, Liverpool.
      P. Marley, Assistant Director of Social Services, Liverpool.
  •




      P. Farrell, Director of Social Services, Sefton.
  •




      H. Parker, (Chair of Planning Group) Liverpool University.
  •




      B. Walker, Social Services, Knowsley.
  •




      T. Owen, Social Services, Cheshire.
  •




      R. Tann, Merseyside F. & C.D.A. - Emergency Planning.
  •
  •




      S. Paul, British Association of Social Workers.
  •




      S. Cole, British Association of Social Workers.
  •




      K. Westly, British Association of Social Workers.
  •




      P. Johnson, Personal Services, St. Helens.
  •




      B. Harrison, Social Services Inspectorate.
  •




      W.J. Twist, Social Services, Lancashire.
  •




      E. Cooper, Merseyside Probation Service.
  •




      D. Evans, Social Services Wirral.
  •




      G.P. Davey, City Solicitors, Liverpool.
  •




      A. Horner, City Solicitors, Liverpool.
  •
85.   Planning Group.                                                                ACTION.

      Professor Howard Parker presented the proposals arising from meetings
      of the Planning Group for the establishment of a Hillsborpugh
      Support Unit, viz: —

                              Joint Management Committee

                                                           Public Relations
                                    Co-ordinator
                                             I
      Data Base         Helpline          Referral         Training Staff Support
                                          Outreach
                                          Co-ord ination


      After a full and detailed discussion, it was noted that -

      (a)    the cost of the Unit had been estimated at approximately
             £340,000 per annum which could be shared between Authorities,
             based on population and impact of the disaster, somewhere
             between the range of £40-60,000 each. This cost assumes one
             Authority acting as host( for secretarial etc     support),
             although such costs could well be absorbed within the overall
             figure if necessary;

      (b)    the Unit had an anticipated life span of 2 years which could
             be trimmed or added to based upon experience;

      (c)    the view that the Unit provide an independent counselling
             service had the support of this meeting;

       (d)   further consideration is to be given to the manner in which
             the presentation is to be made to the meeting of Politicians
             on 29th April, and the alternative options for funding -
             including approaches to the Government/EEC/the Merseyside Fire
             and Civil Defence Authority etc. - is to be considered further
             at the meeting of Directors of Social Services on 28th April;

       (e)   the appointment of a Researcher could be pursued as a separate
             application for funding; and

       (f)   the drop-in centre could be funded independently but on
             match days, the centre be utilised as a Regional resource,
             funded by the Unit.

86.   Leaflets/Badges.

       It was noted that further packs of leaflets, posters and lapel               All to note
       stickers would be available for collection from 10.00 a.m. on
       28th April from 3rd Floor, Hatton Garden.

87.   Voluntary Sector Training Day.

       It was agreed that the voluntary sector training day be
       re-arranged for 24th May and the cost involved be absorbed into the
       overall training day costs of the core Authorities. The venue for            D.Evans.
       the meeting is to be arranged by Derek Evans.
                                  -2-



 88.     Staff Counselling.

         It was noted that the B.A.S.W. Office was up and running from today,
         that a Staffline (051-949-0542) was now available and that printing
         of publicity material is underway. A copy of the information which
         is to be contained within a staff leaflet was circulated. This gives
         full details of the service being provided and hours of operation
         etc..... and a copy is attached as Appendix 'A' to these Minutes.
         It was agreed that —

         (a)   all Authorities should ensure that offers to counsel staff be
               referred direct to the B.A.S.W. Office, and                         All to note

         (b)   staff be granted the facility to arrange appointments for
               counselling during office hours if necessary.

         The question of office equipment for the B.A.S.W. Office is in hand.


^89.     Helpline.
         Carole Wilkinson circulated a note on the appointment of a co-ordinator
         for the Helpline and of an assistant for associated clerical and
         administrative support. Also circulated were details of the Helpline
         staff rota for 2nd and 3rd May. In noting this information, it was
         agreed that all Authorities would trawl their personal records to
         identify retired social workers who may be able to fill future slots      All to note
         in the Helpline and to convey the names of any volunteers to Pauline
         Farrell for transmission to                    The Director advised
          the meeting that as at 6.00 a.m. today, Helpline had received
          calls requesting help, of which approximately 400 were anonymous or
         incomplete (which is an issue so far as the database is concerned).

  90.    Computers.
         Various offers of computer equipment have apparently been made and
         these offers of assistance are to be progressed. It was agreed that
         the meetir^of administrative personnel from Authorities (to be held on    P.Marley
         27th April) be requested to discuss the question of computer
         compatability.

  91.     Permanent Accommodation - Drop In Centre.

          It was agreed that Pauline Farrell provide           |*ith a copy of     P.Farrell
          theDirector's report on the establishment of permanent premises for
          a counselling, drop-in and memorial centre.

   92.    Training Video.
          The meeting noted that the following Authorities wish to acquire the
          Crisis Psychology Training Video, viz:-

                          Knowsley
                          Sefton
                          Cheshire (subject to preview)
                          Liverpool
                          Merseyside Probation Service.

   93.    Keeping Members/Staff Informed.

           A draft core document for the use of all Authorities and agencies
           (under cover of its own letter) was circulated and agreed as a basis    All to note
                              -3-



       for advising Members of the progress that has been made to
       establish services in the wake of the Hillsborough tragedy.
       Authorities are asked to ensure that copies of the document are
       circulated to its Members prior to the meeting of Politicians on
       29th April.

94.    W.W.A.S.S.A.

       The Director informed the meeting that his report to N.W.A.S.S.A.
       for funding for publicity, training and continuing developments,
       had been favourably received at the Emergency Meeting on 25th April.

95.    A.D.S.S. Update.

       The meeting noted the terms of a letter of 22nd April to the
       Association of Directors of Social Services appraising the
       Association of progress to date.

96.    Support Group for Victims.

       Pauline Farrell advised the meeting that she is currently
       arranging a meeting between             and the CommunityLiaison
       Officers of all the Authorities to co-ordinate the activities of
       local groups responding to the tragedy.

97.    Appeal Funds.

       It was agreed that Paddy Marley act as the Group's Liaison Officer in
       dealings with the Appeal Fund and in this connection, he be             P.Marley
       requested to obtain a statement from the Department of Social
       Security regarding the position of families in receipt of state
       benefits.

98.    'Social Work Today1.

       A copy of the advertisement inserted in 'Social Work Today' about
       possible vacancies which may arise from the tragedy was circulated
       for information. In noting the advertisement, it was agreed that
       no further action be taken for the time being to progress the
       proposal for a Hillsborough Jobs Forum Day.

99.    Anglican Memorial Service.

       It was noted that the question of social work support at the Anglican
       Memorial Service and at hotel accommodation for bereaved families
       had been raised with the Dean and that he had agreed that the matter
       would be dealt with by the Cathedral authorities.

100.   Referrals to Psychiatrists.

       The Director reported that he had raised with                  the
       question of direct referrals to psychiatrists.

101.   Professional/Trade Journals.

       Bernard Walker reported that arrangements were in hand for
       representatives of professional/trade journals to attend meetings
       and to undertake visits throughout the core Authorities during
       27th April.
                       -4-


Payments to Staff.

Brian Harrison informed the meeting of information he had
obtained regarding payments to staff following recent tragedies        •Marley
and it was agreed that the various methods (i.e. time-off in lieu,
honorariums, extra days leave) be fed into the discussions on this
issue at the meeting of administrative staff on 27th April.

Letter from Trent H.A.

It was agreed that the letter of response to the communication         .Davey.
from the Trent Regional Health Authority about de-briefing sessions
be circulated at this meeting on 28th April.

Proposed Financial Arrangement with Crisis Psychology.

The Director circulated the terms of a proposed financial
arrangement in respect of the services of
The statement is to be amended to include the cost of the training     .Marley
sessions for the voluntary sector on 24th May, i.e. an additional
sum of £500. It was agreed that a formal contract be drawn up and
arrangements be made for Authorities to be invoiced on a monthly
basis. Derek Evans agreed to raise with                 the question   . Evans
of training sessions for Training Officers.

Offers of Help.

It was agreed that this matter be considered further at this
meeting on 28th April, when Vic Citarella can be in attendance.        .Davey
The meeting noted that the Helpline had logged 3,600 offers of
help, of which 2,800 have been acknowledged to date.

Steering Committee - Hillsborough Solicitors Group.

Pauline Farrell circulated a copy of a press release of the
Steering Committee - Hillsborough Solicitors Group of 26th April,
a copy of which is attached as Appendix 'B 1 to these Minutes.

Police Hotline.

The meeting requested that the following matters be pursued with
the co-ordinating officers of West Midlands Police Hotline, viz:-

(a)   are referrals from distressed and angry people to the
      Police Hotline being made to the Helpline; and                   •Marley

(b)   are the rules governing the compilation of evidence from
      juveniles being adhered to.

Further information is also necessary regarding referrals of
calls received by Childline and an approach is expected from the
Judicial Inquiry for permission to access the Helpline data base,
which will be a matter for consideration at a future meeting of
this Group.

Finance.

The Director reported that —

(a)   he had received an unsolicited approach from Merseyside
      Task Force about the services being provided in response to
      the tragedy and that arising therefrom, a meeting had been
      arranged for 11.30 a.m. on 2nd May at which another member       .Mason
                                   -5-

              of the Group would be welcome to attend;   and

        (b)   the possibility of tapping into available resources through
              Liverpool Football Club (anonymous donations)     being
              pursued as a possible source of funding towards the cost of   D.Mason
              services required over a 2/3 year period.

109.    Visit of H.R.H. Prince of Wales.

        It was agreed that further details of the proposed visit of the
        Prince of Wales on 3rd May be gathered and reported to this         A.Horner.
        meeting, if possible, on 28th April.

110 .   Future Meetings.

        It was agreed that the next two meetings of this Group be held at
        4.00 p.m. on 28th April and 2nd May.
                                                                                  APPENDIX 'A'.




       A personal message to staff currently working on or whose work
            has been affected by the Hillsborough Disaster.


                               STAFFLINE                  051 949 0542


Since the Hillsborough Disaster on Saturday 15th April the work load
for Social Workers and other professional colleagues has increased
enormously. Many of you will have had direct or indirect experience
of the trauma caused by this disaster and many of you will have
counselled and will continue to counsel people who have been touched
by this tragedy.

Both the British Association of Social Workers and your colleagues up
and down the country became aware that this work is demanding of yourselves
and you in turn may want the opportunity to talk to someone.

Consequently STAFFLINE has been set up which will provide a confidential
service to yourselves by Social Workers trained in staff support from
   o-inc>—{■ r i p—   S
                      ’p   ^   «
                               a■■- -- ■   T n ^ r vq 1 ."
                                                         8y s    ©~;; n p p ri .::.«§<*              -         -




                                                                                                           -
direction of Simon Cole CSS Dip.Coun. from the Royal School for the Blind,
Leatherhead and assisting him will be seven Social Workers from Sandwell
Social Services. The latter have been trained as members of a
departmental support group.

STAFFLINE will initially be open weekdays from 11.00.a.m. - 7.00.p.m. with
an answering machine outside of these hours. Arrangements can be made to
see you by appointment at one of the counselling centres and there will
also be an opportunity to meet STAFFLINE Staff at the HELPLINE and
ADVICE Centres at the end of key shifts.

Please do not hesitate to use STAFFLINE if things get difficult;                                  it is there
to help you.
                                                 APPENDIX 'B'.




                     P R E S S     R E L E A S E

                          26TH A PR IL 1 9 8 9


          STEERING COMMITTEE. HILLSBOROUGH SOLICITORS GROUP




Solicitors instructed to pursue compensation claims following
the Hillsborough Disaster met last night and elected a
Steering Committee to co-ordinate the claims.  It will consist
of 6 members and will be chaired by                        The
other members are
                            and

As one of its first tasks the Steering Committee is arranging
for Counsel to appear on behalf of the claimants at the

Friday,

Solicitors instructed in these claims who have not already
made contact with the Steering Committee are asked to do s o /--
care of the Liverpool Law Society7s Library, Castle Chambers/
Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH {Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236
0047) .

For further information, please contact Nicola Harrison on
051 480 7000 or 051 255 0628.
HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER

PERMANENT PREMISES FOR A COUNSELLING, DROP-IN AND MEMORIAL CENTRE




INTRODUCTION

The number and the nature of the referrals for counselling and other
services that has been generated through the "Helpline", Drop-In Centre
and through the mainstream service, since the disaster, indicates
a very significant demand for skilled post-trauma counselling over
the next one to two years and perhaps longer.

The response to      the opening of the Anfield ground, to the Drop-In
Centre, and to the   bus service for those wishing to re-visit the Hillsborough
Ground, indicates     the need for, and the benefits of, an opportunity
for those affected   by the disaster to share many of their common experiences.

In considering how best to provide for the future it is important
to note that many of those traumatically affected by the consequences
of the disaster are not themselves fans.

A number of factors suggest that much of the counselling and support
work generated by the disaster should in future be co-ordinated from,
and in part operate from, premises that have an independent identity
associated to "Hillsborough" and which are located close to the Liverpool
Football Club and Anfield Park.      It seems appropriate also that such
a Centre be close to the Liverpool Supporters Club and to the Vernon
Sangster Sports Centre in which the Drop-In Centre was first based
and from which the Sheffield Hospital bus shuttle, and the Hillsborough
Ground bus, ran.   It should continue to provide an informal, comfortable
and quiet meeting place for those who will benefit from a sharing
of common experience.

There are several sites around the Anfield Park football ground principal
car park, in Stanley Park, which have excellent access and meet all
requirements.   The quality of modular construction building now available
is such that a building with appropriate dignity and ambience, having
a life expectancy from two years to "permanent", could be fully operational
within ten to twelve weeks of commissioning. The sites under consideration
all lend themselves to simple landscape screening with shrubbery or
memorial garden so that ease of access may be combined with a degree
of privacy.   Should such a Centre be established the name would remain
to be determined.      For the purpose of this note it is referred to
as "The Hillsborough Centre".

There follow notes on:-

Purpose
Accommodation Requirements
Commissioning
Management
Staffing
Costs

Purpose

The purpose of the Hillsborough Centre would be:-
                                     - 2 -

 (1) To provide a drop-in centre and meeting place, with support services
     on hand, for those who may benefit from sharing common experiences
     and needs.

 (2) To continue to receive and/or co-ordinate new applications for
     assistance arising from the disaster and ensure integration into
     the data-base for response and follow up.

 (3) To provide a centre from which a case co-ordination and de-briefing
     service could operate to support a Care Fieldwork Team and, by
     request, any Key Worker concerned in post-disaster work.

 (4) To offer a small Memorial rest room.

 Note

 It is not proposed that future applications for help that are associated
 with Hillsborough would be referred to the Centre, although that option
 would be available where appropriate, but that the Centre would assume
 responsibility for logging and co-ordinating longer term work and
 provide a common reference point for de-briefing and support services
 for Key Workers.    It would nevertheless retain its own staff, whether
 provided on a seconded basis or not, and would maintain an open referral
 service during the day.

There seems little doubt that the needs currently identified would
help keep such a Centre fully occupied for two years or more. Thereafter
it seems probable that a more enduring role may have evolved that
will on the one hand continue to meet long term Hillsborough needs,
of which there will be a significant number, and on the other hand
have developed a more general related brief relating perhaps to sports
casualties.

Accommodation

The building should afford dignity, security and medium to long-term
durability. A single storey pitched roof building of modular construction,
fully accessible to the disabled, is envisaged.      It should be close
to parking facilities, and to the locations referred to above.         It
should be well signed posted and accessible, yet provide a degree
of privacy from the car park and the Stanley Park playing field.
This may be achieved by fencing and planting, and the area could include
a small memorial garden.

-----------------------Accommodation SpecificaLion------------------------

Element              No       Maximum         Square
                              Occupancy
Manager's Office     1           1               150
Administrative       1           2               250
Office
Social Work Office   1           4               150
Kitchenette          1                           100
Lobby (mobility      1                           100
standard)
Drop In Lounge       1       15—20 easy          500
                                   chairs
                             40—60 stacking chairs
                                        - 3 -

    Interview rooms (3)       2        2               200
                              1        4               200
    Toilets-mobility
    standard
    (staff and users share)
    Memorial Rest Room        1        8 easy chairs    250
    Store room                1                          100

    Total 2,000 square feet excluding toilets and circulation space.

    Commissioning and implementation schedule

    The small gymnasium in which the present Drop In Centre is operating
    was fully booked by local schools and youth organisations at the time
    it was made available to counselling services, and it is desirable
    to free it as early as possible.

    The Merseyside Youth Association have indicated that they would respond
    favourably to a request for an extension beyond the currently agreed
    for release date of May 7th, but clearly there would be an advantage
    in early relocation of the Drop-In service if that can be achieved.

    It is necessary to ensure however that the location of the Drop-In
    Centre is not radically changed as it is now established in the publics
    mind.

    Enquiries have suggested that a number of modular building specialists
    would be prepared to supply the quality of building needed.       Some
    would be prepared to supply immediately usable portakabin type units
    to be situated beside the Vernon Sangster whilst the more permanent
    building is completed.

    If the proposed scheme is approved and the necessary planning permissions
    expedited the following schedule appears feasible.

    (1) Relocate present Drop-In Centre staff to temporary cabin by 1.5.89.

    (2) Open permanent Hillsborough Drop-In Centre by 21.7.89.

    Management

    Temporary arrangements are under consideration for the Liverpool Social
    Services Department to continue to manage the Drop-In Centre in the
    ohort -term— a»d—   — this— fce— continue— %o— be— staffed— by— a— Core— Group----
     workers from Liverpool Social Services Department and voluntary organisations
    notably Victim Support and Barnardos.         In the longer term it would
    be desirable for the Centre to be staffed jointly by relevant Authorities,
    Probation staff and volunteers and be managed by a Hillsborough Victims/
    Survivors Management Committee.
    Staffing

    PHASE 1

*   Staffing requirements are likely to alter with time.     In the immediate
    future they are anticipated to continue as now. That is:-

    Manager of Day Centre seconded more or less full time.

    Co-ordinators (Casework Services) six operating on a rota basis.
Staff Counsellors * Approximately 30 per day; that is six for each
of four three hour shifts, with an additional four at the peak 12.00
to 3.00 p.m. period covering hospital and ground visiting.

*The attempt has been made to ensure that both the Casework Co-ordinators
and four out of six of every "shift" of social work counsellors are
skilled and experienced in beareavement counselling.

Staff De-briefing Service -     should be   independent    and,   at present,
constantly available on site.

PHASE 2

Once the level of activity in the Drop-In Centre subsides and the
Sheffield trips terminate it seems probable that the Drop In Centre
would be adequately staffed by the identified group of 14 or so Core
Team workers which will by then be in place, working on a rota basis,
with the help of a reduced number of volunteers.

The need for the Case Co-ordination will remain,          though possibly on
a slightly reduced basis.

The need for the De-briefing service will remain but can perhaps begin
to operate on a more planned basis and extend to all Key Workers the
majority fo whom will not be operating from the Hillsborough Centre.

PHASE 3

Difficult to predict.      Staffing requirements would need review in
terms of needs in the areas of (l) Case Co-ordination of post disaster
work on Merseyside and (2) the provision of an appropriate de-briefing
service.    It is anticipated that the De-briefing Service would be
that approved at the Inter Agency Forum for Merseyside.

Capital Cost

Provisional estimates suggest that the Permanent Hillsborough Drop
In Centre could be on site, with services, for approximately £50,000,
by 21.7.89. This excludes the cost of landscaping and temporary portakabin
provision for the intervening weeks.
                           THE HILLSBOROUGH DROP-IN CENTRE


1. Evidence suggests the need for both a Drop-In Centre and a post—trauma
    counselling service for a minimum of two years.

2. The Centre should be near the Liverpool Football Ground, the Liverpool
    SuppertsrsClub and the present location of the Drop-In Service at
    the Vernon Sangster which is established in the public's mind.

3. The Centre should be identified with 'Hillsborough', yet have an
    independent identity. It is important to note that not all who
   have been traumatised by the disaster are themselves 'fans'.

4. PURPOSE

     (a) To continue to provide Drop-In facility for those who may gain
     from the sharing of experience.

     (b) To provide a counselling and advice service in association
     with the Drop—In Centre.

     (c) In the longer term, to provide a Centre from which post disaster
     work may be co-ordinated and reviewed and where a de-briefing and
     support service for all Key Workers may be based. The Centre
     would almost certainly be kept fully occupied for 2 years.

     (d) In the much longer term it seems probable that in addition
     to serving the very long term needs of Hillsborough, a more general
     related function may evolve. This could be personal needs relating
     to sporting accidents generally for example.

5.   The accommodation schedule would be:—

        1   x   Managers Office                                    (1)
        1   x   Administrative Office                              (2)
        1   x   Social Work/Counsellors/Solicitor's Office         (4) (Work Stations)
        1   x   Kitchenette
        1   x   Drop-In Lounge                          (20 Lounge/60 Stacking)
        3   x   Interview Rooms                                 2 x (2)
        1   x   Toilets                                         1 x (4)
        1   x   Memorial Rest Room                                 (8)
        1   x   Store

6.   A durable, dignified and aesthetically acceptable building could
     be 'on site' in an appropriate area of Stanley Park by 21.7.89.
     at a cost of approximately £55,000 discounting fencing or landscape
     plaiiLlng~.   ----_
                                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER REFERRAL



         REFERRAL CENTRE 1                     DATE                  t                   T ItC
                            1                                        1
                            1                                        1
                            1                                        1
             1              1
Details      |   Name       |
             I              1
                            1
   of        1   Address    |
             I              1
             1              1
Caller       |   Tel. No.   |
             1              i
             1              i
Details      I   Name       |
   of        1              1
 Person      |   Address    |
 needing     |              1
  help       |   Tel. No.   |
             1              1
 If the person needing help had a friend or relative who         1
 died or was injured at Hillsborough, give the name of           1
 person died/iniured                                             1
 Tick the nature of         1 Offer of Help | Request for Help   1 Request for information   |     Other
 the telephone call         I           I             I                                      1
 received                   I           I             I                                      1




   Details
        of
    Call




 Info/comment
 given to
 caller



                        1                                 1                  1
 Name of person         |                                 | Name of Employer |
 who took               1                                 | or Agency and    |
 referral               1                                 I place of work    |
                        1                                 1                  1
                        1                                 1                  1


 For "HElPlIt't" Collator




 ACTION TAKEN (Details/Date/Time/Tnitial)




                                                                                                 C O f A P

                                                                                                  y          N

GAIABB
' Promotion and News Unit, P.O. Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.

'T e l:                      Fax No.


                                                                                                                        B o r o u g h e l W lf«»l

              Lancashire
              CountY - 0 H
KNowi^ll      Council          M elropolilan Borough of S Li1* IO.'N”   S ttfc J c D S   C l)C sb iicG nm lyC iim cil




          LIVERPOOL SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
          'HILLSBOROUGH'- DATABASE


          -   All requests for help received by the Helpline will be put onto a database.

              An initial referral is completed by the Helpline Team. As part of the
              routine admin, procedure in processing that form, it is passed through the
              computer input team.

              The information from the form is transferred onto one of the attached
              forms which is used by the computer operators for input.

          -   Where a referral has been passed by Helpline to another Authority or agency,
              that initial information and disposal will already be held on the database.
              What will be required is an update referral to be returned to the Helpline
              which sets out the action taken subsequently in response to the initial
              referral.
              The department would wish eventually to hold details of all contacts to
              to various agencies.   Authorities/Agencies are requested therefore to return
              information on contacts direct to them (i.e. not through Helpline).      Details
              of these contacts will be requested in due course when the computer system
              I.s fully operational and up to date with roforralo t-h-rough the -Helpline.-----
f Promotion and News Unit, P.O. Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.

f Tel:                    Iffl Fax No.



                                                                                                                       Borough o f Wirral




                                M e tropolita n B orough   olSEFTON   S tH e le n s   Cheshire County Council




                                                                 HELPLINE ROTA


            Rotas for the week ending Friday 28th April are attached.                                           Please note -
            lam — 5am shift no longer requires extra help.


            5am - 9am shift has been converted to a 7am - 9.30am period requiring only
            3 additional staff from you.


            Please ensure staff arrive Vz hour before their                            shift to bebriefed.


            Thank you for all your help.




           CAROLE WILKINSON
