     A CTIO N P L A N N E R

             1            £-u- w Gorfv/,, [~1
                 fw -       lu-c-r *sv    n




                                                 1□
                                              !
                                                  n
             n \                ^\                n




                                                 i
                 3Xl




                                  'T ^
    —




                                                 □
o
c

                 INSIGHT
R E C R U IT M E N T H O T L IN E 0 1 -6 4 2 8 8 7 0
                                                                                                 > ~
                             LIVERPOOL HEALTH AUTHORITY
                       ROYAL LIVERPOOL HOSPITAL
                                    Prescot Street, Liverpool L7 8XP
                                       Telephone: 051-709 0141



Your Ref:                Our Ref:    RM P/LG                If telephoning please a ^ fo r:> E x t ’2E$jj
                                                                                    /
                                                                                    V
       19 May 1989

       Mr D Mason
       Director of Social Services
       26 Hatton Garden
       T -!         S'


               Mason

                 Thank you for your letter of 27 April 1989. I am sure you have been
       extremely busy with the Hillsborough Disaster asAcjell as your many other
       responsibilities. Perhaps I should emphasise that I was responsible solely for
       organising the first meeting on the following Monday. Currently Dr Forth, at
       this hospital, is co-ordinating our medical responseto the Disaster, and in parti­
       cular our regular meetings. Personally I would feel it very helpful for you
       to come to one of our Monday lunch time meetings.

                 My own responsility with regard the Disaster is to co-ordinate our
       medico-legal response. Personally I feel this is a long term issue and that
       we should not be undertaking any preparational reports for several months
       at least.

                                                Yours sincerely




                                            R M Philpott FRCPsych
                                           Consultant Psychiatrist
                                                       SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
                                                       David Mason
                      City                             Director of Social Services
                      of                               Hatton Garden
                                                       Liverpool.    L3 2AW
                      L iverpool                       Telephone:
                                                                                        22
                                                                     051 227 3911 Ext 377


                                                       Your Ref:
   Dr.' M.' Forth,                                     Our Ref:      AJ/LP
   Consultant Psychiatrist,
   Psychiatric! Unit,                                                28th April, 1989
                                                       Date:
   Royal Liverpool Hospital,
   Presciot Street,
   Liverpool,
   L7 8XT.'



   Dear Dr.) Forth,

                                  re: "Hillsborough"

         Further to our short telephone cionversation yesterday I write
   to thank you for offering your servicles as a referral point for any
   bereavement counsellors working on behalf of this Department who
   may wish to seek mediclal assistance or refer the bereaved, with their
   cbnsent, for raediclal tiounselling«>

         We may antidipate that in the dourse of time numbers of people
   may require psycho—therapy to assist with abnormal grief reactions
   but, in the first instancie, we are simply looking for a parallel,
   for work with adults, to the servicle offered by Dr.' June Robson at
   Alder Hey Ac'ciident and Emergency in respetit of children, to help
   parents who may feel the need for this to talk through the meaning
   of post-mortem findings.' Some relatives or cilose friends of adults
   who died may feel the need to understand better how death oddurred.<
   In one sense it is a simply lay understanding of the physiologidal
   trauma that caused death that some people may be seeking; but the
   content is one in which a psycho-therapeutic; approach is valued.'

         Thank you for your assistande.-

         You may appreciate that in the post Hillsborough       situation,
   it has been something of an "all hands to the pumps" situation in
   this Department.'    I personally shall be withdrawing from involvement
   in the disaster related servicles at the end of this week and would
   ask that if you have any queries on liaison that you address them
   either to Ms. Carole Wilkinson, Assistant Director (Field Servides),
   or to Mr.) D. Mason, Director.)

                                   Yours sincerely,



                      Ass istant Director uHj   lential ServicSesT




en calling or telephoning please ask for
           Copy sent to Dr. M. Forth, Royal Liverpool 26.5.89.




                                                                     225 3800


                                         DM/JB.                      27th April, 1989.



Dr. R.M. Philpott,
Consultant Psychiatrist,
Royal Liverpool Hospital,
Prescot Street,
Liverpool, L7 8XP.


PERSONAL



Dear Dr.. Philpott,

     Please accept my sincere apologies for my lack of courtesy in not responding
to you earlier.   We did have a brief conversation light years ago on Monday before
last.     It was mot helpful to receive the Minutes of your meeting of the 15th
April and I was most impressed with the range of issues that you neaeged to address
so promptly.   Me are still working very much cm a hand-to-mouth basis, but I hope
by the end of this week we will have a clearer picture of what is going on.

     I took the liberty of circulating your Minutes to my colleagues in the
Co-ordinating Group earlier this week to keep them appraised of the situation and
wonder if you might find it helpful for me to attend a part of one of your meetings
on a Monday in the future*   This is in no way to cut across the direct liaison with
the Health Service via Rory Duff my colleague, but perhaps could be supplementary to
that.   I am copying this letter to Rory so that he is aware of this suggestion.

    I I is our expectation, and I think you confirmed this view, that direct work
with survivors is likely to emerge over time rather than instantaneously and wonder
if you could agenda with your colleagues some discussion around direct response from
Social Workers who are likely to be (me of the first points of contact, either through
the Help Line or during the ongoing counselling thereafter.    I would also be
interested to explore with you the possibility and the availability in the longer
term of psychiatrfcetoonsultancy for our Help Line. To date it has not been a problem
but it may well be that people operating the Help Line are confronted by situations
where they would want speedy advice.

     You will of course realise that we have and hope to continue to work across
seven Local Authorities and although the concentration is in Merseyside there are-----
likely to be requirements over a vast area, would you feel it worthwhile to share
your discussions and perhaps promote discussions, via Rory Duff, on a regional level
with psychiatrists. Again my sincere thanks.
                                   Yours sincerely,
                                                      Director of Social Services.
           Copy sent to Dr. M. Forth, Royal Liverpool 26.5.89.




                                                                      225 3800


                                         DM/JB.                      27th April, 1989.



Dr. R.M. Philpott,
Consultant Psychiatrist,
Royal Liverpool Hospital,
Prescot Street,
Liverpool, L7 8XP.


PERSONAL



Deai' Dr. Philpott,

      Please accept ray sincere apologies for ray lack of courtesy in not responding
to you earlier.    We did have a brief conversation light years ago on Monday before
last.      It was mot helpful to receive the Minutes of your meeting of the 15th
April and I was most impressed with the range of issues that you ocaaged to address
so promptly.    We are still working very much on a hand-to-mouth basis, but I hope
by the end of this week we will have a clearer picture of what is going on.

      I took the liberty of circulating your Minutes to my colleagues in the
Co-ordinating Group earlier this week to keep them appraised of the situation and
wonder if you might find it helpful for me to attend a part of one of your meetings
on a Monday in the future.    This is in no way to cut across the direct liaison with
the Health Service via Rory Duff my colleague, but perhaps could be supplementary to
that.    I am copying this letter to Rory so that he is aware of this suggestion.

    IX is our expectation, and I think you confirmed this view, that direct work
with survivors is likely to emerge over time rather than instantaneously and wonder
if you could agenda with your colleagues some discussion around direct response from
Social Workers who are likely to be one of the first points of contact, either through
the Help Line or during the ongoing counselling thereafter.   I would also be
interested to explore with you the possibility and the availability in the longer
term of psychiatric consultancy for our Help Line. To date it has not been a problem
but it may well be that people operating the Help Line are confronted by situations
where they would want speedy advice.

     You will of course realise that we have and hope to continue to work across
seven Local Authorities and although the concentration is in Merseyside there are
likely to be requirements over a vast area, would you feel it worthwhile to share
your discussions and perhaps promote discussions, via Rory Duff, on a regional level
with psychiatrists.   Again ray sincere thanks.
                                    Yours sincerely,
                                                       Director of Social Services.
