 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
    C h esh ire      liverpoolz^I
    County Council   (hx^C et^cil
                                    £
c/o 26 HATTON GARDEN
    LIVERPOOL
    L3 2AW                                                 Telephone: 051

Your ref:                           Our ref:    d m /e p            Date:   22nd April 1989.



                                                             ADSS - FOR INFORMATION OF
           Mr. R. J. Lewis,                                         MEMBERS
           Secretary,
           Association of Directors of
              Social Services,,
           Social services Division,
           Town Hall,
           Stockport, SKI 3XE.




           Dear Bob,

                Just a note to follow up my letter of 18th April 1989 to all
           Director colleagues. The offers of help and support have continued to
           be forthcoming. I think I have managed to thank everybody personally,
           but if there has been an oversight I hope people will understand the
           reasons.

                The Department is now beginning to pursue some of the offers with a
           view to accepting them. I ask you to assist me with maintaining contact
           with colleagues and "oil the wheels" as we seek particular assistance.
           Obviously we are hoping to draw on the resources within the North West
           region; however, the Hillsborough tragedy has to be considered as a
           national disaster and responded to also in that context.

                  The Merseyside Authorities, Lancashire, Cheshire, the Regional
            Healtli Authority, the Probation Service and many voluntary organisations
            and individuals are working jointly in the response.    We are jointly
            exploring the possibility of creating a Disaster Unit within, but separate
            from, the Social Services Department, based in Liverpool.    It is envis­
            aged that this would have a capacity to maintain a continuing 24 hour
            helpline, co-ordinate and provide counselling both locally and nationally,
            manage a drop-in and advice centre at Anfield, co-ordinate voluntary effort,
            and maintain a computerised database to aid the tracking of individuals.
            Additionally, the Unit could have public relations, training and finance
            and administration functions.    Support and debriefing of counsellors
            should be provided separately and independently.    BASW have generously
            offered to co-ordinate and utilise all the offers of assistance that
            have been received in this direction.


                                                                            /conLd• • • •
When calling or telephoning please ask for:
     What I would want you and colleagues to be aware of is that all
the aspects of the "Disaster Unit" described overleaf are currently being
provided from within the existing capacities of the agencies committed
to the joint arrangements.    None of us quite know how but all of these
services are very much operational at the moment with the exception of
finance.   Whilst, to date, money and resources have been available,
effectively this is being achieved through a combination of secondments,
staff goodwill and changing priorities plus instant decisions on spending.
Such arrangements cannot continue and it is the intention of the agencies
to work towards permanence.

     For your specific information currently:   Wirral SSD are co­
ordinating training; Sefton SSD the voluntary organisations and Liverpool
SSD the database (with the assistance of Kent SSD) public relations and
general co-ordination.   All agencies are staffing the "Helpline".
Knowsley are managing transport and have hosted the four large-scale
training presentations as well as supporting the Liverpool public
relations effort which is itself massive.

     I would be grateful if you would keep colleagues informed. I will
undertake to keep you up to date, and will give you a ring.   You could
share this letter with the professional press but I would appreciate no
comment to media other than that.   Handling the press has been a night­
mare to date.

     Thank you once again for your support and assistance.

                            Yours sincerely




                       Director of Social Services
