                       FROM THE OFFICE OF THE LEADER OF THE CITY COUNCIL
                                               P.O.BOX 88
                                        MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS,
                                         LIVERPOOL, L69 2DH.

                                     Telephone: 0 5 1 —S3ScS9cbdx£xlc.   2 2 5 -2 3 1 8


   To:        The Rt. Hon. Nicholas Ridley, M.P.,                                          6th May, 1989.
              Secretary of State for the Environment.

              The Rt. Hon. Kenneth Clarke, M.P.
              Secretary of State for Health.
                                                                                          Se-t. . kfiA
               The Rt. Hon. John Moore, M.P.,
               Secretary of State for Social Services.

jj'o   c- f             '^



                                    Hillsborough Tragedy

        Since Hillsborough eeven Local Authorities; ^.n Merseyside, plus Cheshire
   and Lancashire, together with Mersey Regional Health Authority, Merseyside
   Probation Service and numerous voluntary organisations have been providing a
   co-ordinated response.   On Saturday last, the 29th April, the Leaders of these   a
   seven local authorities and the Leaders of Nottinghamshire and Sheffield Councils
   met to consider a joint approach to the provision of services which will continue
   to be necessary for several years to come.

            The attached report, prepared under the independent Chairmanship of the
       Professor of Social Work at Manchester University, was agreed in principle. The
       report recommends the establishment of a Regional Unit to provide a core of common
       services, including:-

              i)     A Helpline to receive calls from anywhere day and night;
              ii)    The Co-Ordination of counselling services both within and outside
                      the nine local authorities provided by voluntary as well as
                      statutory agencies;

              iii)    A Database capable of dealing with all requests for assistance and
                      offers of help;

              iv)    A continuing training and staff support programme                      in this previously
                      unfamiliar area of work;

              v)     The management of media contacts and publicity.

        It was agreed to reconvene the meeting following exploration of all possible
   sources of funding.    Recognizing that services will need to extend beyond these
  nine local authorities and be available nationally on a scale not previously
   experienced by an authority or group of authorities, our first but not only approach
   for funding is" addressed to Government.   Further work is being undertaken to
   approach private industry, charitable bodies and E.E.C.     Already the local social
  'services authorities in the North West have agreed to jointly sponsor an additional
   training officer.

                                                                                  /cont'd
/continued




     The Department, we anticipate, would wish to be associated with this
initiative and through Government may be able to make finance available to fund the
Regional Unit at a cost of £350,000 per year for a period of three years. Within
all the participating local authority areas it will also be necessary to take urgent
action to strengthen staffing in order to directly help individuals and their families,
according to the scale of the problems which they Eire facing. As yet these costs
have not been fully assessed but when aggregated Eire unlikely to be less than £1 millio
per year, spread across the North West.   The Government we hope would wish to be aware
of this and may consider making resources available to assist in direct service
provision as well as the establishment of the Regional Unit.

     It is, of course, appreciated that Government has already donated £500,000 towards
the National Disaster Fund.   This fund has quite properly focussed its attention on
the relief of individual hardship and will provide financial help directly to victims,
but will not do away with the neecl for other help of a non—financial'kind to be
provided.

     Given the nature and extent of these services this letter has been copied to
the Secretary of State for Environment and the Secretary of State for Social Security,
and also for information to officers in other agencies.

      In view of .the importance of the issues involved a copy has been forwsirded to
 the Prime Minister so that she, personally, can be aware of the state of service
 development and needs.

     An early decision on financial support would be most appreciated as it is
anticipated other potential sources of finance will await the response of Government
before making a commitment.

                                              Yours sincerely,


                                                     k<?         t o


                                                I)     ( H       "         .-L , - 'CT. 'S U .'—
   Councillor n           d                                      "   .      Councillor Mrs. L.J. Ellman'
Leader, N o t t i r , u       tte tt    C o u n c i l l o r John Collins    Leader, Lancashire C.C.
         » ^ottmghamsh lre CC.          Leader, Cheshire C.C.



                                                                           ,/:V-
     MARIE E. RIMMER
     Leader of St. Helens MBC
                                                                             r. J, C O R C O R A N
                                        . T , C U N NIFFE
                                       Lead er - Democ r a t G roup L e a d e r - La b o u r uroup
                         -3-




,■   (r<

                                   Ufib&R   of   m                C M
           -   £ ^ 2




                                                 rtf   La Aq **




      i




Councillor J Keight    >JP

Leader, Knowsley Borough Council
