                          THE - -
                      HILLSBOROUGH
                      - DISASTER -
                      — APPEAL —
                                                 £ L.P      -




                  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL


                    STATEMENT BY THE TRUSTEES



•Our first wish is to express our heartfelt sympathy to all those
 who were injured or bereaved.in the terrible disaster at
 Hillsborough on Saturday last.

   trustees of the appeal we consider our overriding priority is
 ) give speedy and practical effect to the widespread feelings of
sympathy and support which are manifest in the many donations
which have been reaching the fund even before the formal
inception.  By last night £660,000 had been received in the Bank
accounts set up in the three cities, and this was apart from the
promised contribution of £500,000 from the Government and £25,000
from each of the three cities.   The trustees are aware that many
more donations have already been pledged and that many fund
raising activities are underway.

Immediate payments to relieve har ds hi p have been made during this
week through the Social Service Departments of the Local
Authorities, and the trustees have agreed that they should take
responsibility for these, and will continue to meet these
immediate payments.  In particular, we have agreed to pay, if
requested, all funeral expenses. ‘ Again the process of dealing
with this has already been initiated by the Local Authorities and
   shall take these oh board.

   ^ to distribution of the bulk of the Fund, we have been
 fortunate in having had the ben efit of advice from those who ran
 the Bradford Fire Disaster Fund so successfully.   This has
 enabled us at our first meeting this afternoon to take a number
 of decisions on the principles whic h will guide our actions.
 They are
 1.   that we should pay out to the victims or their families
      as quickly as possible

 2.   that as hardships have not been suffered equally,   this
      should be reflected in the distribution policy

 3.   that we should not at any time publicise to whom we had
      made distributions nor how much- any individual or
      category of persons had received

 Continued/.
                              -   2   -




It is hoped that the Trustees will be able to make an early
distribution.  As soon as the Deed has been ex ecuted a copy will
be available at the principal office of each of the Local
Authorities referred to above.   Anyone who has contributed to the
appeal before reading this announcement may, if he or she feels
that it does not meet the pu rposes for which he or she has made a
contribution, apply to have the contribution refunded-.    A ny such
application should be made to The Trustees at 290 India
Buildings, Liverpool L2 ONH (Ref. d h m ) not later than 28th April
1989, after which date all contributions made will be irrevocablv
part of the Appeal Fund.

The Trustees are confident that this Appeal does reflect the
generous and widesp rea d public reaction to this terrible
disaster.

A further Statement will be issued in due course outlining the
procedures for persons wi shing to make claims on the Fund.




Issued by the Trustees of The Hillsborough Appeal




Note   The formal signing of the Trust Deed will take place at
       the Town Hall, Liverpool at 4.30 p.m. on Friday,
       21st April.  This will be preceded by a Press
       briefing at 4.00 p.m.



For further information ring Mike Reddington on   :-

       051-236-5428 Extension 3328 between 9a.m. - 5p.m.

                    after 5.30p.m.
                           I I   A L - C - V J ^ V i l V M


                           - DISASTER
                           - APPEAL


                            PRESS STATEMENT



Following a meeting held in Liverpool on 17th April 1989 under
the auspices of Liverpool City Council and Liverpool Football
Club and. attended by representatives of Sheffield City Council,
Nottinghamshire County Council and Nottingham City Council and
consultations with the Metropo li ta n Boroughs of Knowsley, St.
H e l e n s , Sefton and W i r r a l , Trustees we re appointed for the Fund
which is to help those injured or bereaved in the terrible
disaster at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield on Saturday,
15th April 1989 and their families and dependants.

The Trustees   of the Fund are a past President of the Liverpool
Law Society,   the Chairman of the Liverpool Stock E x c h a n g e , the
President of   Sheffield Chamber of Commerce and the Chief
Executive of   Nottingham City C o u n c i l .

It is anticipated that within the next few days the Trustees will
execute a Deed containing the detailed declaration of trust and
the administrative provisions regulating the Appeal Fu n d .

Donations may be made at any bank or building society for credit
to the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Fund at Barclays B a n k , City
O f f i c e , Water Street, Liverpool L69 2EX Account Number 20565555,
sorting code 20-51-01, or at the Co-operative B a n k , 84/86 West
S t r e e t , Sheffield Si 3EX Acc ou nt Number 50000005, sorting code
08-90-75.

The Trustees w i 11 have a dis cretion how and to wha t extend to
benefit individuals and to determine who are to be regarded as
potential b e n e f i c i a r i e s .

It has been decided to establish the Appeal as a discretionary
trust fund for the injured or bereaved and their families and
dependants rather than as a charity but the Trustees will hold on
separate trusts any part of the fund wh ic h they in their
discretion decide is not immediately required for the direct
b v i c t i m s                  of the disaster and their relatives and
d e p e n d a n t s S u c h separate trusts will be available to serve
community needs in ways which commemorate both the disaster and
the generosity of those who respond to this a p p e a l ; but the most
urgent purpose of the appeal is to benefit the victims of the
disaster and their dependants.



Continued/,
                            -   2   -




     that we should pay out lump sums rather than
     reqular income payments

5.   that we as trustees will not be able to meet all of the
     beneficiaries and therefore we should not meet any of
     them

6.   that the costs of administration should be kept to the
     minimum.


Apart from the immediate payments alr ea dy referred to, it is our
hope and intention that we can make an initial payment to those
bereaved and to the injured within four weeks.     Clearly we are
not aware of all those who have been injured and we would ask
anyone who considers that they may have a claim on the Fund to
write to the Trust Fund Manager, Hillsb oro ug h Disaster Appeal,
P 0 Box 220, Liverpool, L69 2PN.

Fii^fcly, we should like to express our sincere thanks to all
th   e who have already sent donations - many o>f which are
anonymous.

Individual acknowledgements will not be sent by the trustees
unless specifically requested.  The trustees are most grateful to
the many organisations, large and small, local, national and
international who are proposing to raise further funds for this
appeal.




list April 1989
