                                                    SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
                     City                           David Ma s o n
                                                    Director of Social Services
                     of                             Hatton Garden
                     Liverpool                      Liverpool.     L3 2AW

                                                    Telephone:      051 X3Qaoas>9®XXExt,
                                                                        225 3800

                                                    Your Ref:
   To All Members of the City Council
                                                    Our Ref:

                                                    Date:           27th April, 1989.




   Dear Member,

        I apologise for not writing before to advise you of the action that has
   been taken since Hillsborough and it is inappropriate that you should be reliant
   upon the media for information.   I hope you will understand that it has only been
   operational pressures that have caused this delay.

         Attached is a r6sum6 of the work by all the public and voluntary bodies to
    try and mobilise resources to help the victims and survivors of this tragedy.
    Without producing a very large document it is impossible to make Members aware of
    every detail, but I would like to stress our need for information and your
    co-operation.   I anticipate that you are already receiving many requests from
    people in your local area for assistance of various kinds. Would you please
    endeavour to seek their permission to at least advise the Help Line (Tel. Nos.
    225-3413 or 225-3414) of your contact with them and if you can persuade people to
    make direct contact with us so much the better.   We shall continue to try to
    respond with all possible speed to every request whilst, at the same time, maintain
    our existing service commitments.   You will be interested to know that already we
    are providing long term services to some 300 families and individuals as a result
    of their contacts with us and this I imagine is just the tip of the iceberg.

         As you are aware our aim is to reach as many people as is possible and we
    would appreciate your help in this difficult task.


                                     Yours sincerely,




                                     Director of Social Services.




When calling or telephoning pl ease ask for
                       HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

      This information has been produced to acquaint members
of the progress that has been made to establish services in
the wake of the Hillsborough tragedy on Saturday 15th April,
1989 .

       From the outset, the Authorities most affected within
the North West Region (the core authorities) agreed to work
on a pan-Merseyside, pan-Agency basis, co-ordinating
the es tablishment of immediate, short term assistance and
planning a longer term, coherent response to events, which
will likely effect thousands of people.       The planning and
pr o vis ion of specialist and discreet services for these
'victims' on a multi-authority, m u l ti- age ncy basis is
already well underway.

          The task of co-ordinating the response to the tragedy
has been undertaken through regular meetings of an
In ter -Agency Co-ordinating Group which comprises
rep res ent ati ves of the Directors of Social Services of all
five Me r s e y s i d e Authorities, Cheshire and Lancashire,
together wit h colleagues from the Mersey Regional
Health Authority, the Probation Service and the Emergency
Planning Unit of the Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence
Authority.             The voluntary sector response is being
c o - o r d i n a t e d through the Voluntary Sector C o-ordinating
Committee, wi t h access to the Inter-Agency Group.

          Steps were taken immediately by the Gr oup to establish
a national, 24 hour Helpline to enable those affected by the
tragedy to m a k e contact with trained and experienced
co unsellors able to listen and help.             In addition, a number
of dro p-i n and advice centres have been established
p r i n c i p a l l y to pro vid e easily accessible counselling
services and a meeting place with appropria tel y trained
support services on hand, for those who m a y benefit from
sharing common experiences and needs.              The establishment of
p e r man ent premises for a counselling, drop-in and memorial
cent re is being actively pursued.

         In addition, the Inter-Agency Group is exploring the
po s s i b i l i t y of creating a Disaster Unit which would have the
ca pac ity to maint ain a continuing 24 hour Helpline,
c o- ord ina te and provide counselling both locally and
nationally, m a n age a permanent drop-in and advice centre and
co -or d i n a t e volu nta ry effort.  The Unit w oul d also maintain
the computer data bas e which, with the assistance of
Consultants, was established by the Inter-Agency Group very
early on to deal with the mass of information and referrals
from the Helpline and to aid the tracking of individuals.
The Unit is also envisaged as having public relations,
training, finance and administrative functions.



GAFAAZ
       The requirement for a major training programme of
crisis intervention work and counselling for health
authority staff, social workers, teaching staff and
volun tar y sector organisations was recognised and
arrangements were put in hand almost immediately for
pr ese nta tio ns to be ma d e by Michael Stewart of the Centre
for Crisis Psychology to large groups of staff.        In
addition, briefing seminars for Elected Members of the core
Autho rit ies took place on 22nd April.      For longer term staff
training purposes, agreement has been reached for the
appoint men t of Training Officers, one post being funded
through N.W.A.S.S.A.       This post aims to attract an Officer
who will engage in training ventures across the North West
equipp ing the workforces in a number of agencies to cope
both as helpers and as victims.

       Arrangements are being mad e for details of this post to
be ad ver tis ed in 'Social Work T o d a y ' and contact poin ts in
all the core authorities have been given to enable potential
appl icants for any vacancies which may arise as a result of
the tragedy to mak e an approach for details.         The Gro up is
co nsi der ing the es tablishment of a Hillsborough Jobs Forum
Day at which job vacancies could be discussed with
interested persons.

        It is pla nne d that support and d e-briefing of
counsellors will be provi ded separately and independently.
In this connection, the Inter-Agency Group has a ccepted the
offe r of B.A.S.W. to co-ordinate and utilise all offers
wh i c h have been received in this direction.

        The Gr oup has arranged for the production and
di str i b u t i o n to the core Authorities (and indeed to all
Autho rit ies affected by the tragedy) of appropriate
pub l i c i t y material for adults (containing advice on how to
cope with a major personal crisis) and for young pe ople
(encouraging them to talk about their feelings about what
ha ppe ned at Hillsborough, and how it effected them, their
friends and family).          These leaflets have been backed up by
the p r o d uct ion of posters for use in schools and colleges
and posters for more general use.          Sticky label badges have
been pro duced and information has been reproduced in local
'free' or 'in-house' newspapers.

         There has been liaison between the Group and the
Hi l lsb oro ugh Disaster Appeal Fund and working arrangements
b e t w een the Author iti es and the Fund have been established.
The Local Authorities have no direct responsibility in
relation to the Fund and it's management.

     The Group has a ttempted to ensure that all agencies
have been kept fully informed and appraised of it's work and
of the progress made in establishing services and responding



GAF AAZ
 to the tragedy.   Meetings and consult ati ons at Officer and
 political level continue.   Information h as been made
 available continuously to the press and a separate and
 discreet br iefing arrangement with professional and trade
 journals is being established.

         The immediate priorities are be ing a ddressed by the
 G r ° uP*        clear that all those people attending, playinq
 and officiating in the match at Hillsborough, plus their
 circle       family and friends, must be regarded as victims.
 The issue for Authorities must ult ima tel y be the quality of
 life of the survivors and those close ly associated.      The
 nature of the service to be pro vid ed must be regarded as
 pr eventive mental health.




GAFAAZ
