                                                   VUIM   ruu   (
         CiU to v ^ l                  Twv^        -RT

      -T ^ w r.         60^    j^             \.




                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR AND AFTER




                          FEBRUARY 1990




                              - 0O0-




Officer Contact:    Mr. T. Smith,
                    Research Officer,
                    Hillsborough Working Party

                    Tel. No. 051-225 2333




XR5AAV
                    O
                             I N D E X




The Taylor Report ..   ..   ..                   ••     ••    PP 1 " 4




The Response of the Hillsborough Working Party        .. pp     5-15



Appendix 1.   The Medics at Hillsborough Working
              Party's Report




                                 -oOo-




XR5AAV
1.     Lord Justice Taylor's comprehensive and far reaching
Final Report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster includes
the most damning criticism to-date into the management and
conditions prevailing within the national game.

       Following from the 43 recommendations of the Interim
Report, the Final Report introduces 33 new recommendations
which reflect the Report's concern with football's future.
Published on Monday, 29th January, 1990 the Final Report
examines, in great detail, the underlying causes of the
Hillsborough disaster and critically comments on the malaise
that afflicts the football industry.

       Although the Final Report is a thorough-going and
robust document, offering stinging criticisms of every level
of the game, including the rationale behind the compulsory
national membership scheme, it seeks to strike a balance
between issues of control and discipline with those of
spectator and ground safety.  In so doing, the Report offers
an agenda which whilst seeking to contextualise Hillsborough
(and the "it couldn't have happened here" attitude)
effectively fosters the flawed logic of 'hooligan hysteria'
which has enveloped the game, public perceptions and
Government thinking in the post Heysel period. Although a
commendable Report under the circumstances, Lord Justice
Taylor has squandered an opportunity to shake the game to
its very foundations.  In consequence, this Working Party
fears the Taylor Report will not be the last into the state
of the national game.

       What follows is a non-exhaustive outline of the major
points raised in the Final Report:


2.1 NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME:

       In presenting the Government's case for a universal
compulsory national membership scheme and the arguments
raised by the critics of the scheme, the Report examines, in
some detail, three of seven concerns addressed against the
scheme; the danger of congestion and disorder; will the
scheme defeat hooligans?; and police resources.

--------Stressing— "strong-doubts— aboutthe-piraefeieal-i-ty-of---
 policing the scheme" (para 423) the Report questions the
 capability of the turnstile technology to operate in all
 conditions and be resistant to sabotage attempts.        Most
 significantly, Lord Justice Taylor directly challenges the
 whole rationale of the proposals contained in Part 1 of the
 Football Spectators' Act pertinent to the I.D. Scheme.
 Paragraph 419 is unequivocal on this point:-

                                -1-


XR5AAV
         "I (therefore) have grave doubts whether the
         scheme will achieve its object of eliminating
         hooligans from inside the ground.   I have
         even stronger doubts as to whether it will
         achieve its further object of ending football
         hooliganism outside grounds.   Indeed, I do not
         think it will, I fear that, in the short term at
         least, it may actually increase trouble outside
         grounds.11

2.2.   ALL SEATED STADIUMS:

       The Report recommends a two-tier,, phased introduction
of all seated stadia covering all relevant grounds
designated under the Safety at Sports Grounds Act, 1975.
This proposal calls on all English First and Second Division
and Scottish Premier League grounds to be all-seated by the
start of the 1994-95 season with the remaining English and
Scottish clubs being required to comply by the start of the
1999/2000 season.    Standing accommodation will be reduced
by 20% and 10% respectively to be effective from August
1990.

2.3. FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY (FLA)

       The Report supports the provisions and powers of the
FLA as detailed in clause 13 of the Football Spectators' Act
1989.   Lord Justice Taylor pays particular attention to the
need for a national inspection and review body empowered to
review and monitor the discharge of functions by local
authorities in relation to their Ground Safety Certificate
responsibilities under the provisions of the Safety at
Sports Grounds Act and the Fire Safety and Safety of Places
of Sport Act 1987. Ostensibly the purpose of recommendation
6 (a and b) is to ensure standards of ground safety become
uniform in the wake of the 'poor performance' of Sheffield
Council in relation to the Hillsborough Ground Safety
Certificate.

2.4    SAFETY CERTIFICATES:

        Lord Justice Taylor repeats the recommendations of
his Interim Report regarding the obligations of local
authorities under the 1975 and 1987 legislation including:
the- annua 1 “review-and^renewal of sa fety certif±cates; the
provision of an accountable administrative structure and
regular inspections of stadia.     Provision for 'discretionary
flexibility' and/or absolute compliance should be written into
certificates whenever any part of the Green Guide is
incorporated.      The Report amends Interim Recommendation 17 on
Ground Safety Advisory Groups and calls for the removal of
spectator and club representation and participation to be
replaced by a consultative process.

                               -2-

XR5AAV
2.5   STATUS OF THE GREEN GUIDE:

       On the status of the Green Guide, Lord Justice Taylor
recognises the risk relating to "slackness developing in the
absence of any mandatory provisions.11 (para. 147).   The Report
rejects the possibility of making the Green Guide's terms and
provisions mandatory.   It is feared that a statutory Green
Guide could be too rigid and in relation to some peripheral
matters this would be impractical.    Instead, the Report
recommends specific amendments and additions to the Green Guide
aa well as making some of the Guide's provisions obligatory in
each Ground Safety Certificate. As a matter of urgency, the
Report calls on the Home Secretary to set up a body to revise
the Green Guide in accordance with the relevant recommendations.

2.6   FENCES AND GATES:

       The Report does not support the complete removal of
pitch perimeter fences.   Lord Justice Taylor is, however,
highly critical of the 'cage like fences' which reminded him
of prison.   Such structures lead him to comment that many
pitch perimeter fences are 11inconsistent with a sports
ground being for pleasure and recreation" (para 185).
Pitch
perimeter evacuation is strongly stressed and where grounds/
sections are fenced gates of a minimum 1.1 metres in width
are recommended as is the removal of all spikes including
those topping radial fences. A uniform height of fence is
recommended at a 2.2 metre maximum in line with EUFA standards.

2.7   TERRACES:

        The Report recognises that terraced areas pose distinct
safety problems and accordingly makes a total of 19
recommendations affecting terracing, including their ultimate
replacement by seating.      The Report covers: maximum capacities
for terraces; a reduction in the maximum crowds density,
recommended in the Green Guide, from the current 54 people per
10 square metres to 47; maximum notional turnstile rates should
be reduced to 660 persons per hour from 750; a written
(non-contractual) agreement between the police and the club
setting out functions and responsibilities; monitoring of each
crowd- area for— signs of-d-istress/overGrowd-ing-;--gangway-s— to be---
kept clear and clearly marked and crash barriers to be inspected
annually, their layout reviewed with regular checks for rust.

2.8   NEW CRIMINAL OFFENCES:

       Lord Justice Taylor calls for the introduction of four
new criminal offences covering;  incursions onto the playing
area; obscene or racial abuse, throwing missiles and ticket
touting.   The Report supports the provisions on exclusion and

                                -3-

XR5AAV
attendance orders for convicted soccer hooligans which are
detailed in the Football Spectators' Act.   The Report proposes
that electronic tagging be introduced for relevant offenders.


2.9    POLICE PLANNING:

       The ten recommendations under this section reflect the
appalling failure of the police operation at Hillsborough.    In
an effort to improve policing at football matches, the Report
calls for a Chief Constable to nominate a chief officer to
liaise with club management and local authorities on safety
matters.   Such an officer would have the power to consider
postponing a kick-off in the interests of crowd safety.
Consideration should also be given to early kick-off and Sunday
matches.   Provision is made for the specific training of senior
officers and the Report calls for greater flexibility in police
operational orders.


2.10   EMERGENCY SERVICES:

       The Report makes five recommendations on this subject
including:  inter-agency co-operation and liaison on matters of
crowd safety; lines of communication between each service
should be maintained at all times with all agencies requiring to
be fully briefed on crowd numbers, movement and routes of
passage.   Contingency plans covering the management of
emergency vehicles with police officers posted at entrances to
grounds is recommended.


2.11   FIRST AID AND MEDICAL FACILITIES:

       The Final Report on this subject varies from the relevant
recommendations in the Interim Report. The Full Report
recommends: one first-aider per 1,000 spectators; at least one
first-aid room and appropriate equipment should be specified in
the Safety Certificate; where an expected attendance is above
2,000, a suitably trained medical practitioner should be present
- below this figure a practitioner should be on call and at
least one fully equipped ambulance should be in attendance with
more provided where larger crowds are expected, this being a
requirement of the Safety C e r t i f i c a t e . _____________________




XR5AAV
RESPONSE OF THE HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY TO THE FINAL
HILLSBOROUGH REPORT:

3.     Much of the comment and many of the issues raised in this
section of the Report were discussed in the Working Party's
submission to Phase II of the Hillsborough Inquiry which was
forwarded to Lord Justice Taylor in November 1989.


4.   COMPULSORY NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME:

       The background, course and contents of the I.D. card
proposals are fully detailed and examined in the Working
Party's Report into the Football Spectators' Act, 1989. This
Working Party fully supports Lord Justice Taylor's challenge to
the efficacy of the Government's legislative proposals but
registers its disturbance at recent official pronouncements on
the subj ect.

       In consequence of the Report's scathing attack on the
Government's cherished identity scheme, the Government have been
forced to shelve its controversial proposals on I.D.   cards.
Such an embarrassing climbdown has resulted directly from Lord
Justice Taylor's dismissal of the proclaimed merits of
compulsory membership as a practicable deterrent against
soccer-related disorder. Embittered by the sheer weight of the
Report's attack, the Government have most recently announced
that research into a 'feasible' compulsory membership scheme
will continue with the Minister for Sport commenting: "The
policy has not been dumped.  It has been put on the back-
burner."

       Contrary to press speculation, the Government intend to
re-introduce its I.D. card proposals on the "next significant
outbreak of soccer hooliganism".   As the relevant clauses
contained in Part 1 of the Football Spectators' Act, 1989
remain on the statute, it is likely that the Government will
seek to re-introduce its compulsory membership scheme at the
earliest opportunity.


5.   ALL SEATER STADIUM:

        The Government have pre-empted Lord Justice Taylor's call
for the introduction -OjC_all-se.a_t_er stadia directly in the wake__
of the Hillsborough disaster by introducing a new clause 11 to
the, Football Spectators' Bill.       This clause, however, referred
only to select stadia.     The Full Report broadens the
Government's proposals in seeking to designate all stadia
covered by the Safety at Sports Grounds Act (1975) with a
specific dual timetable.


                               -5-


XR5AAV
       The switch to all seated stadiums is likely to cost
football some £130 million including the cost of covering all
seated areas (estimated at £100 million).

       Such a draconian step has already drawn much controversy.
The Report contends that all-seating is the way forward for
football improving spectator safety and comfort whilst offering
distinct advantages in crowd control.    In challenging the
arguments of the Football Association and supporters'
organisations (including Everton Supporters' Club) - who wish to
retain a proportion of terracing - Lord Justice Taylor deploys a
classic outsider's view: "They like being part of an amorphous
seething crowd and do not wish to have ..each his own place in a
seat" (para 67). The Report ignores the fact that home fans
usually congregate in the same location, mixing with the same
people each home game fusing rather than losing their identities
in the crowd.
       In theory, seating is assumed safer than terracing.
However, recent experiences of Everton and Manchester United
fans in Coventry City's 'Sky Blue Stand', and at the problems of
overcrowding to the Anfield Road visitors' section at the recent
Aston Villa game, brings into question the efficacy of
all-seater stadia.  Concern must be expressed about the layout
of many seated areas currently in existence at English and
Scottish League grounds and at the adequacy of access and egress
arrangements.

       If the same mistakes at Hillsborough are not to be
repeated - and there have been incidents of 'near-misses'
already this season - then a fundamental change of attitude
needs to accompany the introduction of all-seater stadia.

       This Working Party does not oppose the concept of
all-seater stadia.   What we do challenge is the universal
application of this principle by legislative means.   The
decision to make a ground all-seated should be made by each club
in meaningful consultation with the relevant local authority and
supporters.

        As a consequence of introducing all-seater stadia, prices
 will inevitably rise. The Report recognises this and
 accordingly challeneges clubs to minimise such increases.      Price
 increases will merely compensate clubs for the reduction in
“capacity impl"icit in^the^^shift^from^ terra^cing to seating.
 Any further increase would risk driving fans away.      Furthermore,
 the increasing financial pressure confronting clubs could
 increase the likelihood of a breakaway Super-League.


6.1   PITCH PERIMETER/RADIAL FENCING:

         It is the contention of this Working Party that the

                               -   6   -




XR5AAV
hysteria surrounding 'football hooliganism' in the past two
decades has led to a number of Football League Clubs installing
pitch perimeter fencing without addressing the inherent conflict
between containment and legitimate 'traffic paths' which
tragically at Hillsborough meant the pitch was inviolate to all
spectators.   We contend that the Final Report has fudged the
issue of pitch perimeter fencing by calling for restrictions on
the height and style of fences including the removal of all
spikes.

       Pitch perimeter fences have no place at a recreational
facility used for public entertainment. As Hillsborough proved,
such fences fatally compromise safety however aesthetic to the
eye or uniform in construction.  We urge a major rethink
on the desirability of fences given the above consideration and
the numerous means of preventing pitch incursions available to
the authorities without resorting to such draconian structures.
 Furthermore, fences restrict the ability of emergency services
access to casualties on terrace/seated areas.

       Based on the Working Party's fencing survey of all
English First and Second Division and Scottish Premier League
clubs and a number of English and Scottish local authorities, we
discovered that at only a minority of grounds was pitch
perimeter fencing introduced as a result of specific incidents
of pitch incursions.   Most fences were installed at the request
of police and/or local authorities.   Some clubs did introduce
pitch fencing to comply with EUFA guidelines, although EUFA's
provisions do allow for alternative structures such as dry
moats.

       Pitch perimeter fencing is the net product of the
'hooligan hysteria' which has permeated 'official' thinking
since the mid 1970's.   We repeat the fact that no one has died
as a result of a pitch incursion.

6.2    The rise in popularity over the last two decades of
radial segregatory fencing, such as at Hillsborough's West
Terrace, mirrors in many ways the rationale behind pitch
perimeter fencing. On terraces the introduction of such radial
fences has increased a club's 'flexibility' to contain and
segregate opposing sections of support and, in some cases, to
ease 'traffic flow'.   The Working Party recognises that some
of these terraces allocated for visiting supporters are
potentially dangerous due to— overcrowding:,— as— they— do—not-------
provide sufficient accommodation for visiting supporters.



7.1   THE STATUS AND PROVISIONS OF THE GREEN GUIDE:

       This Working Party is disappointed that the Final
Hillsborough Report has decided against making the terms and

                                -7-

XR5AAV
provisions of the Green Guide mandatory.   Though Lord Justice
Taylor criticises the Guide's 'flexibility' and minimalist
interpretations of its provisions we believe an opportunity has
been lost to make the Guide statutory in its application. With
a mandatory guide the status of its provisions would be
difficult to compromise even at a minimal interpretation.

7.2.   A new and distinct chapter on 'Turnstile Facilities'
should be introduced in the Green Guide.  Given the essence of
the Hillsborough tragedy was identifiable in the 'crisis at the
turnstiles', we consider the introduction of a specificsection
covering turnstiles is essential to prevent a repetition of a
crisis caused by the convergence of a large number of people on
a small number of turnstiles. Had more turnstiles been
available at Hillsborough the tragedy may well have been
averted. At every League ground the general inadequate ratio of
turnstiles to supporters is unacceptable and should now be
regarded as intolerable.

7.3    The problem of overcrowding and localised overcrowding to
terraces and seated areas and at ingress and egress points is
not capable of being remedied by a single solution.   We suggest
that clear and comprehensive instructions as to the prevention
and crisis management of overcrowding and crowd (flow)
conjestion be introduced into the amended Green Guide.


8.   GROUND SAFETY ADVISORY GROUPS:

       Lord Justice Taylor's admirable account and criticisms of
spectator facilities and administrative arrogance in the opening
two chapters of the Report is not matched by any concrete
proposals to institutionalise spectator relationships with clubs
and administrators. This failure is a serious one and is
compounded by the Report's decision to reject spectator and
club involvement in Ground Safety Advisory Groups relegating
their status to one of a consultative role.  "Higher standards
......   inhuman relationships" cannot be significantly advanced
without meaningful spectator input. Accordingly this Working
Party calls for a reversal of this proposal and calls on this
Authority to continue to support actively fans and club
representation on its Ground Safety Advisory Group.


9.   POLICE PLANNING AND CONTROL:

9.1    The Final Report's concern with improving control and
discipline strategies is argued as being axiomatic to crowd
safety. In defence of effective public order strategies at
soccer grounds Lord Justice Taylor is forced to oppose the
Government's compulsory football membership scheme (see para.
424). Although the Report makes a total of ten recommendations
on police planning, no case is made for effective and meaningful

                               -8-

XR5AAV
 police consultation and accountability. We view this as a
 serious omission.  In consequence, we repeat the relevant
 section of our submission to phase II of the Inquiry
 ("Policing, Accountability and Community Consultation") in full.


 9.2: Since 1979, the debate over police accountability and,
 in particular, police/community relations has been of major
 significance.    This period of controversy is in marked
 contrast to the previous fifteen years, since the passing of
 the 1964 Police Act, during which time little was published
 or researched on the matter.    The inner-city disturbances
 in Southall 1979, St. Paul's 1980, and in other major cities
 during 1981 changed the level of debate.    Throughout the
 late seventies, there had been much discussion of the Devon
 and Cornwall model of community policing and its potential
 for other areas.


 9.3: Two major factors emerged from the period of
 controversy, research and publication of the early 1980's.
 First, the police made it quite clear, via the Association
 of Chief Police Officers (A.C.P.O.) that on 'operational
 matters' involving force strategy, practices and priorities
 the Chief Constables' decision was absolute.   The 1964
 Act's brief to police authorities to provide an 'adequate
 and efficient' police force would not extend to operational
 policies or practices. This has become the accepted
 convention.  Second, following Lord Scarman's Report,
 community consultation became governed by statute in the
 1984 Police and Criminal Evidence Act.  Scarman had called
 for effective consultation and not 'talking shops'.
 Consequently, all force areas have some form of direct
 consultation through forums, panels or committees.

       _The problem has been that in the organisation and
 administration of community consultation the police have
 retained absolute discretion on agenda items, information
 giving and decision to act on matters raised. In so cibing,
 Chief Constables have invoked the principle of operational
 matters, and thus consultative groups have no effective
 powers to influence policies or practices, nor do they have
 the right to procedures of accountability concerning agreed
 changes in policies or practices.   It is against this
 background— of debate and_controversy _over- the effectiveness-
 of procedures for police accountability that any proposal
 which suggests an extension of community involvement in
 policing must be placed.


 9.4: The Hillsborough Interim Report, discussed at some length
 the relationship between club management and the police in
 establishing responsibility for crowd management inside the

                               -9-

XR5AAV
ground.  It is Lord Justice Taylor's position that the primary
responsibility lies with the police both outside and inside the
ground which enables the official Interim Report to conclude
that the main reason for the Hillsborough disaster was the
failure of the police to control the crowd.  In coming to this
conclusion, the Report established a catalogue of mistakes and
errors of judgment from the police briefing through to their
operational response to the first indications of trouble.  It
would appear to be appropriate to establish effective
procedures for consultation between the police and all other
interested parties.


9.5: In line with Lord Scarman's recommendation that the
police should establish close links with the community, we
propose an extension of these links to include regular and
major sports events.   Existing Advisory groups on Ground
Safety offer an appropriate forum for such consultation to
take place. Their membership includes local -councillors,
club officials, fire officers, St. John's Ambulance, the
ambulance service, the Football Supporters' Association; and
the Supporters' Clubs. We propose that the police present an
operational programme, including planned responses to all
foreseeable circumstances, to the advisory group pre-season.
The agreed programme should be reviewed at subsequent

10.   FOOTBALL'S FINANCES:

        The Final Report makes a series of recommendations with
 significant cost implications.   In calling for "a totally new
 approach across the whole field of football" requiring "higher
 standards both in bricks and mortar and in human relationships"
 (para 138), Lord Justice Taylor throws a direct challenge to
 the football industry and the Government.  This challenge,
 however, is nowhere elaborated in terms of financial
 recommendations given the glaring anomolies in the fiscal
 policies applied to football.

         This Working Party calls for:-

         (i) a levy on the Pools Promotion Association in line
             with the Horse-Racing Betting Levy and supports that
             recommendation as contained in the Chester Report
             (1968) ;                                      ______

         (ii) the introduction by the football authorities of a
              5% levy on all transfer fees above £100,000, the
              proceeds going to ground improvements;

      (iii) fiscal concessions should be granted to expenditure
            ground improvements to encourage stadium redevelop­
            ment ;
                              -10-



XR5AAV
         (iv)    local authorities should investigate means of
                influencing ground redevelopment or relocation by
                way of purchasing an interest in a local club to
                develop community links and activities.

          (v) the recent proposed investment by the Football Trust
              and Football Grounds Improvement Trust into ground
              safety measures should be met pound for pound by the
              Government.

         (vi) a 5% levy to be placed on gate receipts over and
              above a figure to be determined jointly by the
              Football League and Football. Association; and

      (vii) a greater contribution to be made to ground safety
            improvements from broadcasting receipts.



11.   FOOTBALL'S ADMINISTRATION:

       Although the Report is searching in its criticisms of the
games leadership (paragraphs 51-52) at no point are the
weaknesses in the industry's administrative structures
positively addressed. We believe arrogance, incompetence and
inertia adequately summarises the performance of the Football
Association in its duties and responsibilities. We make the
following recommendations:

          (i)   There should be a single body, replacing the
                Football Association and Football League, to
                administer association football in this country;

         (ii)   that body should ensure that crowd safety
                standards are the highest reasonably practicable
                and that organisation should be charged with the
                responsibility of setting detailed safety
                standards and enforcing them in conjunction with
                all relevant local authorities; and

      (iii)     that the F .A. Challenge Cup Committee and the
                Senior Management Team of the F.A. resign
                forthwith.


12.   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND MEDICAL PROVISION AT SPORTS STADIA:

       Whilst this Working Party welcomes the relevant
recommendations of the Final Report, we agree with the Medics at
Hillsborough Working Party's view (MHWP, see appendix 1) on 'the
importance of good communication between emergency agencies as
well as within them.'   We therefore recommend the adoption of
the following proposal in the MHWP Report.

                                 -11-

XR5AAV
         (i)    The club be responsible for the convening of an
                emergency committee involving:

                       a Casualty Consultant
                       Chief Ambulance Officer
                   -   County Surgeon of the St. John's
                               Ambulance Brigade
                       Chief Fire Officer
                       Chief Constable
                       City Engineer

                 which will have responsibility to advise on:-

                   -   the requirements for 'on site emergency'
                       provisions as carried in the 'Ground
                       Safety Certificate;

                   -   the establishment of a 'major emergency
                       plan' covering the responses of all
                       agencies concerned and the lines of
                       communication and collaboration between
                       those different bodies; and

                       the 'major emergencing plan' be
                       incorporated into the Ground Safety
                       Certificate.

         (ii)   The 'on-site emergency plan' should provide the
                basis for a programme of training to involve all
                those employed on the staff of football clubs so
                that each knows what to do in the case of both
                containable emergencies and full-scale disasters.
                Training should also take account of the need for
                certain key staff (e.g. stewards) to be trained
                in basic first-aid.

     (iii)            and that the committee meets regularly enough that
                 its members recognise each other.    (A major factor
                 in the breakdown of communications at Hillsborough
                was the apparent failure of the emergency services
                 to recognise people in control - this was certainly
                 the case between the South Yorkshire Police and
                 South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service at
                Hillsborough.)______________________ _________________

       The Report recommends the use of a Major Accident Vehicle
(similar to those in Scotland) equipped with stretchers, etc.
But Lord Justice Taylor appears to have overlooked that the
South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) had a
major vehicle on 15th April 1989 which only arrived at 3.45 p.m.
This apparent oversight spares SYMAS senior officers the
criticisms some would think they deserved.

                                    -12-

XR5AAV
13.   NEUTRAL VENUE MATCHES:

       As the Hillsborough F.A. Cup tie was held at a neutral
venue, with disastrous consequences, it is somewhat disturbing
that the Report does not consider the specific problems posed by
such matches. This Working Party calls on the Football
Association and Football League to:-

          (i)   hold all future neutral venue fixtures at
                stadiums pre-designated as acceptable venues
                possessing a Special Ground Safety Certificate;

         (ii)   such grounds should be required to have a 75%
                attendance rate to achieve 'designated neutral
                venue' status;

      (iii)     where such stadiums are pre-designated as having
                'neutral venue' status the relevant local
                authority Ground Safety Advisory Group should meet,
                in advance, to assist that authority in exercising
                its functions and obligations under the terms of
                the Special Safety Certificate;  and

          (iv) all relevant pre-match arrangements for such
               fixtures should be monitored by the responsible
               football authority.

14.   CUP FINAL TICKET ALLOCATIONS;

       The recent announcement from the Football Association of
a further cut in the Cup Finalists' allocation of tickets for
the 'tie' at Wembley Stadium is an indication that, as far as
Lancaster Gate is concerned, it will be business as usual
despite Hillsborough and its aftermath.

        With the conversion of Wembley Stadium to a fully seated
arena, the capacity for the Cup Final has been cut from 87,0 00
to 8 0,000.   The two competing clubs will now share 42,000
tickets, a cut of 2,000 from the 44,000 which would have been
shared had it not been an all-Merseyside Final following the
Hillsborough Disaster.

------- For the -1-989 Final- ti-e-, Liverpeo-1-and -Everton- -Footba-1-1---
Clubs shared 70,000 tickets.         This concession, from the F.A.,
was designed as a gesture of goodwill to the City's supporters.

       As a result of this measure, ticket touting was
drastically reduced compared to other seasons, falling by as
much as 83% from the previous year. This Authority's Trading
Standards Department estimated that Liverpool fans paid as much
as £25,000 to touts for tickets for the 1988 Final versus

                                    -13-

XR5AAV
Wimbledon.   After that, Final Trading Standards Officers
produced a dossier naming over 50 football clubs and county
football associations who were alleged to have broken F.A.
rules and had their tickets passed on to touts.

       We would recommend that the F.A. take into account clubs'
average home attendances when allocating tickets but that the
total allocation be no less than the 80% made last season.    A
club with a small average attendance would then get a smaller
proportion of the allocation than a well supported club.

15.   RACISM:

       Lord Justice Taylor recommends that the use of obscene or
racialist abuse should be made a criminal offence.   This is
because the existing provisions under the Public Order Act, 1986
are not sufficient to deal with those indulging in such abuse.

       Under Section 4 of the Act, although racist chanting may
be proved "abusive or insulting" it also has to be shown that it
was used "towards another person with intent to cause that
person to believe that immediate unlawful violence will be used
against him."

       Under Section 5 of the Act, whilst again the chanting may
be proved to have contained "abusive or insulting words", it may
be difficult to show that it was done "within the hearing or
sight of a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or
distress thereby."

       Under Section 18 of the Act "a person who uses
threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour is guilty
of an offence if (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred
or (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
likely to be stirred up thereby."   Again, Lord Justice Taylor
considers it may bedifficult to prove that racist abuse at
football matches are intended to stir up racial hatred.

       Racist abuse and chanting at Anfield is more subdued
nowadays because of the dramatic impact of John Barnes.   There
are still very few black people at Liverpool matches and John
Barnes is an "honorary white" in the eyes of many Liverpool
fans.

       At Good!son ParTmany Everton supporters seem to take
comfort that "Everton are white".

       Young people in particular are at risk from these racist
influences.   It is ridiculous to ignore racist chanting and
pretend it does not happen.   Everyone can hear it and be
affected. Such racism will not go away on its own accord:
it needs to be challeneged and confronted.

                             -14-


XR5AAV
        As racism is prevalent in society, it is not surprising
that it is all too common at football grounds.    What is
surprising though is the .lack of effort by clubs to challenge
racism.    The occasional plea from club chairmen for fans not to
join in racist chants is not good enough.    The clubs should
ensure that respected players time and again condemn the racists
in match programmes, television, radio and press interviews, and
state clearly that racists are not wanted at football grounds.
Distinctive signs should be displayed around the grounds making
clear racist abuse will not be tolerated.

       Lord Justice Taylor argues the need to make obscene or
racist abuse a specific offence so that, people will know what is
prohibited and "that they do these things at their peril".
(para. 299)   The Working Party fully supports the proposal to
make obscene or racialist abuse a criminal offence.



16.   MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES:

       Supporters should be encouraged to join clubs in a
Voluntary Membership Scheme in which all members can participate
on an equal basis by being able to vote for supporters'
representatives on the Board of Directors of each club.

       Other benefits of membership should include discounts on
tickets, cheap travel to away matches and concessions on club
merchandise with the use of club facilities to be made more
widely available to members.

       Season ticket holders should be given automatic free
membership.




                             -15-


XR5AAV
