                                                                                         tn «e ..

                                                                       *    • . » *-


  c*r > 5 5 ^      CT                                                  V*' ^       ^
     'J,(/PP0?:N                                                         J’l/ppOS^
                             Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                         Fifth Memorial Service
                                         Friday 15th April 1994


       Dear Friends,

       The fifth memorial service will take place on Friday 15th April
       1994 at the Anglican Cathedral in Liverpool.

       This will be followed in the now traditional way by a short
       ceremony/laying of roses at the Memorial at Anfield, plus for those
       who wish it a short visit onto the "Kop" terraces before they are
       demolished.

       As usual the families will be joined by officials, players and
       wives, staff of LFC and a number of invited dignitaries.  The
       general public will be invited to join the congregation at the
       cathedral.

       The service will be led by Canon Mark Boyling, the organist will be
       Ian Wells and we have secured the services of the Royal Liverpool
       Philharmonic Community Choir and the Brass section of the Royal
       Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra to assist with the singing.

       In view of the lower profile and numbers involved this year, no
       major restriction has had to be made on the numbers of tickets per
       family, and your family's tickets are duly enclosed.

       We will be following the format that has proved so satisfactory in
       recent years and in addition to the notes below, HFSG committee
       members will be in full attendance, stewards at the car park and
       ground will be provided by Liverpool FC, ushers at the service will
       be from the Cathedral staff, and a small Merseyside Police presence
       will be available throughout.  Please co-operate fully will all
       requests and directions.

       Floral tributes have been arranged by the group to ensure that all
       96 victims are remembered and arrangements have been made for any
       family that wish to lay personal flowers/tributes at the memorial
       or the cathedral as we file into the service.

       The Programme (p.m.)

       1.30             Families and friends gather at Anfield.
                        Free and stewarded parking has been arranged in the Vernon
                        Sangster/Football car park and LFC will have the Centenary
                        Stand Complex open for families to assemble and have
                        tea/coffee and access to toilet facilities.


CHAIRMAN                                  SECRETARY                    TREASURER
T. Hicks                                  P. Hammond                   Mrs. J. Traynor
2.00   Begin boarding coaches for journey to cathedral.  These will
       be parked in line on the Centenary Complex car park and you
       should fill them from the front.  Please try to keep your
       party together to reduce congestion and delay.

2.15   Coaches will leave in convoy, under police escort for
       Cathedral.

2.30   Arrive Anglican Cathedral.  We will enter by the Rankin
       Porch (side entrance) immediately after Mr & Mrs Phil
       Thompson have laid a wreath of 96 roses on our behalf at the
       Memorial.  Any families who have their own flowers can then
       follow with theirs as they file into the service.

       A small number of families have advised they will be going
       direct to the Cathedral where parking should be available,
       but cannot be guaranteed.  They will join us for the wreath
       laying ceremony and are asked not to lay their flowers until
       after it has taken place.

       General public will enter by the main doors and take up
       seats at the rear of the Cathedral.  Seating at the front
       will be reserved for families and friends, club officials
       etc.

2.45   Service begins.

       1000 orders of service are being provided, with the content
       as follows

               Opening Hymn (Abide with me)
               The Welcome
               The Book of Remembrance/Candle Lighting
               The Silence
               Reading
               2nd Hymn (I watch the sun rise)
               Second Reading
               The Prayers
               3rd Hymn (Lord of all hopefulness)
               The Blessing
               Closing Address

       We will all then sing "You'll Never Walk Alone" after which
       the Congregation are asked to remain seated as the families
       leave via the Rankin Porch.

       Once outside please re-board the coaches for Anfield - again
       please keep your own group together.

3.30   Coaches depart for Anfield,   in convoy under Police escort.




                                 2
3.45   Anfield Road closure begins.
       Coaches arrive back from Cathedral and pull into the
       Centenary Stand car park, dropping passengers just inside
       the gates.  All are asked to make their way straight to the
       Anfield Memorial, taking care that young children are kept
       clear of the arriving coaches.

4.00   (approx)    Laying of wicker basket of 96 roses at the Anfield
       Memorial by Mr & Mrs Roy Evans.    This will be accompanied by
        a short Blessing/Prayer by Canon Mark Boyling.

       Families/friends will then be able to file past/pay their
       respect at the Memorial, but this time leave via the Main
       Gates into Anfield.  Those that wish will then be led along
       the cinder track to the Kop (please keep everyone off the
       grass!) for a final opportunity to stand and
       reflect/remember. When ready they should make their way for
       tea - please do not dwell too long.

       Those that do not wish to go the Kop will be directed back
       to the Centenary Complex for tea and refreshments.

       Families are free to depart from Anfield as and when they
       individually wish.

4.15   (approx)   Anfield Road reopened.


We have tried to ensure that this fifth anniversary is properly
organised and that everything goes as smoothly as in previous
years.  There were a couple of very minor problems last year and we
would therefore ask you to assist by following the directions and
minimum rules - a lot of people have gone to a great deal of
trouble to accommodate our requirements and we would not like
anything to "blot our copy book".

Tickets will have to be shown at Anfield, to board the coaches and
upon return to the Memorial/ground but otherwise things will be
kept as informal as is possible within the need to ensure the
dignity the occasion demands.

We hope this letter supplies enough information, but if you have
any queries please do not hesitate to contact a committee member,
Phil Hammond, or myself.

Yours sincerely




Trevor Hicks
Chairman




                                  3
