*H                  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY
                                  of the
                                                                      e3
                      Policy and Resources Committee
                            26th October, 1992


*P     PRESENT: Councillors E. Clein, C. Curry, S. Ellison,
                F. Hegarty, A. Jennings, P. Millea, K. Noon
                W. Roberts and J. Spriggs.


*M   1. Appointment of Chair
        Resolved that Councillor Peter Millea be appointed as Chair
        of this Working Party.

     2. Legal Hatters - Hillsborough Inquests
       The Working Party considered -
        (A)   (i) the report and Background Note previously
                  submitted to the Working Party explaining the
                  Application made to the Attorney General for a
                  fresh Hillsborough Inquest;
              (ii) the Notes of a Meeting held with Members of
                   Parliament regarding the Application on 5th May,
                   1992;
        (B) a verbal Report at the Liaison Officer concerning the
            outcome of the Application and the response of the
            Attorney General; and
        (C) a Report of the Liaison Officer concerning the progress
            of the Application which is being made for Judicial
            Review of the Hillsborough Inquest Verdict and in
            particular the imminence of the announcement of a
            decision in this matter.
        Resolved that -
        (A) the Reports be noted; and
        (B) the decision regarding the Application be reported to
            this Working Party as soon as possible after its
            announcement.



      al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/A261092
3. Use at Hillsborough Trust Funds for
   Additional Payments to Bereaved Families
  The Working Party considered correspondence with the
  Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Fund Manager in respect of a
  request for additional payments to be made to bereaved
  families for the purpose of meeting hardship claims and
  expenses incurred in undertaking ongoing legal proceedings.
   Resolved that -
   (A) the Trust Fund Manager be invited to attend a meeting
       of this Working Party in the near future to discuss the
       matters which have been raised concerning the Fund and
       Members of Bereaved Families also be invited to be
       present at such a meeting; and
   (B) in the light of the difficulty in meeting travelling
       expenses which it has been indicated may be experienced
       by families who consider it imperative to be present in
       London for the imminent announcement of the decision
       regarding the Application for Judicial Review the
       Policy and Resources Committee be requested to consider
       as a matter of urgency the unanimous recommendation of
       this Working Party th^t the City Council provide
       appropriate financial assistance to Members of Bereaved
       Families to ensure that they are able to be present at
       the time of such an announcement.

4. South Yorkshire Police - Alleged
   Mistreatment of Liverpool Supporters
   The Working Party considered
     (i) the following resolution of the City Council from its
         meeting held on 23rd September, 1992:-
         "That this City Council, proud of the courage and
          dignity displayed by its citizens following the
          Hillsborough tragedy of April 15th, 1989, is alarmed
          to learn that even after three and a half years,
          officers of the South Yorkshire Police Force
          continue to behave in a hostile fashion towards
          supporters of Liverpool Football Club, when they
          travel to matches in Sheffield, including most
          recently at the Sheffield United versus Liverpool
          match on 12th September, 1992.
          This Council is particularly concerned that all
          evidence in this matter should be referred to the
          Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police so that he
          can investigate instances and take appropriate
          disciplinary action.

 al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/A261092
         To assist the collection of such evidence a meeting
         of the Hillsborough Working Party be called during
         the next cycle of meetings following consultation
         with Party Spokespersons";

    (ii) a letter sent by Councillor P. Millea to the Chief
         Constable of South Yorkshire Police concerning the
         above matter; and
   (iii) a proposal for representatives of the Working Party
         to attend the Sheffield United verus Liverpool
         Cola" Cup Match being held in Sheffield on 28tt
         October, 1992 in order to monitor the manner oi
         control operated by South Yorkshire Police.
  Resolved that
   (A) the letter to the Chief Constable be noted and ar
       response received be referred to a future meetinc

   (B) a Press Release be prepared on behalf of the Work_
       Party encouraging Merseyside Football Supporters to
       report to the City Council any recent incidents where
       they consider there was mistreatment or abuse directed
       at them by individual Police Officers at football
       matches being held under the jurisdiction of South
       Yorkshire Police; and
   (C) a Recommendation be made to the Policy and Resources
       Committee that appropriate arrangements be made to
       enable one Member of each political Group to attend the
       match at Bramall Lane, Sheffield on 28th October, 1992
       as representatives of the Working Party for the purpose
       of monitoring the Police Control operation.

5. Sheffield City Council - Safety of                 ,
   Sports Grounds
  The Working Party considered Reports received from
  Sheffield City Council and submitted to that Council's
  Licensing Sub-Committee on 16th October, 1992 concerning,
  in relation to the Safety of Sports Groundsi-
     (i) Administration of Certification Procedures; and
    (ii) the 1992 Annual Inspection of Sheffield Sports
         Grounds.
   Resolved that the Reports be noted and referred to the
   Ground Safety Advisory Group for consideration.



 al/cttee/hillsborou/finalmin/A261092
