COPING AFTER
HILLSBOROUGH
Information to help anyone affected by the
          Hillsborough tragedy
Issued by Social Services Departments in the North West
                                   COPING
Somebody you know may have died or been hurt at Hillsborough. You may have been
atthe matchorsaw what happened on television. Yourexperiencewasavery personal
one but we hop eth atthis leaflet w ill help you to understand how other people have
reacted, in similar situations. Itw ill also show you how you can help yourself to begin
to recover.

EVERYONE FEELS THESE THINGS
FEAR                —   of damage to ourselves and those we love
                    —   of being left alone
                    —   of breaking down
                    —   of something sim ilar happening again
HELPLESSNESS        — W hat can you do in the face of such a tragedy?
GRIEF               — fo r death, inju ry and loss
GUILT               — fo r being alive, fo r not being hurt
SHAME               — fo r seeming helpless or emotional
ANGER               — at what has happened and at who allowed it to happen
                    — WHY ME?
MEMORIES            — of people you knew and loved
HOPE                — fo r the future

Everyone has these feelings. They are especially powerful when people have died in
circumstances like those at Hillsborough. And even stronger when you depended on
the person w ho has died, if your relationship was goingth rough a bad patch or if you
had other problems already.
Lettingthese feelings come out is part of the natural healing process. Itdoesn'tm ean
you w ill lose your self control, but if you try to stop them coming out you could end
up feeling even worse. Crying w ill help you to cope, too.




          A 2 4 hour Helpline
AFTER HILLSB                                                                                <

 PHYSICAL AND MENTAL FEELINGS
 Even if you haven't fe lt these emotions, your body m ight react to the crisis. This can
 even happen months later.
 Some common problems are tiredness, sleeplessness, bad dreams, loss of memory
 or concentration, dizziness, palpitations, shaking, d ifficulty in breathing, choking in
 throat and chest, nausea, diarrhoea, musculartension, which may lead to headaches,
 backaches,or neckaches,draggingin the womb, menstrual disorders,change in sexual
 interest.

 FAMILY AND FRIENDS
 You m ight make new friends as a result of the tragedy. But it can also put a strain on
 existing relationships. You m ight feel you're not getting enough support, or that you
 can't give as much help as other people need. You m ight d rink more, or use drugs.

 MAKING YOUR FEELINGS EASIER TO BEAR
 NUMBNESS             — Your m ind m ight not be able to take everything in at once. At
                        firstyou m ightfeel numb,andthetragiceventsmayevenseem
                        unreal. People sometimes wrongly seethisnumbnessaseither
                        "being strong" or even "n o t caring".
 ACTIVITY             — It's bestto keep active. Helping others might help you. But don't
                        overdo it — it could detract from the helpyou need foryourself.
 REALITY              — We have to come to terms with the reality of a tragedy such as
                         Hillsborough. Goingtothefuneral,goingtowhere it happened,
                         will help you to do this.
 TALKING IT OVER — Gradually you w ill need to talk and th in k about your
                   experiences. You'll probably dream aboutthem too. Children
                   may w antto draw aboutthisevent, or even play games about it.




as been set up: [051) ■
)ROUGH
    SUPPORT             — You'llneedotherpeople'sphysicalandem otionalhelp.D on't
                          reject it. It can help to talk to others w ho have had similar
                          experiences.
    PRIVACY             — Sometimes you w ill just need to be alone, o rw ith yo u rfa m ily
                          and friends.
    But remember, overactivity, or letting your feelings remain numb, w ill delay your
    recovery. The pain of the w ound w ill lead to healing. You may even come out of this
    wiser and stronger.

    THINGS TO D O . . . AND NOT TO DO
    DON'T bottle up your feelings. Make sure you express your emotions.
    DON'T avoid talking about w hat happened. Think about what happened and talk
          it over w ith others.
    DON'T expect the memories to vanish — they w ill stay w ith you for a long time.
    These are things you should try to do:
    • Let your children share your feelings and express their own. They may be feeling
      much the same as you.
    • Take tim e to rest, and be w ith friends.
    • Tell friends, family, or counsellors how you feel.
    • As you begin to recover, keep your life as normal as possible.
    • Send the children back to school. Let them carry on as normally as possible.


    And a special warning. Accidents are more common when people are u nder stress. Be
    especially careful when driving; be more careful around the home. This m ight sound
    unlikely, but it is important.




■
5 3413 or 2 2 5 3414
*




                                                                 9
WHEN TO SEEK HELP
Family and friends may helpyou all they can. But you may feel the need fo r extra help.
We can offer this, but only if you ask.
You should ask fo r help if:
• You feel you can't handle your deep feelings.
• You feel you aren't getting back together over a period of time.
• You continue to feel tense, confused, empty or exhausted.
• You have nightmares and can't sleep.
• You've no-one to share your feelings w ith.
• Your relationships suffer, or you develop sexual problems.
• You have accidents.
• You d rink, smoke, or take drugs to excess.
• Your w ork suffers.
• Others close to you are not recovering.
Even if you're helping others,you could become emotionally and physically exhausted.
Don't hesitate to seek help. No problem is too big or small fo r us to helpyou deal w ith.
Everyone needs help — it is n othingto be ashamed of. Anythingyou say w ill be totally
confidential.
FINALLY, REMEMBER — You're the same person you were before this tragedy. There
is a light at the end of the tunnel. HELP IS AVAILABLE.
          WHERE TO FIND HELP:

     HELPLINE
 A 24 hour telephone helpline has been set up. Phone:




        (051) 225 3413
          or 225 3414
The helpline is staffed by trained and experienced social workers.
They will helpwith material problemsor if you are upset and just
w anttotalk. Anything you savor any helpyou are given will be
completely private and confidential. No problem is too big or too
small for us to help with.




            Revell & George Ltd, Salford 061-745 7771
