STAFFING

Various alternatives have been considered and it is now proposed to link
functions together in order to promote - operational action on helpline
                                       - outreach work
                                       - training
                                       - staff support.

These tasks must be managed to produce a cohesive service able to respond to
changing circumstances and co-ordinated with the many other agencies and groups
who have roles relative to the Hillsborough Disaster.


HILLSBOROUGH ASSISTANCE UNIT MANAGER (P.O. 6)

The post holder will manage the work of subordinate staff
                    - Database/Helpline Manager
                    - Training Officer
                    - Outreach Work Development Officer

The Unit Manager will also co-ordinate the staff support system currently
provided through B.A.S.W. although it is important that the staff support worker
is not in a managerial line in order to avoid staff anxiety.

There are various other tasks which require to be carried out at this senior
level

           Public Relations and Media Work
           Link with the Trust Fund
           Link with other Agencies
           Fund Raising
           Research/Evaluation into Disaster Response
           Links with Football Club
           Co-ordination of Core Teams work
           Development of training material for Post Qualifying Award

If it was acceptable to other authorities Liverpool Social Services Department
would prefer this manager to directly control the work of its core team through
the two Senior Social Workers.

The Manager would provide reports to the local authority members group at regular
intervals. On a day-to-day basis he/she should be managed by a Director of Social
Services in the Region and be a member of the Management Team. The post holder
would, through the established inter-authority officers group report on progress
and development.

HELPLINE/DATABASE MANAGER (P.0.1)

The effective control of these two aspects of the Units work is crucial to its
success. The Manager will supervise - Volunteer Co-ordinator
                                        Database Co-ordinator

This Manager will also be responsible for the co-ordination of recruitment and
training volunteers who staff the telephone helpline.   Liaison with the hospital
providing the base for the Helpline Service and arrangements for the running of
the Helpline.------- ------- ------           -- --------------------------
                                                       /cont'd
                                       -2-




The postholder will process requests for help and pass referrals to the relevant
core teams in authorities and track their progress for the database.

The database will co-ordinate information on requests for help and services
received/provided via Helpline, Core Teams and other social work Agencies.


TRAINING OFFICER (P.0.1)
(FUNDED BY NWASSA)

This post has been filled and the training officer has been located within
Liverpool Social Services Department Training Section.

The training role will be developed to meet the changing needs of staff. The
collaborative training programme between participant agencies and the development
of training within NWASSA will be developed as a secondary role.

The developing expertize of the Core Teams will be co-ordinated by the Training
Officer as input to courses for other local authorities.

OUTREACH DEVELOPMENT OFFICER (P.0.1)

This member of staff will take lead responsibility for the development of work
outside the Unit and the Core Teams including other local authorities and specific
services.

Other local authorities need to be 'encouraged* to provide appropriately for
disaster victims either directly or through local voluntary agencies.

There are also developments of - the Newsletter
                               - Drop In Centre.

The Newsletter is developing a role as a means of keeping people affected by
Hillsborough in touch with each other.   The production of copy and material for
the letter requires a consistent input.   The Drop In Centre planned for the
vicinity of Anfield will have a high level of control devolved to families who are
bereaved and victims.   The Outreach Development working in conjunction with these
people and local core teams will build on these developments of self help.

VOLUNTEER CO-ORDINATOR (HELPLINE)   (SCALE 5)

Within the expenses available for volunteers it is planned to appoint a full-time
co-ordinator who will maintain the rota and provide on-going help, support and
assistance to volunteers. The maintenance of up to date information on services and
procedures to ensure that volunteers can function effectively.

The Co-ordinator will also be responsible for processing expenses claims from
volunteers. The Co-ordinator will be employed by the Council of Voluntary Service
who will provide day-to-day support and administer grant aid.

                                                         /cont'd.............
                                    -3-



DATABASE OPERATOR (SCALE 5)

The development of an updated programme will require review of all existing
records.   The operator will input data on referrals and progress, produce a
register of service users and profile reports on a regular basis for managers
and members.   The maintenance of accurate records here will help in the co­
ordination of service and predictions of changing patterns of need. The database
operator will also be able to highlight any duplicate/parallel services.

SENIOR CLERICAL OFFICER (SCALE 4)
CLERK/TYPIST (SCALE 2)

These posts accountable to the Unit Manager, will provide clerical/admin, back-up
across the whole range of services.   The Clerk Typist will, under the direction
of the Senior Clerical Officer, deal with production of letters, correspondence and
reports.   The two workers will share responsibility for incoming telephone calls.

CHILDREN'S WORKER (P.0.1)

In parallel with the mainstream services to families, the Children's Worker will
work with other organisations and agencies to promote individual and group work
with children.   This will involve collaborative work with Education and Youth Work
Colleagues and may lead to a Junior Link Newsletter for children involved. There
could be potential for sharing experiences between Merseyside and Nottinghamshire
and development of link services.




                                                            /cont'd
COSTINGS        EXPENDITURE


(1) Staff                                                Min        Max.

Hillsborough Assistance Unit Manager P.O.6.            18,942    20,232
Helpline/Database Manager P.0.2.                       14.178    15.417
Outreach Development Officer P.0.2.                    14.178    15.417
Training Officer (NWASSA) P.0.1.
Volunteer Co-ordinator (Vol. Cost) Sc.5.
Database Operator Scale 5.                              9,474    10,407
Senior Clerical Officer Scale 4.                        8,256     9,228
Clerk/Typist Scale 2.                                   6,918     7,335
Children's Outreach Worker S.W.L.3.                    11,475    12,739

                                                       83,421    90,775


1. * Staff and On Costs

2.   Vol. Expenses                                     20,000    40,000

3.   Supplies                                          10,000    14,000

4.   Transport                                          5,000    8,000

5.   Telephone                                          7,000    15,000

6.   Printing and Photocopying                          2,000    4,000

7.   Newsletter Production                              1,600    2,400

8.   Staff Support Counselling                         30,000    50,000




* Ex. Pay Award 1st July              Salary Max plus_______ %




DM/JB.
11.9.89.
