The           Hillsborough memorial banner



The   Hillsborough       memorial   banner    was    made    in    the    week    following       the
Hillsborough tragedy as a tribute to those who lost their lives on April
15th 1989..


The material was originally meant to form one half of a celebration banner
for the centenary of Liverpool F.C.             It’s design is*'biased on ideas for that
purpose.      The banner is approximately twenty five feet wide and eleven feet
high.


There are 18 league championship trophies and 5 European cups.                          All out one
of each of these bear the names,              in no specific order, of the tragedys
victims.      The League trophy with no names on it represents the campaign
Liverpool were involved in at the time.                 The European cup with no names on
it is Red because the next time Liverpool win it we will keep it forever.
The F.A. Cup is not represented because of it’s irrelevance at the time the
banner was made.          Exhibiting the banner is intended to act as a means of
keeping alive the nanses and memory of the men, women and children who died.


Since the banner was first exhibited at Anfield a number of mementos have
been added.         The Everton scarf was added in thanks to Everton F.C. and
their fans for the marvellous way they conducted themselves throughout the
trauma.       The Celtic pennant as          a gesture of         thanks,    the Werder/Dynamo
pennant as a symbol of the barriers football crosses. The Sorrento (Perth,
Australia) was sent by, and represents, exiled Scousers. Personal tributes
in remembrance of individuals have also been added.                         Anybody wishing to
make a contribution in a similar vein is welcome to do so.


Thanks     are     due   to   Merseyside   Play     Action   Council        for   providing       the
material,     the City Council,       the Blackie and Big Beat              ’89 for help with
exhibition and .                    for his     support.      Massive       thanks      are due    to
Fringe     (arts    Development     Training)     for    workshop        space    and    invaluable
support.      The banner was made by


Futher information from: 708-0468.
W O R D S o f T R IB U T E
After what happened at Hillsborough many people felt an overwhelming desire
to do something, to find someway of expressing the pain and grief that they
felt, for many people this included a powerful desire to write down their
thoughts and feelings. For some people this was something that they did quite
often for many people it was the first time that they had ever felt this need
to write.

In those awful days following the 15th of April, poems appeared in the press
and radio, were passed around pubs, stuck on walls around the City and
nestled among flowers at Anfield. They were read and heard by many people and
offered real comfort and support to a City that was submerged in grief.

It became clear that some record should be kept of these poems and several
people independently came up with the idea to produce a book of verses.
'Words of Tribute' contains 95 poems, the number chosen is obviously
significant but each poem represents more than one of the victims it also
represents 10 other poems collected and many, many more that were written. '

In the book we also tried to choose poems that represent a range of feelings,
some are personal accounts that vividly and terrifyingly depict experiences
of that day in Sheffield, some draw on religious beliefs to give comfort.
There are poems that speak of pride as well as those that feel guilt, some ^
are angry and look for explanations, many are written by football supporters
but some from people who love and have pride in the City without much
knowledge of the game.

'Words of Tribute' also represents the many people who helped make the book,
it was not published by one person or organisation but is a symbol of the
talents and strengths of people working together, freely giving of their time
and energies to make a book that all can be proud of. It is a book that
speaks through the words of ordinary people, their words are strong and speak
out clearly about all that is good about Liverpool.

'Words of Tribute' is a difficult and sad book to read and many people may
not be able to face reading it for a long time, but it will always be there
as a permanent record of how the people on Merseyside felt about
Hillsborough, written i.n their own words and published through their own
efforts.

All the 1000 poems collected are to be stored in a special archive in
Liverpool Central Libraries and special thanks to all those people who sentj
in poems and to Liverpool City Libraries for their assistance. Thanks to   ^
Radio Merseyside, Radio City and the Echo for their assistance in collecting
poems, anc especially


The book was published by                 |of the Liverpool University
Community Resource Urkit in collaboration with              [jf WALL (Writing
Activities in Liverpodl Libraries), MAWW (Merseyside Association of Writers
Workshops) and Fringe LCentre for Arts Development Training) especially “


The book would never have been produced without the offer of services from
the following companies, special thanks to                  from August
Filmsetting, St Helens, |
E. Fish and Co Ltd. I
                                    Ifrom Willow P a p e r a n d I   y
                                                   |of Centaur Press not
                                                                        rom

only printed the book but also gave tremendous assistance to a fairly
inexperienced group of publishers.

Thanks to Liverpool City Council for paying for the reprint, with all
proceeds going to the Hillsborough Disaster Fund, and hosting the launch.
There are also a lot of other people to thank, the staff and students of
Fringe especially            the General office and porters of Continuing
Education, Liverpool University and everyone else who supported and
encouraged the publication of this book, including Benson Street Recording
Studio and Red Watch, Bankhall Fire Station.
