                                                                        225 3300


                                         DM/JB.                      4th May, 1989.


The Football League Ltd.,
Lythara St. Annes,
Lancs.
FY8 1JG.



Dear Sir

                            Hillsborough Tragedy

     Since the tragic events df 15th April the local 'authorities in the areas     ‘
most affected have been working together to mobilize resources to assist
individuals and families.   There has been excellent co-operation betweien
Liverpool F.C. and ourselves and a new partnership developed.

     Many people from around the country will require help over the coming months
and years.   The nine local authorities considered the attached report and approved
in principle the establishment of a Regional Unit to co-ordinate work iand provide
core services.   It also recognised that there will be a need to strengthen existing
services and develop new services for victims at a local level.

     Given the scale and impact of the disaster which crosses existing administrative
boundaries and requires financial support immediately to establish on a substantive
basis our temporary service arrangement, it was decided to explore every possible
source of funding.   The total annual cost of the Regional Unit is £350,000 and direct
services are unlikely to be less than £1 million per year.

     It was felt that football organisations would wish to participate in the
service development to victims most of whom are regular supporters. Approaches have
also been made to Government and contact established with the E.E.C. as well as
discussions proceeding with private company sponsors.

     Would the Football League be prepared to raise with the members clubs financial
support as either a payment or an annual payment each year for this and the next two
years.    Given the number of clubs and their very different financial position it may
be thfct you would consider contributions according to League position, or perhaps an
approach to individual club commercial sponsors on our behalf.


                                                           /continued
The Football League Ltd*,                                     4th May, 1989


/continued....




     I realise that it is unusual to receive such a request and there are many
calls on your resources.   However, we believe that these are exceptional
circumstances and services cannot be maintained without a very considerable amount
of additional money.

     I would, of course, be willing to attend any meeting to discuss this request
and answer questions.

     I look forward to hearing from you.


                                  Yours faithfully,




                                  Director of Social Services.
