  Liverpool Council for Voluntary Service, 14 Castle Street, Liverpool L2 ON J                                             Tel. 051 -2 3 6 7 72 8




14th. June, 1989




Dear Colleague,
                                                   Hillsborough Volmtary Sector
                                                      Co-ordinating Cbranittee

      I write to confirm that the tenth meeting of the Ccmmittee will take
place on Thursday June 15th 1989 at 2.00.p.m. in the Coranittee Roan at this
office.

      The minutes of the last meeting are enclosed and an agenda is given
below. I hope you will be able to attend.

                                                                            Yours sincerely.




                                                                      AGENDA

            (1)        Apologies and Welcomes

            (2)        Minutes of the Meeting held on June 8th 1989

            (3)        Matters Arising

            (4)        Belpi ine

            (5)        SupparL and Training

            (6)        Regional Support Unit

            (7)        Week in Progress

            (8)        Liaison and Ijepoarting

            (9)        Any Other Business

            (10) Date of Next Meetings                                   22nd June 1989
                                                               C hief Executive: m U m M t t . Financial Services M anager: ' f W t m m m B
 D eputy C h ief Executive: q g § P P P i y . Accountant:

 An agency to help th e local com m unity to fulfil its social needs; adm inistered by Liverpool Council of Social S ervice (In c o rp o ra te d ), a Trust Corporation
 for charitable funds a n d trusts. R egistered office as above. No. 18 1 7 5 9 . England. R egistered C harity N o . 2 2 3 4 8 5
      Minutes of tte ninHi Meeting of the BUl^bocough VahBtary Sector
   Co-ordinating Gaamittee - Held on Jime 8th. 1989 in the Iavexpool CVS
               Ocnraittiee Boom, 14 Castle Street, Idverpoal.2.



Present:—                                      Liverpool CWS (in the Chair)'
                                               Liverpool CVS
                                               NACRB
                                               Merseyside CVS
                                               Young Persons Advisory Service
                                               Catholic Social Services
                                               Diocesan Board of Social
                                                 Responsibility
                                               Liverpool.S.S.D.



Apologies:
                                               Family Service Unit
                                               COMPASS
                                               Liverpool Ccmnunity Transport
                                               Wallasey CVS
                                               Sefton
                                               St, Helens CMS_____________

(1)   Minutes:

      The minutes of the meeting held an June 8th 1989 were approved.

(2)   Helpline
        _   Ithanked all the agencies who had provided assistance can the Help-Line.
      She informed members that frcm June 16th out of hours cower would be provided
      by the Liverpool Social Services Emergency Duty Team. Work in hand can Help-
      Line undertaken by Catholic Social Services and the Diocesan Board of Social
      Responsibility was reported.


(3)   Training and Support:

      (a)    Notes of                 training session had been circulated and
             were noted.

      (b)                     discussed at length with mentoers their training
             needs and the sorts of workshops she could offer. It was agreed
             that 4MHHHlHK>repare scsne course-outlines for circulation,
             (enclosed)

(4)   Regional Support Obit
                        reported that discussion continued on exactly which
      functions would be regionalised and which dealt with by Districts.  There
      was still no indication of any substantial funding of the Unit. It had
      now been agreed that Districts would be responsible for meeting requests
      for help recorded chi the data-base. It was agreed thatl^pMliHHi^be
      asked to attend the next meeting to discuss hew this would be done.


                                                oont'd..
Liverpool Council for Voluntary Service, 14 Castle Street, Liverpool L2 ONJ                                               Tel. 051 -2 3 6 772 8



   14th June 1989




   Dear Colleague,
   Hillsborough - Training
   Please find enclosed details of three two-day workshops we are
   offeri ng.

          Workshop 1:                       The Initial Stages:                                      17/18 July.
          Workshop 2:                       Treatment Planning:                                      31 Ouly/1 August,
          Workshop 3:                       The Client-Counsellor Relationship:
                                                                  14/15 August.
   All workshops will                               be run by                         a counselling
   tutor at Liverpool                               University, and certified transactional
   analyst who worked                               with survivors and b e r e a v e d .after the Herald
   of Free Enterprise                               disaster.
   The workshops will be in Liverpool city centre: venue to be
   confirmed in the light of numbers. There will be no charge for
   the workshops.
   Please let me know if you wish to book places and if so how
   many. Please bear in mind that places are limited. Only
   complete the booking form if you are sure that you will need a
   place. Places will be allocated on a first-come first-served
   basis.
   Yours sincerely,




C hairm an: Tilly Boyce. Hon Treasurer: Law rence Holden. C h ief Executive: Edw ard M urphy. Financial S en/ices M an ag e r: R ichard Jarm an

An agency to help the local com m unity to fulfil its social needs; adm inistered by Liverpool Council of Social S ervice (In c o rp o ra te d ), a Trust Corporation
for charitable funds and trusts. R egistered office as above. No. 1 8 1 7 5 9 . England. R egistered Charity No. 2 2 3 4 8 5
                WORKING WITH THE SURVIVORS AND THE BEREAVED
                             POST-HIL1SBQROUGH



                                  B O O K I N G               F O R M


Name of Organi sati o                n     .... . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .




Name of Contac/t:



                                         PLACES REQUIRED

Workshop          1 : The Initial Stages
Workshop          2 : Treatment Planning
Workshop          3 : The Cl ient-Counsellor Relationship




S ig n e d : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Date:.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



Please return to:

                                           l^v^poS^C^
                                         14, Castle Street
                                    by July 7th at latest
           WORKING WITH THE SURVIVORS AND THE BEREAVED
                        POST HILLSBOROUGH




WORKSHOP 1 :   THE INITIAL STAGES - 17/18 July (9.30am to 4.30pm)




(i)     The nature and impact of the disaster for the survivors
                                                  the bereaved
                                              and the helpers


(ii)    The normal and atypical reactions to the disaster
        - the risk factors and signals of a poor resolution


(iii)   The role of the counsel 1or/helper
        - task definition
        - the lines of responsibility and authority


(iv)    Establishing the client-counsel1 or relationship
        - making contact
        - maintaining rapport
        - the assessment of the client's individual stress and
          coping skills
        - the clarification of the client's goals
            WORKING WITH THE SURVIVORS AND THE BEREAVED
                         P O S T HILLSBOROUGH




WORKSHOP 2 : TREATMENT PLANNING - 31 Duly/1 August
                                  (9.30am to.4.30pm)



(1) MID-STAGE
    - Facilitating the individual's working through of his
      reactions and grief
    - Promotin'G ths f 3 ini 1 v *s 3 d a nta t i nn ^
    - Reinforcing the individual's coping skills and strategi
    - Managing the issues of compensation
    - Identifying the individuals at risk of post-traumatic
      stress disorder and responding appropriately



(2) END STAGE
    - Moving towards and achieving closure of the
      client-counsellor relationship
    - Supporting the reintegration of the individual into
      their own family, network and community
                  WORKING WITH THE SURVIVORS AND THE BEREAVED
                               POST HILLSBOROUGH




WORKSHOP 3:             THE CLIENT-COUNSELLOR RELATIONSHIP - 14/15 August
                                                        (9.30am to 4.30pm)



  - the stresses of empathy and identification
  - using supervision - for the supervisor and counsellor
  - the frustrations of the task
  -   UIIC   i   c^|U I I CI I ICII ^J   I Ul 011*5   p j J U I I U I U y i V U l   muui   i   i   I Iiy




      the counsellors
  - surviving the disaster




The workshops will have an emphasis on skills practice as well
as the acquisition of information and the sharing of ideas.

Workshops one and two, normally, would be taken together
whereas workshop three may be taken alone particularly in the
case of supervisors not directly involved in the 'hands-on'
contact of the counsellors.
