                          INTER AGENCY MEETING

                       THURSDAY, 20TH APRIL, 1989


PRESENT:

       Mr. David Mason, (In the Chair) Director of Social Services
                                       Liverpool.

       Mr. Vic Citarella, Deputy Director of Social Services, Liverpool.

       Ms. C. Wilkinson, Assistant Director (Field Services), Social
       Services, Liverpool.

       Mr. D. Evans, Social Services, Wirral.

       Mr. T. Owen, Social Services, Cheshire.

       Mr. W.J. Twist, Assistant Director (Admin.) Lancashire.

       Ms. E. Newby, Division 4, Social Services, Lancashire.

       Mr. T. Foster, Director of Social Services, Lancashire.

       Mr. K. Westly,„British Association of Social Workers.

       Mr. P. Serge, British Association of Social Workers.

       Mr. B. Walker, Social Services, Knowsley.

       Mr. R. Adams, Merseyside Probation Service.

       Mr. R. Tann, Merseyside F.&.C.D.A. - Emergency Planning.

       Ms. P. Farrell, Director of Social Services, Sefton.

       Ms. M. Farrington, Woody 1 . Mersey Regional Health Authority.

       Mr. A. Guthrie, Personal Services, St. Helens.

       Ms. M. Gibson, Department of Health and Social Security.

       Mr. G. Davey, City Solicitor's, Liverpool.

       Mr. A. Horner, City Solicitor's, Liverpool.
                                 -    1   -




29. Planning Group

    The first meeting of the Planning Group is to be held                      D. Mason
    at 10.00 a.m. on 21st April, 1989, in the Transport
    Authority Offices in Hatton Garden.      The other meetings
    will    be held on 25th April (all day)      and 26th April
    (all day). Brigette Fann will be representing the Voluntary
    Sector.    The Director will arrange a meeting with his
    colleagues in other areas prior to the proposed joint
    meetings with Politicians that following weekend.

30. Computer Up-date

    The meeting between Authorities and the Kent people
    responsible for the computer system will be set up as
    soon    aspossible.   A note concerninghelpline  calls
    being putinto a database was circulated.

31. LMC/GP

    A note on the MRHA Senior Managers Training Day was
    circulated.   It was agreed that all enquiries requesting
    the provision of psychologists to provide debriefing
    for staff should be directed to the MRHA.

32. Leaflet

    It was agreed that:-                                                       All to
                                                                               Note
    (a) authorities would arrange to collect copies of the young
        persons crisis leaflet from 10.00 a.m. tomorrow from the
        Press Office, Third Floor, Hatton Garden;

    (b) no objection was raised to stamping their authority's logo
        on the leaflet so long as its not on the back cover where
        the Helpline telephone numbers are printed;

    (c) the production of the poster be expedited and consideration            Press
        be given to producing a poster for use_elsewhere then in               Office
        schools and colleges; and

    (d) lapel badges be produced bearing the Helpline telephone                Press
        numbers.                                                               Office

33. Schools/Training Programme

   It was agreed that the establishment of educational                         D. Mason
   training programmes for staff of secondary schools and
   colleges of further education be discussed further at
   this meeting on 21st April, when more information should
   be available.

34. Casualty List

    It was asked that copies of the casualty list be made                      P. Marley
    available as soon as possible.

35. Helpline

    It   was   hoped   to   utilise       the   Voluntary   Sector   through
                                -    2   -




    Ed Murphy to staff the Helplinefor the Bank Holiday
    weekend.    The MRHA will approach Nurses with experience
    of bereavement counselling etc, for assistance. An approach
    to the Association of Directors       Social Services for
    assistance had been warmly received at a meeting today.
    The Director asked Authorities to consider whether any
    one of them could offer to second a person to take over
    the Helpline organisation role currently being undertaken
    by Carole Wilkinson.      The Director then referred to
    his discussions with Alan Holden (Childline) which has
    resulted in an offer for a small group to travel to
    London on 24th April to gain experience of their expertise
    in this type of forward planning.       It was agreed that
    the offer be accepted and the group comprise Carole
    Wilkinson and the person seconded to co-ordinate this
    task in    the future.   The meeting notedthat a helpline
    telephone number for the West Lancs/Skelmersdale area
    had not    been established, contrary to a suggestion that
    Radio Merseyside had possibly broadcast      a number this
    morning.

36. Training

    Clarification was given that the elected members training
    seminar on 22nd April would be in two separate sessions.
    The training programme for social workers had been finalised
    and the     module that was to take place over the Bank
    Holiday weekend is now to take place on 5th, 6th and
    7th June.    Two sessions on 22nd May have been arranged
    for the    Voluntary Sector.    Arrangements have been made
    for members of the voluntary sector co-ordinating group
    to attend a seminar on 21st April (instead of in May).

37. Large North West Employers

    It   was agreed that contact be made with the Merseyside                D. Mason
    Chamber of Commerce to pursue the establishment of counselling
    services for workforce members affected by the tragedy.
    It was also agreed that the Chamber be requested to
    make contact in this respect with other Chambers in
    both Lancashire and Cheshire.

38. Offers of Help

    Rod Tann    is to provide a micro computer and work in                  Mr. Tann
    conjunction with the voluntary sector to establish a
    small group, based in Johnson Street to sift through
    offers of help and assistance received on the Helpline.

39. Staff Counselling

    The offer of the British Association of Social Workers                  All to Note
    to act as the co-ordinating body for all agencies offering
    staff counselling and support be accepted.     Authorities
    are asked to telephone information to Keith Westly on
    021 622 3911 or 051 928 0589 with details of any offers
    of help to undertake counselling work which they receive.

40. Consultation

    It   was   agreed   that   all       Authorities   should   undertake
                             -   3   -




    on-going consultation   with their members1 trades union
    representatives about   decisions concerning the tragedy.

41. Telephone Numbers

    The meeting reiterated the agreement that for the present
    no other contact telephone numbers should be made available
    other than the Helpline numbers.

42. Press

    The meeting noted the Director's statement to the press
    about the coverage of the tragedy by sections of the
    popular press and the decision to return bodies without
    clothing or personal effects.   An agreement had apparently
    been reached between television companies that funerals
    and other events would not be covered by more than one
    television   crew   (excepting   Memorial   Services  etc).
    The meeting endorsed the decision that if persons are
    invited to television/radio stations to recount their
    experiences, support staff will be despatched to the
    station, whether invited      or not, for counselling purposes.

43. Voluntary Sector Co-ordinating Committee

    Pauline Farrell reported that the Co-ordinating Committee
    is scheduled to hold its next meeting on 25th April
    and that the detailed arrangments would be confirmed
    shortly.

44. N.W.A.S.S.A.

   The Director reported that an Emergency Meeting of N.W.A.S.S.A.
   was to be held on 25th April at 11.30 a.m. in Huyton    to
   consider requests that it funds all publicity material
   and the Training Officer post, to be attached to the
   Regional Training Unit.      A request for other funding
   to be made available is also to be considered at the
   meeting.
