                               SOCIAL SERVICES INSPECTORATE
                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND GOCIAL GUCURhTV
                               Richmond House
                               79 Whitehall
                               London SW1A 2NS

                               Telephone 01-210 5569




Mr D Mason
Director of Social Services
Liverpool Social Services Department
26 Hatton Garden
Liverpool
L3 2AW                                                 10 May 1989




Dear David


My colleagues in the North West Region of the Inspectorate have
kept me informed of the action taken by local social services
departments together in the wake of the Hillsborough football
disaster.  I congratulate you and the staff of the Department on
the effective work undertaken to provide counselling and other
support services to the bereaved families and others distressed
by the tragedy.

I was greatly impressed by the speed of the social services
reaction and by the commitment to continue to help and support
people through a possibly protracted period of mourning. The
direct work involved is difficult and demanding. But others not
directly involved have also contributed by providing cover to
enable the normal work of the Department to continue. In that
very important sense, this is truly a department-wide effort,
fully in keeping with the spirit and achievements of social
services work after earlier tragedies.

I have written in similar terms to other Directors concerned.
I add my personal congratulations on the outstanding leadership
demonstrated in your own response to the disaster, and on the
managerial effort involved in co-ordinating statutory and
voluntary effort.


Best wishes.


Yours sincerely



 $r\h.
W B UTTING
Chief Inspector
Social Services Inspectorate
♦
     %



                                                                         xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
                                                                         225-3800
    Personal.

    Mr W.B. Utting,
                                                                    DM/PJC
    Chief Inspector,
    Social Services Inspectorate,
                                                                    16th Hay, 1989
    Department of Health,
    Richmond House,
    79, Whitehall,
    London,
    SW1A 2NS.




    Dear Bill,


         Thank you very much for your letter of the 10th, which I received on
    Friday. I did try to call you back on Monday, but was advised that you were
    not well. I hope you are soon restored to health.

         I realise that colleagues in the North West Region have been keeping
    you advised of our work, and have been pleased to receive their support
    and sound advice. Your congratulations are most welcome, and I will ensure
    that they are conveyed to staff here in Liverpool.

         Our speed of response and reaction to the tragedy has been possible
    because of the tremendous effort that has been made by colleagues throughout
    the Department and the other agencies. It has not been a Liverpool venture,
    but a collaborative piece of work involving other Local Authority Departments,
    the voluntary sector, as well as colleagues in Health and Probation.

         I am sure it would be much appreciated, if you felt able, to visit
    Merseyside to see for yourself the work that is being done or, alternatively,
    if one of your Civil Service colleagues from the Centre was able to do
    this. There has been a recognition by many groups of the effort of staff,
    and the support we have received has been excellent. Acknowledgement by
    the Inspectorate and the Department of Health would, in this context, I
    feel, be helpful.

         Again, many thanks for your letter, and the personal message.


                                    Yours sincerely,



                             DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES
