                                           DM/JB.                       10th Hay, 1989



Dr^___________________
Royal Liverpool Hospital,
Prescot Street,
Liverpool, L7 8XP.



PERSONAL



Dear Dr.

     Thank you for your note indicating that merabers of the Department are
prepared and willing to contribute to any research projects that are developed
after Hillsborough.

     During the last week                           Professor of Social Work at
Manchester Universityr, has been doing some planning and development work »ith a
group of staff and has agreed to try to co-ostiinate the research.   Frora uty
preliminary discussion with him it would appear that his primary focus would be on
social and organisational aspects of the Hillsborough writ, and if the Royal
Department was interested in developing work on a personal and psychological
perspective at first sight to appear to dovetail very well. I am copying this
correspondence to Howard Parker and will assusae that he will be in touch with you.
I have mentioned to him your interest in the cones!tment.

        Many thanks for your letter and your assistance.

                                         Yours sincerely,




                                         Director of Social Services.

c.c-.                            Manchester University.
                      LIVERPOOL HEALTH AUTHORITY
                  ROYAL LIVERPOOL HOSPITAL
                             Prescot Street, Liverpool L7 8XP
                                Telephone: 051-709 0141



                  Our Ref:     MG/AJD                If telephoning please ask for: 2593
                                                     Psychotherapy Department
25th April 1989

Mr D Mason
Director of Social Services
Hatton Garden
Idverpool 3

Dear Mr Mason

This is a fcrief note to let you know that members of the Department of
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, have had discussions about the research
implications of the Hillsborough disaster, and would be more than willing
to contribute to any projects that people might want to set up.

Yours sincerely




Consultant Psychotherapist


cc   Dr
     Dr
                                                                                                     8
                              LIVERPOOL HEALTH AUTHORITY
                         ROYAL LIVERPOOL HOSPITAL
                                     Prescot Street, Liverpool L7 8XP
                                         Telephone: 051-709 0141



Your Ref:                 Our Ref:     V .G /A J D           If telephoning please ask for:   ?593
                                                             Psychotherapy Department
       ?5th April 1989

       Kr D Kason
       Director of Social Services
       Hatton Garden
       Liverpool 3

       Dear Mr Kason

       This is a brief note to let you know that members of the Department of
       Psychiatry end Psychotherapy, have had discussions about the research
       implications of the Hillsborough disaster, and would be more than willing
       to contribute to guy projects that people might went to set up.

       Yours sincerely




       Michael Gopfert     (
       Consultant Psychotherapist


       cc   Dr I? Poole
            Dr H Abou-Saleh
