                                                 SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
                                                 David Mason
                  City                           Director of Social Services
                  of                             Hatton Garden
                                                 Liverpool.    L3 2AW
                  Liverpool
                                                 Telephone:   051   225   3800


                                                 Your Ref:

                                                 Our Ref:     DM/JB.

                                                 Date:        30th April, 1990.




   FROM:          David Mason,
                  Director of Social Services,
                  Liverpool.

                  FAX No. (051)   225 - 3916.




   TO:            Bernard Walker,
                  Social Services Department,
                  Knowsley.

                  FAX No. (051)   443 - 3670.




                  This communication consists of six pages including

                  this page.




When calling or telephoning please ask for
                                                    (=>

              City
              O f             y   * +   ■   ^ 3 3fr"7o
              L iv e r p o o l
              Document Routing Slip
  From                            To

                                               oaj& n



  F or your inform ation

  F or your com m en ts

  Please deal w ith this

  Please see me w ith this

  Please arrange a m eeting about this

  As requested

  N ote and file


  Signature


  Date             2>o       ho
M 1434
             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                      2 8th June, 19 89



PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
           Councillors W. Edwards, S. Ledwich,
           Peter Millea, Jacqueline Smith and
           I. Templeman.



           Mr. A. Doswell attended as an observer
           representing Liverpool Trades Council.




Minutes of Last Meeting

Resolved that the Minutes of the last meeting of the
Working Party held on 7th June, 1989, be approved.


Application for Research Funding
Project: "Hillsborough and After -
the Liverpool Experience"

The Working Party considered the Report of the City
Solicitor concerning an application received from Edge
Hill College, Ormskirk for funding for a research
project called "Hillsborough and After - the Liverpool
Experience".



With the permission of the Working Party, Dr. Phil Scraton,
Principal Lecturer in Criminology and Head of the Centre
for Studies in Crime and Social Justice at Edge Hill
College, addressed the meeting on this matter.



Resolved that this Working Party recommend that the
City Council make a payment of £34,900 as a contribution
towards the funding of the Research Project.
                                                           HILLSBOROUGH

                                                                 l|fc|n
    18.    Staffing and Administrative Support

           The Chair informed the Working Party that following
           advertisement in the Liverpool Echo short-listing
           will take place on 8th June, 1989 for the post of
           Research Officer.


    19.    Licensing of Football Stadiums

           Resolved that the City Building Surveyor be requested to -

           (a)   prepare a Report on the present arrangements for
                 the licensing of Football Stadiums particularly
                 insofar as they apply to Anfield and Goodison
                 Park; and

           (b)   provide the Football Supporters Association, as
                 requested with a copy of the Ground Safety
                 Certificate for Anfield subject to the consent of
                 Liverpool Football Club.


    2 0.   Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry

           The Deputy City Solicitor reported upon the further
           request which has been submitted to the Lord Justice
           Taylor Inquiry upon the representation of the City
           Council at the Inquiry.  A response to the request was
           expected imminently.




t
«
a p p t                 for RESEARCH FUNDING
          T p a T T n ]\(

                  r S H I LL S H O RS D ^         : THE LIVERPOOL EXPERIENCE^


                                       Report of .the City Solicitor
                            (Officer Contact : Andrew PinfcTel. No. 225-2334)

_1l . Following the Hillsborough disaster Dr. Phil Scraton, Principal
Lecturer in Criminology and Head of the Centre for Studies in ri™e an
 Social Justice at Edge Hill College, Ormskirk, approached the Leader of
 the City Council with a proposal for a research project to be funded by
 Edge Hill College and the City Council„

2   The Chair of the Hillsborough Working Party and:the Chair of      ^
Finance and Strategy met with Dr. Scraton to discuss the proposed project.
At that meeting Dr. Scraton emphasised that:-

                  (i) the Edge Hill Centre has established itself as a basis for
                      advanced critical research into soccer-related issues
                      including crowd behaviour, policing, financing and safety,

                (ii) his objective is to place the events at Hillsborough into
                     their long-term historical, social and economic contexts;

              (iii) that the negative reputation of Merseyside m the media and
                    national politics contributed to the disaster and its
                    aftermath;

                 (iv) also, having published extensively, the work at Edge Hill
                      on criminal justice processes, official inquiries and
                      controversial deaths provides the project with the capacity,
                      facilities and resources to monitor the offical inquiries
                      and media coverage.

  3.           The basis for the research proposal is as follows:

       Hillsborough is the most serious tragedy in terms of loss of 1:L^e/ _
  injury, to have occurred within 'organised leisure' in contemporary Britain.
  It is the focus of world attention, projection and opinion. Within a few
  days of the two inquiries being established there was a general concern m
  Liverpool, shared by local politicians and political/academic commentators,
  that the formal processes would neither have the capacity or the resources
  to cover the broader issues relating to the Hillsborough Tragedy. This was
  compounded in many accounts by a purposeful emphasis on Liverpool's ^ ad
  reputation' and the'violence' of its people. As with the events during
  the Toxteth disturbances (1981; 1985) and Heysel there was an immediate
  sense of 'isolation' within the City. Clearly the sequence of events in
  the first two weeks after Hillsborough emphasises this problem for people
  and it became apparent that some would not give evidence to the inquiry
  team    The Hillsborough Working Party's remit to assist, encourage and
  organise facilities for people to give evidence has responded to this
  problem. The Working Party's focus on the events around Hillsboroug
  will help to construct a broader picture, including media and governmental
   reaction to the disaster. The project will be more extensive m its
   coverage of personal accounts than either of the official inquiries.
                                                -   2   -




               4„   The research project would and will cover issues more broadly
J -0 ]        defined than those within the remit of the Working Party. Apart from
f;            taking in-depth accounts of the post-Hillsborough progression of events
               within the City the main objectives of the project will be to:

                     (i) consider the background and impact of 'hooligan hysteria'
                         and its emphasis on controlling football supporters
                         through police policies and practices;

                    (ii) examine the significance of prejudiced attitudes held by central
                         government and the authorities concerning Merseyside's
                         negative reputation and the control of Merseyside supporters;

                    (iii) monitor all Inquiries into Hillsborough, providing a full
         •          V_Jf
                          evaluation of the adequacy of the Inquiries, and their
                                          selective use of evidence; and

                     (iv) also, inquire into events related to Hillsborough which will not
                          be covered by the official investigations (treatment of relatives
         //               by the authorities; intrusive journalism; impact on the Social
                          Services, etc.).

               5.    The research project intends to work alongside the Working Party to
               place this full range of material within the longer term historical,
               political and economic developments of soccer and its recent emphasis on
               control and regulation — both from the official bodies within the sport
               and from those with responsibility for policing it. The recent projects
               completed, published and to be published from the Edge Hill centre
               demonstrate their expertise in the fields of, criminal/civil justice,
               police powers and accountability, soccer and media research. It is envisaged
               that the project will take approximately 12 months to complete from its
               inception. Dr. Scraton highlighted the academic independence of his
               research proposal and the Chair of the Working Party identified the brief
               of .the Working Party's Research Officer who would liaise closely with
               Dr.''.Scraton to develop a comprehensive coverage of Hillsborough and related
               issues.

               6.   In order to develop the project the costings are estimated as follows:

                    Staffing:

                    Research Assistant (IB Scale)           inc. all 'on costs'   £13,500
                    Research Assistant (IB Scale)           inc. all 'on costs'   £13,500
                    Project Secretary (Scale 1/2)           inc. all 'on costs'   £ 6,500

                    Project expenses:

                    Stationery/mailing etc.                                          £300
                    Purchase of Reports etc.                                         £250
                    Travel (Sheffield/London)                                        £600
                    Discs/D Base Programme                                           £250


                                                                                  £34,900
Other expenses carried by the    Centre': Project Director's salary;
Capital equipment (inc. word processor, D Base etc.,); library searches;
consultancies; office and telephone. This would be worth approximately
£25,000 if fully costed.

7.   The College have requested that a grant of £34,900 be made available
to help finance the project.

8.   There is no budgetary provision for the proposal.




The Hillsborough Working Party on 13/11/89 Agreed that the contract for
the Hillsborough Research Officer be extended for six months.
