East Dvisional Manager
                                                 30/10/92
Granton Road
Liverpool 6




Dear

Re:    a) Offering a service for neighbouring authorities &
       b) Xraining requests.

1 promised I'd clarify the types of service we could offer
neighbouring authorities, as we have seen Clients from outside
Liverpool City boundaries, and without payment, we will now have
to refuse a service.    we could offer a Social Work/Counselling
service within our Seam Brief for those suffering aa a result of
a traumatic   event or bereavement to individuals outside of
Liverpool if authorities are willing to pay.

I've  spoken   to                 who said  that for  a  Social
Work/Counselling  serviceweshould     charge an hourly rate at
social work pay plus 10%.      This would be done by informing
personnel of the hours provided and they would invoice the
appropriate authority/agency for the fee.      Similarly we can
offer a service to     neighbouring authoritie's Social" Services
Staff who    may  feel   more comfortable  about seeking  support
outside of their own authority.




                                        (please see attached)
2) The second part of our discussion involved the demands on
oauy Team for Training. We are frequently requested to take
part in training days specifically related to,Post Traumatic
Stress   and bereavement.                was uncertain about
charges for this and advised me to talk to

It transpires that the training section have very recently
(via a Social Services Committee report) set up a fund with
money, training officers earn for sessions given to outside
agencies. They then use this money for their own training.
        stated that it would be possible for us to put any
money we aquire into this fund and then use it for our own
training and consultation. I think this would be an excellent
idea especially at a time when our training needs in the areas
of counselling and therapeutic skills are increasing.

This also ties in with a phone call I had from            at
Mossley Hill Psychotherapy Unit, who said he wanted to cut
through the bureaucracy we were caught up in at present, in
our negotiations for extra supervision and consultation from
his unit. He says that they too have a training fund (trust)
and if we could contribute something to this they would be
more than willing to provide us with consultation.

We obviously need to discuss these matters more fully. I would
like to see you A.S.A.P. as my staff and this service are
reaching crisis point in terms of matching skills to the types
of referrals we are receiving. I'm convinced that our service
is unique and invaluable and it could be even better with the
extra support and consultation our team so desperately need
(I'll show you the types of referrals we're receiving when I
next see you).

Sorry about the rambling - I'll speak to you next week.




Yours sincerely




Sarah Darcy
Team Manager
Hillsborough Centre
