 Issues needing sorting:
                                                                           '         '

 (1) Counselling: how many individual offers, if any, need to be taken up.
     Implications - ver^y considerable work load potentially re vetting, processing etc?
     SWLO's/VWO's could do rough screening of likely ones if we know how many are
     needed.

 (2) Training of counsellors:    do we want, or need to take up offers re training
     of counsellors?

 (3) How do we process requests for training re counselling?

 (4) Transport:  Ideally they should be vetted, insurance, licence etc., checked out?
     Is this practical? Is there an issue of paying expenses.   Liverpool Social
     Services existing volunteer drivers need to be paid, especially where we have
     asked them to help.  What about others?

 (5) Accommodation:  Again should be vetted, not practical if offers are being taken
     up immediately?

 (6) Childminders/baby sitting service: Should use registered ones where possible,
    .check with appropriate S.S.Department. People should be vetted otherwise.

 (7) Holidays:  Need   some follow up, two categories - (a) holidays in people's homes.
     (b) holidays in   their caravans, time share etc.  need to check people's bona fides
     and get further   details, e.g. any costs involved, how do we pay transport,
     how is decision   made who to offer holidays too?

(8) Admin task:  much of this needs to be happening quickly in order to take up offers,
    but also there is an on going job over many months.  Need therefore, for extra
    SWLO/VWO posts and admin.   We are carrying alot of work considering especially
    how few of us there are.   Implications re district work.

(9) General Offers of Help:  Very considerable amount of work following this up.
    Is there a need to?   Can we leave it at acknowledging their offer?

(10) Who is going to respond to specific offers of help from large organisations etc??




                                                                       9
