                                                            <k> ■
                                                                ---------

                                                                              - '




Dear Friend,

                      HILLSBOROUGH FAMILIES SUPPORT GROUP


     Following the successful launch meeting of the above, it has been decided
to arrange further meetings of the families directly involved in the Hillsborough
Disaster,

     For those not yet aware, this body is an informal "getting together"
of the families with the objectives of supporting each other, improving
communications, arid agreeing how we the families think matters should be
handled, It consists of immediate family only and all other people are
excluded. We would ask you to respect the confidence of all the families
(especially regarding the media!) and NOT to discuss this outside your immediate
family.

     Our intention is to seek out a consensus and elect a'"committee" to
co-ordinate on our behalf with others/outside bodies. Your opinion is most
welcome and we invite you to join us on:-                      •

         Tuesday, 4th July at 20.00 hrs.,
         Vernon Sangster .’
                          Sports- Centre,
       ■ Priory Road,
          Anfield,                                           .„.
                                                               ■
                                                               ..    ....
          Liverpool 4                    -.       .’          .     ••    '
         .(next to the football car park),        • ■       ■'      • '

     Any problems please contact any of-the following:-

          Barry or Jackie Devenaide on I           :
          Trevor or Jenni Hicks on (
          Les or Doreen Jones on <
         Colin or Terry Sefton oi
         'Bill or Sheila Pemberton on
          Steve Kelly on <




Copy of this letter sent to all of the 95 Next of Kin/Relatives of the bereaved -
Hillsborough - 28th June, 1989.
