                                      BC.90.L8




              9t k


The Diocese of Liverpool
           and the
  Hillsborough Disaster




  A Report for the Bishop's Council

              May 1990
                       C O N T E N T


Page                                   Section


 1     Introduction                         1


       What Happened                        2


 6     Observations                         3


 8     Wider Questions                      4


 9     Recommendations                      5


11     Report by Archdeacon of
                  Sheffield            Appendix 1


14     Hillsborough Bulletin
                  No. 3                Appendix 2


15     Coping After Hillsborough
                  Leaflet              Appendix 3


16     Diocesan Emergency Standing
                  Committee            Appendix 4
              Liverpool Diocese and the Hillsborough Disaster

1.    Introduction

1.1   On April 15th, 1989, the worst football disaster in Britain's history
      occurred at Hillsborough, Sheffield.    Ninety-five people died as a
      result of a crush at the F.A. Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and
      Nottingham Forrest. The tragedy happened in Sheffield and people at
      the match were drawn from all parts of the country but most of those
      at the Leppings Lane end of the ground were the crush occurred came
      from Merseyside. The disaster and its aftermath involved all those
      who were at the match, their families, their friends, public services
      of all kinds, voluntary groups and helpers, the churches and many
      others.

1.2   This report was requested by the Bishop's Council of the Diocese of
      Liverpool at the invitation of the Board for Social Responsibility.
      There were two areas of concern.      Firstly to see how the Diocese
      responded and to learn any practical lessons, secondly, the disaster
      raised many questions about bereavement, the general response to
      tragedy, and the way communities behave. The Bishop's Council agreed
      "that the Director (of Social and Community Work) along with an
      assessor be asked to co-ordinate a review of the Anglican responses
      to the Disaster and to highlight what might usefully be learnt for
      the future." It was hoped that the wider questions raised should be
      considered separately and ecumenically.

1.3   This report, then, is primarily about the practical response at
      Parish and Diocesan level of the Church of England in Liverpool
      Diocese.

1.4   The report has been compiled by Stephen Martin, Director of Social
      and Community Work for the Diocese, and Paul Barnard, who was
      seconded by the Children's Society to work with the local authorities
      and voluntary organisations on the response to the Disaster.
      Material has been compiled from survey forms completed by fifty
      people, interviews with eight people with special involvement in the
      follow-up, and from a variety of other sources. Inevitably we do not
      have a total picture of everything that happened and there are many
      whose comments might have added significantly to this review.      We
      apologise to all who may wish we had given more emphasis to their
      comments.


2.    What Happened

2.1   The tragedy happened in Sheffield at 3.00 p.m. on a Saturday
      afternoon. Some 15-20,000 people from Merseyside were at the match,
      95 died, many more were physically injured and all those present were
      affected by the trauma - being at the ground, seeing the tragedy,
      feeling helpless, knowing those killed or injured, and being aware
      that it 'might have been them1. Nearly everyone in Liverpool knew
      someone at the match or found that someone living near them was
      amongst the dead or injured. In the way it affected Liverpool it has
      probably more in common with the Aberfan disaster and the Bradford
      Fire than other more recent tragedies.



                                 -   l   -
2.2.   Another report has been written about the immediate response by the
       churches in Sheffield (see Appendix 1)    our review concentrates on
       what happened in relation to the Anglican churches in Liverpool
       Diocese. By the nature of this review it emphasises the response of
       clergy and Diocesan staff but we would want to acknowledge that many,
       many lay people were also part of the response of the church and the
       community. The Diocese had no 'disaster plan', the roles undertaken
       were an immediate response to the event not part of any prepared
       plan.

2.3    With the disaster unfolding on television and radio many quickly knew
       a tragedy had occurred and the families and friends of those at the        :$
       match anxiously waited for telephone calls to re-assure them their
       loved ones were safe.    For some those calls never came.      By the
       evening some clergy had been called to families who already knew they
       had lost a loved one. A few clergy went to Sheffield with bereaved
       families, others went to offer help at the hospitals, others offered
       support to families awaiting news, one or two joined fans returning
       from the match.

2.4    When the Disaster occurred the Bishop of Liverpool, the Rt. Revd.
       David Sheppard was on holiday in the Hebrides.     The Roman Catholic
       Archbishop, the Most Revd. Derek Worlock, contacted the Anglican
       Suffragan Bishop, the Revd. Michael Henshall, to discuss the Sunday
       evening Mass at .the Roman Catholic Metropolitan Cathedral being used 1 )
       as a special Mass for Hillsborough.      The Revd. Stephen Bellamy,
       Bishop David's Chaplain was newly in post, he was quickly in contact
       with Archbishop Derek Worlock s Press Officer, the Revd. Paul
       Thompson, and this group met at the Archbishop's house on the '
       Saturday night to discuss and arrange the Sunday evening service and
       a hospital visit to Sheffield which took place on the Sunday with the
       Methodist Moderator, Dr. John Newton. The Revd. Stephen Bellamy had
       also made contact with Bishop David and was trying to find out how to
       get him back to Liverpool.

2.5    On the Sunday morning a state of shock hung over Liverpool.      Many
       extra people attended church services and at these much pastoral work
       was begun.     Some churches remained open during the day and sane
        stayed open for the following week or two.

2.6   The local authority work was already beginning.       A team of social
      workers had been dispatched to Sheffield on the Saturday evening. By
       Sunday morning representatives of five local authorities (later
       eight; gathered in Liverpool, Michael Steward from the Centre for
       Crisis Psychology set up after the Bradford Fire disaster had arrived
______ to _.advise -on_ the -response~to the tragedy, and_a meeting— of social-------
      workers was held.

2.7    The latter meeting was also attended by the Liverpool Diocesan Board        ^
        for Social Responsibility Director of Social and Community Work,
        Stephen Martin, and the Diocesan Adviser on Pastoral Care and
        Counselling, the Revd. John Patterson.    Representatives of Catholic
        Social Services and other agencies were also present.          Michael
        Steward strongly urged the co-ordination of support services so that
        people are not bombarded with different offers of help, said that all
        those at the match not just the bereaved and physically injured will
        be liable to suffer the effect of trauma, and, that support services
        will be needed for 1 - 2 years not just immediately. Some links were
        already being established between clergy and social services offices.
        A telephone Helpline was quickly established and 'drop-in' centre was
        set up in a Sports Hall near the Liverpool F.C. Anfield ground.

                                    -   2   -
         2.8     Bishop David returned (with help from the R.A.F. and many others)
                 just in time for the Mass at the Metropolitan Cathedral. This was a
                 focus for the grief of the City. The Cathedral was full and several
                 thousand people filled the area outside where a service was hastily
                 arranged. The Cathedral service was broadcast on local radio (which
                 was the main channel of communication during the weekend).   At the
                 services children then adults began to lay football scarves and
                 mementos at the altar.
f *
         2.9     By Monday many clergy were by now aware of the families who were
                 bereaved in their parish and of others needing support. Some began
%                to discuss special services (often shared and ecumenical), many
                 churches were opened, and enquiries began about funeral arrangements.
                 Of our survey 80% were involved in post Hillsborough work, nearly all
                 supporting victims and families and about 40% with special services.

         2.10    A packed meeting was held at Liverpool Town Hall for voluntary
                 organisations.   Apart from the church representatives many of the
                 other groups were strongly church connected (such as the COMPASS
                 counselling group).     Out of this came a Voluntary Sector Co­
                 ordinating Committee on which Stephen Martin and Terry Gilvin
                 represented the churches. This group helped co-ordinate staffing for
                 the Helpline, the Drop-in Centre, transport and counselling help for
                 those travelling to and from Sheffield etc. The Diocese provided a
                 team of volunteers for the Helpline, clergy and lay; Clergy provided
                 back-up help at the Drop-in Centre offering support to those staffing
                 it (initially from Victims Support Schemes) as well as to those who
                 visited the Centre. Offers of help were* pouring in to the Helpline,
                 Social Services (and to Church House). These included the offer of
                 the Mothers' Union to provide accommodation in Sheffield.

          2.11   The first formal list of those killed appeared on Monday and the
                 B.S.R. office linked with the R.C. Archdiocese office to match the
                 addresses to parishes, check clergy were aware of the families
                 concerned and find out who would be taking the funerals.

          2.12   One of the members of the Church House staff had been badly injured
                 at Hillsborough and was in intensive care. A short service was held
                 at Church House with prayers for him (he did make a slow recovery)
                 and all those affected.    Some of those directly affected attended
                 Church of England schools and sensitive support was offered.   Some
                 schools took groups of pupils to Anfield.

          2.13  Local radio was probably the key source of information on Merseyside
                and placed a particular strain on some staff. The Radio Merseyside
      _________ religious-af fairs team -worked -hard to offer -pastoral support“to the
                staff.
>'
          2.14   On the Wednesday a briefing and information sheet was sent out with
                 the parish mailine with details of practical matters (Helplines,
                 Disaster fund etc.; together with some notes on the Bradford Fire
                 Experience, the co-ordination systems being set up, and trauma
                 counselling.  This was also sent out to all other Dioceses with the
                 list of the details of those who had been killed (many of whom came
                 from other parts of the country).    Five Hillsborough Bulletins were
                 sent out within the Diocese (see Appendix 2)




                                             - 3 -
2.15   Soon after the disaster people had begun to visit Anfield and leave
       flowers, football mementos, poems and other items at the 'Shankley
       Gates' (Bill Shankley was a former manager of Liverpool).      By the
       middle of the week the numbers going to the ground had grown
       enormously, the ground was opened, and a major operation was taking
       place to offer support to the tens of thousands who visited each day.
       The Diocesan Youth Officer joined youth workers offering help to
       those visiting the terraces.    The Salvation Army were particularly
       involved. The Liverpool players and their wives spent a lot of time      ,1
       with bereaved families.    Bishop David visited the ground to offer
       thanks to those helping.
                                                                                &
2.16   This was a disaster that seemed to affect everyone in Liverpool. The
       disaster was initially noticed by T.V. and radio commentators as what
       appeared to be a 'crowd disturbance' until the horror unfolded.
       Those at the match reported what they felt as police mis-management,
       ground safety faults, and criticised the handling of the match
       itself.   The initial shock was coupled with anger and the anger
       mounted as sections of the press carried accusations against
       Liverpool fans for drunken and violent behaviour. Some of the press
       were also criticised for their use of photographs of crushed and
       dying fans and for exploiting the anguish of families.         Stories
       circulated of members of the press lying their way into conversations
       with bereaved families, abusing situations, and making up articles,

2.17   Against this background the first funerals were held. There were 18
       'Anglican' funerals in the Diocese although many were shared and/or
       ecumenical services.   Several small parish churches were completely
       full with hundreds outside listening to relays of the services.
       Whilst the Liverpool Echo decided not to send photographers to the
       services other press photographers made a nuisance of themselves.
       Liverpool F.C. players attended all the funerals and the services
       became a focus of the grief of a community.

2.18   A leaflet 'Coping After Hillsborough' had been printed by Social
       Services.   It was based oh a CRUSE pamphlet and versions have been
       used at many disasters. This was quickly distributed to most of the
       churches where there were funerals and generally to parishes. Copies
       of the music for 'You'll Never Walk Alone' (the Liverpool F.C.
       Anthem) were also supplied to several churches.

2.19   Many Memorial Services took place in different parts of the City and
       churches also contributed to the vast array of fund-raising events
       that took place.

2..20 The .-Memorial Service at the Anglican Cathedral took place on_____
      Saturday, 29th April, two weeks after the disaster. The arrangements
      for this not only had to take account of the bereaved and others who ,
      were at the disaster but also the desire of many political, civic,
      and other V.I.P.'s to attend.     With the numbers visiting Anfield
      rising into the hundreds of thousands not only was care needed over
      the limited number of tickets available (and mainly distributed via
      Liverpool F.C.) bit arrangements were made to cope with an expected
      huge number of people who would need to listen to the Service from
      outside.




                                    - 4 -
2.21   The televised Service was ecumenical with Archbishop Worlock giving
       the address. The Service included the singing of "You'll Never Walk
       Alone" led by a solo choirboy, a particularly moving moment. It was
       followed by the dedication of a Hillsborough Memorial on the steps
       outside the Cathedral.     The Service was attended by the Prime
       Minister, representatives of the Royal Family, other dignitaries,
       bereaved families and others.    Only a small number listened from
       outside the building.

2.22   On the following day the gates of Anfield were closed after a short
       'impromptu' service led by Bishop David and other Church leaders.

2.23   Clergy and ministers in the Anfield area continued to offer daily
       back-up to the 'Drop-in Centre' for some months. The Centre moved to
       different premises in October and now serves as a base for the social
       workers and others assisting victims and as a base for various
       Hillsborough victims support groups. The local Vicar is Chairman of
       the Hillsborough Centre Advisory Group and other ministers also
       continue to visit. Church social workers offered counselling back-up
       at the first Liverpool match (at Everton) after the disaster in
       premises made available by the parish church.     Volunteers gathered
       through the B.S.R. continue to staff the Hillsborough Helpline and
       much support from clergy and others for individual families has
       continued.    The Bishops and church leaders have continued with
       various Hillsborough related tasks such as a request for care by
       television companies as the anniversary and inquests approached.

2.24   The first anniversary of the disaster was marked on Easter Day at a
       service at the Anfield ground led by the three Merseyside Church
       Leaders and organised by the Hillsborough Victims Support Group. The
       nearby parish church was open as somewhere where support was offered,
       the clergyman used his house to offer childcare during the service.

2.25   The Hillsborough Centre and others are still finding that people who
       were at the match are asking for help for the first time. Many young
       people, particularly, initially felt they could cope without help are
       finding that not so. Others such as a bereaved mother who returned
       to work quickly after the funeral of her son found she was unable to
       cope as the anniversary and inquests approached. The effects of the
       disaster will be felt by many for a long time to come.


3.     Observations

3.1    Churches directly affected.
       In a disaster-such as -happenedat -Hillsborough— the churches are not"
       just providers of support to others who have been affected, many
       clergy and church members were directly affected having attended the
       match or through having their, own family and friends killed or
       injured. This can lead to them trying to set. aside their own grief
       and emotions while assisting others then having to come to terms with
       their own feelings later. While some parish clergy were under strain
       it is possible that others may have been able to offer more help. In
       particular groups such as the University/Polytechnic Chaplains and
       hospital chaplains offered help which was not taken up.




                                   - 5 -
3.2   Children
      Little attention was given immediately after the disaster to the
      position of young children who were bereaved or in the families of
      those injured. In addition to the 'usual' pain of a tragic death in
      the family after the Hillsborough disaster bereaved families found
      themselves the subject of media attention, had visits from V.I.P.'s
      and had to cope with other difficulties.      The adults were often
      unable to give enough time to younger children.   One clergyman kept
      his own son off school so that he could be with a friend who was the
      young brother of one of the victims.       This was an instinctive
      response but seems an excellent one.

3.3   Shared activity
      Much of the Hillsborough follow-up involved shared activity with
      different churches, local authorities and other organisations. About
      half our survey were involved with shared work with other churches
      and a quarter with Social Service departments.    In many cases this
      led to new links which may be sustained. At a recent conference a
      local authority social worker paid tribute to one Anglican minister
      who had told the Social Services support that was being given to a
      family immediately after the event, and that this support could be
      maintained at that level for a month. Near the end of that period
      the minister introduced the social worker who was able to offer other
      support and the minister was able to reduce (although not stop)
      visits.

      Some of our survey respondents felt that although they managed to
      deal with the funerals and immediate pastoral demands it would have
      been helpful to have been offered cover so that they could have had a
      break shortly afterwards to sort out their own emotions.

3.4   Press
      Although there is a Merseyside Press Service and the Bishop of
      Liverpool's Chaplain serves as his Press Officer, the demands of the
      press can create a major problem.          Several clergy had great
      difficulty dealing with press enquiries (at all hours of day and
      night).    Advice and co-ordination in the arranging of press
      conferences and briefings related to individual funerals might have
      taken the pressure off some of the clergy as well as helping their
      confidence in dealing with pushy reporters.

3.5   Training/Preparation
      Most of those completing our survey felt their training and
       experience enabled them to feel prepared for their involvement.
      However a significant group felt that in the future the need for
------ training-about---the proe.ess -of shock and trauma should-be recognised.
      Many found the training sessions led by Michael Stewart for the
       Centre for Crisis Psychology to be extremely helpful.        Others felt
       training/information should be given on handling the press, working
       in a multi-disciplinary setting with social workers etc., and
       training/showing family and friends of victims/bereaved how to listen
       better (since they not professionals are likely to need to listen
       most).




                                    - 6-
3.6   Information
      The information distributed through the Diocese from B.S.R. and
      others appears to have been useful.       Over three-quarters in our
      survey said they received all the information they required (although
      one felt bombarded with literature).       The leaflet 'Coping after
      Hillsborough' published by the City Council and distributed by the
      B.S.R. was particularly mentioned as helpful, (see Appendix 3)

3.7   Siqjport
      Most of those completing our forms felt they had not needed any
      particular support as a result of their Hillsborough involvement. Of
      the 10 who did need support eight felt they received it, others said
      they were confident support was available if required. The contacts
      from the Bishop of Warrington, were particularly valued and
      Archdeacons, Area Deans, clergy and family are also mentioned as
      sources of support.    There is, however, evidence that for a small
      group of people the need for support was some time after all the
      funerals not during the hectic time immediately after the disaster.
      This was not always picked up.

3.8   Bishops
      The role of the Bishops (and other Merseyside Church leaders) in
      articulating the grief of the community and being a focus for the
      media was well regarded.    In fact many of those completing survey
      forms felt the overall Diocesan response was good. Comments included
      "excellent", "They did all that could have been expected...", "...the
      Diocese's response was quite adequate, offering encouragement to the
      clergy involved that was both caring and ecumenical".

3.9   Cathedral and other Services
      In our survey the Cathedral Services received a great deal         of
      comment. The service at the Metropolitan Cathedral was "a quick and
      sensitive response", "like a Good Friday".       The service at the
      Anglican Cathedral was also highly regarded by many, "superb",
      "wonderfully unstuffy, especially by the inclusion of 'Pie Jesu' and
      'You'll Never Walk Alone' ", "a tremendous comfort to all the people
      of Liverpool", "like an Easter Day and acted to conclude the 'formal'
      time of grief...".   Others, however, felt the service was "used by
      people in high places", "there were too many dignitaries and should
      have had more ordinary people".     Some felt thebereaved were not
      treated as well as they should have been.     It would seem that the
      service was generally well regarded but the criticisms come from
      those most closely involved with bereaved families and from those who
      felt the Service should have been at Anfield not the Cathedral.

------ Many— of— the— individual— funerals— also suffered from1-the need to
       include V.I.P.'s and to, at times, speak over the bereaved to the
       wider community.     How this can best be dealt with is worthy of
       greater study.




                                  - 7-
3.10 Planning
     Several comments were made about the lack of any emergency
     'planning'.  There was no co-ordinating group or meeting within the
     Diocese and Diocesan officers and staff generally acted quickly and
     effectively within their own spheres. However, one Diocesan officer
     commented he was unable to involve himself in a Diocesan response
     through lack of knowledge of what the Diocese was doing. There was
     also some duplication of effort and sane matters not attended to
     because of uncertainty about who was doing what.        Another person
     commented that on the Sunday after the disaster he was struggling to
     work from home when it would have been much better if Church House
     could have been opened and the telephone lines staffed.

3.11 Ecunenical Co-operation
     A great deal happened ecumenically.      Church leaders' activities,
     local services, and some funerals were strongly ecumenical. In fact
     we have probably reached the point where it is now expected that such
     public activity will generally be ecumenical to a greater or lesser
     extent.    It is perhaps worth noting that very little of the
     ecumenical co-operation related to MARCEA and the formal ecumenical
     structures. For instance it was not possible to mobilise and use an
     ecumenical information system.


4.    Wider Questions

4.1   Apart from the need for an immediate response the disaster also
      raised for many people a series of wider questions which it is beyond
      the scope of this report to consider. Many, however, are worthy of
      reflection and further discussion. Amongst the many wider questions
      are:

i     What should be offered to bereaved and victims of the many smaller
      disaster that happen?

ii    After Hillsborough many men cried and grieved not just for
      Hillsborough victims but also allowed themselves to grieve for lost
      wives, children etc.     What part can churches play to help men
      recognise, show, and cope with grief/loss?

iii   Do we give adequate thought to the need for children and young people
       to be supported, grieve, etc. after a death?

iv    Have we under-estimated the community role in grieving and offering
       support to the bereaved. Do current funeral practices need looking
------ at?-----------------------------------------------------------------

v     Can the 'religious' community responses shown at Anfield and
       elsewhere be dismissed as mere folk religion or should they be taken
       seriously? If so how?

vi    What is the role of a disaster fund beyond enabling people to 'do
       something' after a disaster? If the Fund increases the disparity in
       treatment between those affected by a 'major disaster' and a local
       disaster does this matter?



                                   - 8 -
    5.    Recommendations

    5.1   Emergency Committee

The Diocese should have an Emergency Standing Committee. This should be a
small group vested with the power and authority to co-ordinate the Diocesan
response to a disaster or major incident.   It will involve a small number
of people who have planned how the communication and co-ordination systems
should operate.   They would provide the Anglican contact point for any
ecumenical Disaster Planning.     Membership should include a Bishop, an
Archdeacon, Diocesan Secretary, Communications Officer, a B.S.R. Officer.
A proposal is described in Appendix 4.

    Recoamendation:      An Emergency Standing Committee should be established as
                        a Standing Comnittee of Bishop's Council along the lines
                        proposed in Appendix 4.

    5.2   Emergency Planning

    The Merseyside Joint Services Emergency Planning Committee have agreed in
    principle that they would be happy to link clergy into the emergency
    planning process and to recognise the church with a role of ministry at the
    scene of a major incident, to bereaved, families etc., and in the provision
    of buildings.    Other Diocese are developing such plans.     However, the
    emergency services will not work denominationally. They need an ecumenical
    contact and ecumenically agree procedures.      If the churches are to be
    involved in such planning it can include procedures for inter­
    denominational co-ordination and communication not just the relationship to
    emergency services.

    Recommendation:     The Diocese expresses its willingness to seek to agree a
                         major incident plan with its MARCEA partners and the
                         relevant emergency services and asks the Diocesan
                         Emergency Standing Conmittee to report in due course on
                         implementation of such a plan.

    5.3   Press/Media

    There is a need to define the roles the Merseyside Press Service, Diocesan
    Communications Officer, Bishop's Press Officer and others (e.g. Livewire
    Editor) should play.   This should include the task of training/preparing
    clergy to deal with press enquiries and press conferences as well as in any
    actual response to a major incident.

Recommendation:     The Diocesan Communications Officer/Media Gnmmi t-tep. be
asked to consider these matters and report them through
-




                   the Emergency Standing Committee.

    5.4   Training

A number of matters are mentioned that may be considered for inclusion in
training programmes.

Recommendation:          The Director of Continuing Ministerial Education and the
                         Lay Training Committee? be asked to consider if training
                         and information on trauma, helping others to listen,
                         press relationship and working in multi-disciplinary
                         settings should be added to the training they offer.




                                       - 9 -
5.5   Funerals

The difficulties associated with high profile funerals and memorial
services could usefully be looked at. Experience of the services after the
Hillsborough disaster could usefully be compared with experiences
elsewhere.

Recommendation:    The Board of Ministry be asked to consider if it might
                   arrange for the sharing of experiences and prepare same
                   reflection and advice. It should also consider if the
                   MARCEA Department of Ministry might be involved.

5.6   Wider Questions

Most of the 'wider questions' are not specifically Anglican. Encouragement
should be given to some discussion by ecumenical and other bodies.

Recommendation:    The MARCEA be asked if it would help facilitate
                   reflection on some of the wider questions arising from
                   the disaster.     The General Synod Board for Social
                   Responsibility be asked if it would facilitate some
                   reflection at a national level.

5.7   General

Recommendation:    The work of all who have responded to the needs of those
                   affected by the Hillsborough Disaster is to be affirmed
                   and where appropriate encouragement and support should
                   be given to help activities to continue for as long as
                   required.
Appendix 1

                                                                 THE   HILLSBOROUGH   DISASTER   -   LESSONS   FOR   THE   CHURCHES



                                                       A Word of Warning

                                                                    This paper is an attempt to review how the churches responded to
                                                        the Hillsborough disaster and to draw some conclusions which may prove helpful
                                                       Ito those attempting to plan for the sadly inevitable day when another disaster
                                                        strikes.     The lessons are not meant to be prescriptive.   Disasters, by
                                                        their very nature, produce chaos.    People are in shock, victims, mourners,
                                                       emergency services and helpers.    You cannot plan where the disaster is likely
Hie Hillsborough Disaster - Lessons for the Churches    to take place.   Lockerbie showed us that.   You cannot organise out the
                                                        insecurities, competitiveness and emotional needs of those involved.   However,
                                                        I do believe several simple steps should be taken by church leaders to ensure
                                                        that a very basic organisation is in place, equipped to play the critical role
                                                       which clergy and trained laity can contribute at the point of tragedy.


                                                       The Hillsborough Story

                                                                   My involvement was one of those strange accidents. The television
                                                       happened to be on and, as a football supporter, I had some interest in the
                                                       progress of the semi-finals.    The seriousness of what was happening began to
                                                       emerge and, as a fairly new Archdeacon, I tried to discover if there were any
                                                       plans in place for such an emergency.    Diocesan Bishop, not unusually, out;
                                                       fellow Archdeacon unaware of any plans.   I then contacted the rural deans,
 ofR ? £ 2 S - bijVen* Stephen Lowe, Archdeacon        hospital chaplains and other clergy who were at home and made an arrangement
                                                       to meet some clergy at a vicarage near enough to the ground to be accessible,
             *     on fche immediate response          but where our parking would not be a problem.   By a combination of a lift and
     the church at Hillsborough and Sheffield.         walking we arrived at around A p.m.   We found the Club Chaplain (a Methodist
                                                       minister), who was able to give us the first hard information; at least fifty
                                                       or sixty dead.   The police are going to co-ordinate the disaster response
                                                       from Hammerton Road Police Station and would like us there.    It was over a
                                                       mile there and we could get no police help to get us there.    There was a
                                                       sense of dazed shock, a strange quietness, as thousands moved home, so we ran.

                                                                   At Hammerton Road Station a few more clergy were already gathering,
                                                       including the local vicar.    The police were not yet organised, but asked us
                                                       if there was anywhere immediately adjacent which could be used as a Relatives
                                                       Reception Centre.   The Vicar suggested the Boys' Club opposite the Police
                                                       Station, which we opened up.   It was one of those youth centres that have
                                                       been ravaged by years of aggressive wear; one accessible telephone, poor
                                                       toilets, not enough chairs and tables, a large hall and a number o f other rooms
                                                       off narrow stairways.   More chairs had to be fetched, but there was no way of
                                                       making the drab surroundings any more welcoming.   Social Services had also
                                                       arrived and their senior officer and I recognised that it was up to us to try
                                                       and induce some order out of the impending chaos.   As clergy and laity from
                                                       other denominations began to arrive, it was also important that they were
                                                       prepared to give me the authority to work with police and social services so
                                                       that our resources were being deployed as rationally as possible.'




                                                                                                                                          Appendix
                                                                   Our first major problem was a broadcast appeal :for helpers -
                                                       social workers and others to come to the B o y s ’ Club. At the same time as the
                                                       first enquiring friends and relatives were arriving, hordes of volunteers
                                                       arrived, social workers, psychiatrists, probation officers, bereavement
                                                       counsellors and people of good-will.   Clergy were also beginning to become
                                           -2 -
       over-abundant.    Looking after those in jneed, giving them space and support,     dreaded blue doors.   One clergyman, who was also Chairman of the local branch
       was in danger of becoming secondary to the task of managing the log-jara of        of Cruse, took an inspired organising role in making lists of people as they
       helpers.   Social Services began to take] names and send some home, also taking    arrived and then went with their ’p a ir’ to wait in the warm in the ancillary
       offers of accommodation.    The local clergy found that their access to            rooms to the gym.    His red-caped (a blanket) figure became a focal point
       telephones at local vicarages was an asset and took people there to ring           for enquiries and provided some security as a someone clearly in control.
       relatives.   A psychiatric team took ovdr one room to do work with the bereaved,
       but were frustrated for lack of clien.t$J    What the uncertain enquirer wanted
                                                                                                      As news spread of the body identification process at the ground,
      Twas a quiet supportive relationship which asked, nothing of them.    We tried to
                                                                                          more 'ministerial* helpers poured in.     Readers, Cruse counsellors, Salvation
       attach a social worker and clergyman to each enquiring friend or small group,
                                                                                          Army officers in abundance, as well as an assortment of clergy.     I was aware
       At this stage we were seeing people who had been at the match, some who knew
                                                                                          that some were ill-equipped for the harrowing process that took place beyond
       rationally that their friends were dead, or seriously injured, but who wanted
                                                                                          the blue doors.     I have no doubt that the clergy who handled that situation
       to know for sure.     Two coaches pulled up outside, waiting for information,
                                                                                          well, offered something which was specific to them.     Maybe it was a spiritual
       full of Liverpool supporters.    I went to one, a colleague to another;   fifty
                                                                                          perspective, an offer of prayer at the appropriate moment.    All were accustomed
       people sitting,.silent, stunned, waiting for news.      I told them what I could
       and said a short prayer.     I'm still not sure whether that was right or          to death: most had seen and touched dead bodies.      Clergy and social workers
       appreciated.                                                                       had learned that it was not words that counted, but an embracing, supportive
                                                                                          presence.   Clergy were good at being a presence and talking just sufficiently
                   Information was scarce.     We had been given an Inspector to act as   to those in shock.    The occasional bible was soon put away and maybe it was
      our Liaison Officer with the police.    lie seemed to know almost less than we      the evangelical clergy who learned the most.    But we all learned quickly as
      did about what was happening.    The social workers were making lists, the W.R.V.   we were doing the job.    The clergy were not afraid to touch the dead and the
      tea and sandwiches, and the clergy wondering if .they were being any use.    I      living.   The social workers were able to meet the physical needs, although
      was reliant on messages front one or two helpful itinerant clergy who were          there were instances of families spending the night in clergy homes.    It was
      moving between the two hospitals and the Boys’ Club.     I was told more help was   often the clergy (male and female) who were closest when the green bag was
      needed at the Northern General Hospital so some were despatched up there.           opened to reveal the often little-marked and youthful bodies.    It was good
      Queues for the telephone were endless.     Social Servicea produced two portable    that there was an opportunity to hold and touch the bodies, however briefly.
      •phones for their use; that one piece of equipment would have made my task so       During the following days, the glass window at the mortuary that separated
f\3   much easier.    The police eventually told' us that all the bodies were at the      mourners from their loved ones proved a serious and painful barrier for relatives.
 I    ground and they wanted us to take a team of clergy and social workers to help
      families and friends as they identified the bodies.     We also had to make sure                 Five other matters of note during this period, which lasted through
      that there were sufficient clergy and s scial workers left to receive coaches       the night until 6 a.m. when about sixty-five bodies had been identified.     First,
      and cars coming from Liverpool who were probably going to be diverted to a          denominational ism mattered little, apart from the need to deploy more Roman
      second (and much better equipped) recep tion centre in a church hall about a        Catholic clergy where Catholic families requested it.     We tried to gather
      quarter of a mile away,    I chose an ecumenical group of ten to join a social      some indication of church links at first contact.    With the higher than
      work team of a similar size     There was a clear contract that we would attach     average Catholic representation amongst the Liverpool supporters, and the
      one of each to each set of relatives/friends unless they requested otherwise.
                                                                                          shortage of Catholic clergy, we had difficulties in always providing a Catholic
      Social workers or clergy who were not prepared to work this way were clearly
      told that this was the arrangement.                                                 priest when requested.     On the odd occasion ministry was more important than
                                                                                          denomination and an Anglican priest played the part.    Secondly, it was vital
                  The bodies were in the gym underneath the North Stand.     It had       that someone was keeping an eye on the carers.    The burden which some of them
      been divided into three, one area for the bodies, one for the police, and one       carried, in an environment where you constantly saw and heard the screams of
      for clergy, social workers and for the interviewing of relatives after              recognition and bereavement, was enormous.     There is a limit as to how much
      identification.   Photographs had been taken of the faces of the bodies and         any carer can take and it was important to try and recognise when that point
      these were displayed on a board just in side a secondary entrance into the gym ‘s   was reached.     It was easy for clergy to get seduced into feeling "Here is a
      storage area.   There were a couple of chairs here where relatives could sit        real role for me.    At last I'm doing something nobody else can do." and to
      after photographic identification while the bodies were being wheeled on a          avoid recognising the toll it was-taking.     By 3 and 4 a.m. I was sending
      trolley to a screened area just inside the gym where formal indentification         people home also in the belief that the flow of relatives was ceasing.      A
      took piace.                                                                         busload arrived from the reception centre with an attachment of social workers
                                                                                          and clergy, threatening our by then smoothly operating system.     At 5 a.m. we
                  When we arrived, the poli ce wanted us to attach our support after      were short-handed, the few remaining, including myself, having to carry quite
      the identification had taken place,     This was clearly unacceptable and the       a load.    People who had been desperately seeking survivors at the hospitals
      police quickly learned that we were mo:st helpful if there was an established       were arriving to find their worst fears confirmed.     Hopes dashed were
      relationship before the identification process began.    So we attached our         sometimes the most difficult to handle.
      'pairs' as relatives arrived at the gr<bund.    The second piece of learning was
      that it was totally unreasonable for th<e police to expect grieving relatives                   Thirdly, the working relationships with police and S ocia l Services
      to queue for- hours in the freezing temperatures waiting to go through the
                                                                                          improved immensely as the evening wore on.    We began to respect and value
                                                                                          each other, even support and care for one another.    One police officer, who
                                                                                                                                  -   5   ~




                                                                                            of the struggle to minister adequately.   The healing process went on for many
      was right at the heart of the identification process, was relieved after the
                                                                                            weeks and months, but, with the Rural Deans keeping a watching brief, the
      clergy pointed out how much stress h e w i s under.  We learned from each other
      and began to see one another as human b< ings with individual needs and gifts         Anglican clergy coped remarkably well.
      behind the uniforms which often produce the wish to slot people into
                                                                                                        Overall the ministry seemed to be effective.   Many good relationships
      stereotyped images.
                                                                                            were built with the bereaved-   Many crossed the Pennines to take funerals, or
                                                                                            at least take part in them.   One church close to the Hallamshire Hospital
                   fourthly, the role of the Bishop was important.     With his Press
                                                                                            provided care for relatives of those in intensive care; meals, overnight
      Officer (a vital adjutant on an occasion like this) he came, saw, listened and
                                                                                            st^ys, hospitality and support were laid on for them outside but close to the
      went.    Sunday followed and the need for a Cathedral event of some kind was
                                                                                            hospital.   Contacts with Liverpool clergy were made and between the dioceses.
      obvious.     We discussed it briefly and fixed it as the need for some focus
                                                                                            Debriefing with police and Social Services was worthwhile.   All. mourners,
      of prayer and worship, if only for thosejinvolved as carers, was going to be
                                                                                            Club and other agencies, seemed satisfied that we had played an important role.
      substantial.     It was good for those who were working so hard to know that he
      had been, seen and shared,    The Archbishop of York fulfilled' a similar role
      on the Tuesday following.

                                                                                            The Lessons
                  Finally, we later learned how| good an environment we had established
      in many respects for the identification process.     I returned a few weeks ago
                                                                                            1.    A simple major incident plan for the involvement of the churches should
      and was struck how much space we had in the gym over against the facilities at
                                                                                                   be agreed with the police and Social Authorities.
      the mortuary.   There was a need for spac 5 - a space to touch, to weep and not
      to be hurried.   The gym provided that,    The medico-legal centre, as it is          2.    Such a plan should be ecumenical in practice and should carry the authority
      known, despite the support and experience of the staff, could not provide
      nearly as well.                                                                              of the church leaders.

                                                                                            3«    There should be one recognised church co-ordinator for all the churches,
                  An hour or so at home, and then I had to think if the rota we had
                                                                                                   for a major incident plan, who should b e a t Bishop's staff level, or
      arranged, with the help of the Rural DeanJ for the medico—legal centre was in
                                                                                                   equivalent in other denominations.    He should be the first to be called
      place for its operating at 9 a.m;    We needed clergy there for the rest of the
                                                                                                   out, but should have two deputies to cover for absence.
      week until the bodies were removed.    I went to the hospitals to see the
u>    chaplains.   At the Northern General the ljqad had fallen on a new but able
                                                                                            4.    This co-ordinator should have a call-phone and an already established
     woman deacon assistant chaplain;    the full-time chaplain was in Australia.
                                                                                                   network of other clergy whom he can begin to trigger.    Rural Deans,
     She had suffered some of the outrageous treatment that some male clergy dish
                                                                                                   Circuit Superintendents, are obviously key figures in this process.
     out to their female counterparts, ignoring! her and moving without reference to
     hospital staff to the bedsides of the injured.     Her Rural Dean, supposedly
                                                                                            5.    Those at second tier level - Rural Deans, etc* - should identify clergy
     on sabbatical, had been there in the end t<> provide the support and authority
                                                                                                   (men and women) and other lay ministers who are likely to have the skills
     she needed.    Denominationalism was more marked at the hospitals, each chaplain
                                                                                                   and stamina for such work.   They must not be afraid not to call out some
     already having clearly delineated responsitilities and authority.      The Royal
     Hallamshire seemed to have survived the ordeal a.little better, the Hospital                  clergy.
     Chaplain seemed exhausted but content that procedures had worked reasonably
                                                                                            6.    There should be no general (broadcast or otherwise) appeals for help and
     well.    On to the ground, which was almost Ueserted apart from the media.
                                                                                                   those who turn up without being asked may have to be sent away.
     There were no expectations at this stage of the need for ministry amongst
     supporters at the ground, but it was necessjry later to support the Club Chaplain
                                                                                            7.    The right environment for reception centres and temporary mortuaries are
     in the provision of a continuous rota for clergy to be present at the ground
                                                                                                   essential for pastoral care during the first 24 hours after an incident.
     for the following week.    The need for ritual mourning, a focus for the pain,
     hadn't yet emerged.                                                                           As part of the major incident plan, premises in each neighbourhood suitable
                                                                                                   for such purposes should be identified with the police and local authority.
                                                                                                   In a large city, one such centre every mile or so should be adequate.
                 The week held much in continued work
                                                  ___ _____
                                                       with the bereaved, enormous
     media interest and the need to be caring for those who had done the caring.
                                                                                            9.    Feelings of helplessness and chaos have to be accepted - they cannot be
     On the Tuesday evening, all those who had helped in the clergy teams in
                                                                                                  organised away.    Nevertheless, authority has to be clear and communication
     reception centre, mortuary, or hospitals were invited to Bishopscroft to listen
     to the experiences of a minister who had beeti through a similar ordeal at the               as good as possible.
     Kegworth aircrash.   Then, in small groups, we told our stories with enablers
     who had not been directly involved.   We didn't allow our feelings of inadequacy,      9.    Proper support has to be ensured for those in the hospitals, as well as on
     helplessness and guilt to spill over into blaming all and sundry (including                   the scene.   Long term care should also be offered by local churches for
     ourselves) that things didn't go better than they did.    The final simple gathering         relatives of those in intensive care.
     for prayer and quiet in the Bishop's chapel, most Or US sitting on the floor
                                                                                            10.   Space 'needs to be provided for listening to the experiences, releasing the
     because of*the Crowd, was a fitting climax to an important evening in the
     process of healing.   Our belief in a God whd somehow loves and sustains us                  emotions and focussing the prayers.
     through such terrible events was at the centr e of our prayer that evening and
     Appendix 2      Example of the Information Bulletin circulated to parishes.-



     B o a r d for
                                          HILLSBOROUGH
     S o c ia l
     Responsibility                       INFORMATION

ORIENTATION COURSE: Half-day presentations on post-trauma stress and the
long-term effects of a disaster are being put on at Bootle Town Hall on
Wednesday 24th May. The presentation at 10.00 a.m. and 2.00 p.m. are for
those from churches and voluntary organisations who have been involved in
contact with those affected by the disaster. Please let me know as soon as
possible if you or someone from your- parish may wish to attend.     (This
information supercedes that in the last information sheet).
HILLSBOROUGH ADVICE CENTRE:    The Advice Centre which operated from the
Vernon Sangster Sports Centre in Priory Road, Anfield, has now moved to
temporary premises in the Sports Centre Car Park. In due course a 'modular
building (like a site office) is to be moved to the car park as premises
for the advice centre for up to two years. The Revd. Godfrey Butland is
co-ordinating the inter-denominational team of clergy who link with the
advice centre. The Centre remains open 9.00 a.m. to 9.00 p.m.
Other 'drop-in* centres have been established at Kirkby House. James Holt
Ave., Kirkby (11.00 a.m. - 9.00 p.m.) and at the St. John s Ambulance
Building (Webster House), St. Johns Road, Waterloo (open Mon., Wed., Frid.,
2.00 p.m. - 8.00 p.m.)
HELPLINE: The main Helpline is still operating 24 hours per day and is
likely to continue for at least a year.
LONG TERM PLANS:   Bridget Fann, Director of Catholic Social Services is
part of a planning group with the local authorities which is proposing the
setting up of a Regional Support Unit to run the Helpline, the information
database and to provide specialists to train and support those involved in
the follow-up.
CO-ORDINATION:   I am continuing as a member of the Voluntary Sector Co­
ordinating Group which is co-ordinating the work of churches and voluntary
groups and the statutory agencies.    Groups like COMPASS, Catholic Social
Services etc. are now receiving referrals for counselling, many groups
including the BSR/churches have done shifts staffing the Helpline.    Help
has also been provided at St. Luke's, Everton and elsewhere.
DONATIONS: Apart from the main Hillsborough Disaster Fund (a/c 205 65555,
sort code 20-51-01) Liverpool Round Table have a charitable fund set up to
help organisations responding to the disaster (Liverpool Round Table
Hillsborough Appeal c/o Pannell Kerr Forster, Chartered Accountants, 52,
Mount Pleasant, Liverpool, L3. Tel (051)-708-8232).______________________ _
LEAFLETS:      I still have spare copies of the Coping After Hillsborough
leaflets.     Please let me know if you want some.
REVIEW:   In due course I hope to have a meeting to review how clergy and
churches have been affected by the disaster and what we might learn for the
future. I would be pleased to hear comments from individuals or Chapters.
Hillsborough Helpline (051)-225-3413/4.
Law Society Rwne-line (051)-236-6998.
Hillsborough Advice Centre - Vernon Sangster Sports Centre (Car Park)
                             Priory Road, Anfield. 9.00 a.m. - 9.00 p.m.
B.S.R. (051)-709-5586.
Diocesan Youth Officer (051)-709-9722

Stephen Martin,                                                      CHURCH HOUSE.
Director of Social & Community Work                                  1. HANOVER STREET,
                                                                     LIVERPOOL L1 3DW.
9.5.89.
                                                                     051 7 0 9 5 5 86
                                      - 14 -
                                                                                                                               Appendix 3
                                                                                            Leaflet widely circulated after the disaster.




                                                                                                                W H E R E T O F I N D HELP:
     WHEN TO SEEK HELP
                                                                                                                                                                                            COPING AFTER
       FamHymdfrlendsmey help you all they can.Sutyou may feel the need for
   .'( Mk ciA oA r (Mi, but en)y «
      «*>u should ask for help Ifc
                                   nk.

     o feu fed *ou can't handle your deep feelings.
                                                                                   help.

                                                                                                          HELPLINE
     •    feei you « * r t gettkng back together M f a period of time.
      • \bu continue lo fed tens*, confused, empty or echausted.
        'ibu Km nightmares and can't sleep.
                                                                                                      A 24 h o u r te le p h o n e h elp lin e h a s b e e n le t up. Phone;            HILLSBOROUGH
      • Vbu'v* n»one lo lhare your feelings with.
      o Vbur relationships sufler, or you dev*top actual problems.
      • \bu Have accidents.
     o \bu drink. smoke. or take drug* lo e c m
     o tout work uiHctv                                                                                                                                                                     Information to help anyone affected by th e
     o Otheri close loyou are not recovering.                                                                                                                                                       * Hillsborough tragedy
     t««n Myou^hdplnfeihen. you could become emoHonaNyandphytlcaM|mhau«Md.
                                                                                                                                                                                            Iw to d by Sod.if Sm i'c cs Dcp.irfnienfs in the N orth VVHf
     Don't hesitate lo seek help No problemls too big or smaN lor us lohelpyou deal with.
     Uwione need* help—ItWnoihlng lobe ashamed of, Anythlngyouseywlll be totally
     confidentlaL
     RNAUXKEMEMRK—to u 'n the same person you wore before this tragedy
                                       HCLf S/MUtAMi.


                                                                                                              (051) 225 3413
                                                                                                                or 225 3414
                                                                                                     The helpline Is staffed by trained and experienced social worker*.
                                                                                                     They will helpw ith m aterial p roblem s o r Ifyou are up set and [ust
                                                                                                                                   s » o r any h e lp you are given will be
                                                                                                     w ant to talk. A nything you say
                                                                                                        mP>letefy
                                                                                                           l      private and confidential. N o problem Is too big o r loo
                                                                                                     small for lis to help wHh.




                                   COPING AFTER HILLSBOROUGH
 Somebody you know may ha««died or been hurt at Hillsborough, feu may hno been              PHYSICAL ANO MENIAL FEELINGS                                                             S U ffO tf         — touHneedotherpeople'sphytkalafldemotlonalhelp.Oont
 at the match or Mwwhat happened on television. \bure*perlenceviosa««ry personal                                                                                                                          reject H, It can heip to talk lo others who have had simitar
                                                                                             Even If you haw nl felt theae emotions, your body might raectlo the crlslfc This can
 ont- tMt we hope that this leaflet will help you lo understand how other people have        aw n happen months later.
 reactedIn similar situations. KwMoho snow you how you can help yourself lo begin                                                                                                    ntrw icr          — Sometimes youwill fust need lobe alone,or wtth your family
                                                                                             Some common problems are tiredness, sleeplessness had dreams, toss of memory                                andfrlendi
                                                                                            ,-orconcentre!ion, dUalness, palpitations, shaklng,dtfflcully In breathing,choking In
  EVERYONE FEELS THESE THINGS                                                                throetandchest, nausea, diarrhoea,muscular tenston.vwhtehmeyleadloheedache*,            But remember, qwsractMty, or letting your feelings remain numb, wiff delay your
                                                                                             baekacheitfnecfcachei, dragging in the MomtvmenstrualtfMrdem change InseRual            memory The pain of the wound wM bad toheaJ(r£.\bu mayown come out of this
 FUM                 — of damage looursehos and those wolov*                                                                                                                         wiser and stronger.
                    — of being left alone
                    « d b n » U n |4 Mm                                                     FAMILY ANO FRIENDS                          .                                            THINGS TO D O . . . AND NOT TO DO
                    ~ of something similar happening again
                                                                                            Vbu might make new friendi >1 4 m u lt of thetwgedy. ButH can also put a strain on         DONT bottle up your faell ngl, Make sure you eapress your fw ot Ions.
 H linrsSH tSS       - What ca* you do In the lace of such a tragedy*                       ealsBng relationships. Ybu might feel you're not getting enough support or that you        DON'T mnId talking about what happened. ThinIt about w h t happened and talk
 C fiCf              — ter death, injury and lo»i                                           can't gho as much help as other people need, m might drink mor* or uso drugs.                       It oretwhh others
 GUILT               — for being alfc* for not being hurt                                                                                                                              DONT e»pect the memorial to w is h —they wBlstoywMi you tor a long time.
                                                                                            MAKING YOUR FEELINGS EASIER I D BEAK
 SHAMt               — ter seeming helpless or emotional                                                                                                                              These are things you AmM try lo do:*
                                                                                            NUMJNBS            —*Hjrmindm%ht notbeabietotakae*frythlnglnatonce.At
 AMCtt               — at what hes happened and at who alloMod It lo happen                                      But youm%ht<aelnum^and>he tragicewentsmayewnieem                      o Utyouf chlkfron share your feelings and «pw fth e< r own. They may be feeling
                    - WHY MET                                                                                    unreal. Nopla lorrmlmsi wrongly see Hsiinumbnets as either              much the seme as you.
 MCMT                — of people you knew and towd                                                               “being strong" or even “not earing".                                ' e nice time lo rest, andbe with friends,
 HO*                 - for the future                                                       ACTIVITY           —ft* beetlo keep actho.H«lplngoth«n mighthelp you. Butdorft             o Telt friends, hm fy or counsellors how you feel,
                                                                                                                 owrdo It—Itcould detract fromthe help you need foryourself.
  Everyone has Ihese feelings. They a rt especially powerful when people haw died In                                                                                                   o As you begin lo recover, keep your Hfe as normal as poitibte.
                                                                                            KAU 7Y             - W shawto come totermswHMhe reality of a tragedy su ch u
  circumstances Bfcethose at HHtiboroutf>.And even stronger when you depended on                                -HflkborougfcCoingio the funeralrfoJng 10      IIhappened.          ~•'SeSSlfieclM cfienBecEioShool. let Aem carry on as nommlty as postiblei
- thepenon whohardled'Hyour ittaiteffthlp w&golngthrough a OacfpTtch or Wyou~                                    wM help you to do this.
  had other probt?»s already
                                                                                            V U X tN C n o va - Gradually you wM need lo talk and think about your                                                                                        wstress. Be
  lotting these leefcngs come out Is part of the natural healing process. Ildoesn'rtnean                         t pertonces. >buHprobaMy dream about them loa Children
  you wiHlose your self conttol, but If you try lo stop them coming out you could end                            maywant lodra* aboutthk event,o r      play garnet about ft.
  up feeling even worse. 0 >*ng wM help you lo cop*, too.
              c



           A 2 4 h o u r H elpline has been s e t up: (051) 2 2 5 3413 or 2 2 5 3414




                                                                                                                                        - 15 -
Diocesan Emergency Standing Committee                                   Appendix 4

In the event of a major emergency none of the existing groups within            the
Diocesan structure contains the appropriate membership and authority to         co­
ordinate the Diocessan response. The need is for a small group able to          co­
ordinate information and activity, have the authority to make decisions         and
(if necessary) spend money.

Role
A)     Preparation
       to provide a link to the development of an (ecumenical) major
       incident plan and to be responsible for its implementation and
       continuing development.
       to ensure the dissemination of information to Anglican clergy and
       churches in the Diocese related to a major incident plan and its own
       role
       to co-ordinate training and preparation activity that may be required
       on an Anglican basis.
       to make arrangements which would enable premises, telephones,
       administrative assistance, clothing etc. to be available in the event
       of an emergency.
       to do such other preparation, possibly including participation in
       exercises, as may be required.

B)     In   the event of an emergency
       to   co-ordinate the flow of information within the Anglican churches,
       to   provide the contact for ecumenical sharing.
       to   ensure that press and media services are available as necessary,
       to   co-ordinate the allocation of tasks and roles as may be necessary.

Membership
The intention is that the Group should provide a focus for co-ordinating
Bishops, Church House staffs, press/media links, ecumenical links, external
contacts, idssemination of information and the activities and support of
parish churches and clergy. The membership might be:
      A Bishop
      An Archdeacon
      The Diocesan Secretary
      Cornnunications Officer
      A B.S.R. Officer.

This group may wish to also involve one or more of the following - an Area
Dean, a hospital Chaplain, a member of the Cathedral Staff, a parish
incumbent, others with relevant role/experience (e.g. Fire Brigade
Chaplain). Once the ecumenical major incident plan is established and
sys terns- and roles have been worked— out— the— D.E. S.G.— sheu Id— on ly— need— to
meet 2 or 3 times per year to review changes to personnel, discuss changes
to procedure etc.

Finance
The D.E.S.C. should not involve significant expenditure although there may
be costs associated with training, circulation of plans/papers etc.,
occasional meetings/conferences/exercises, and (if required) the provision
of any equipment such as protective clothing or telephones that may be
necessary. Most of these items might be absorbed within other budgets or a
small provision of perhaps £300 might be initially allocated.   If further
sums were needed as a result of the development of an ecumenical major
incident plan this would need to be discussed separately.

Structure
The D.E.S.C. should be a Standing Committee of the Bishop's Council.

                                      - 16 -
Heavenly Father, look in your mercy on those
who   still    suffer   as   a   result of    the
Hillsborough tragedy, whether from physical
disability or mental distress.      Bless all who
give   of   their   time    and   energy in   the
continuing    process   ofcaring   and making
whole, through him who brings healing to all
creation, Jesus Christ our Lord.       Amen.


Prayer used at the Service held at Anfield on
the First Anniversary of Hillsborough.
