 BM/89260
                      DEPARTMENT OF J1EALTH A2vD SOCIAL SECURITY
                         Richmond House, 73 Whitehall, Lor.don SWlA 2NS
    V '. ?
                                       Telephone 01-210 3000

                           From tite Secretary <?f State for Social Services




POH<l)1659/153


K Coombs Esq
Leader Liverpool City Council
PO BOX 8 8
Muncipal Buildings
LIVERPOOL
L69 2BH                                                      " * J U r i E 1989




Thank you for your letter of 6 M a y about additional financial
support for direct service provision and for the Regional Unit you
propose to establish to provide and co-ordinate continuing care”1in -
the aftermath of the Hillsborough•tragedy.    You also wrote to_
Jcphn Moore, Secretary of .State for Social Security and to
Nicholas Ridley Secretary of State for the-Environment, Please ..
accept this as a reply to all three letters.

The Department's Social Services Inspectorate have kept me informed
of the action taken by the local social services departments
together in the wake of the tragedy and I know that the Chief
Inspector has written personally to all the Social Services
Directors in appreciation of the remarkable efforts made by them and
their staff.

The precise response to a tra^e^y- of this sort needs to be decided
on the spot, on the basis of a careful examination of needs.   Xy
Department has no power to make additional resources available to
local authorities for this purpose.   However, I understand from
Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Environment, that under a
model scheme designed to deal with extra-ordinary costs arising from
emergencies, (the Bellwin Scheme), the Government has provided
special financial assistance to local authorities in certain
circumstances.

The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local
Authority Associations and provide for assistance towards the
immediate and additional costs of dealing with an emergency once
expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond which local authorities would
normally be expected to budget for.  in the case of the last use of
the Scheme, following the Great Storm of 1987, that threshold was
(for Counties and Metropolitan Districts) set at the exclusive
product of a l.op rate.
If you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind,
Nicholas fiidley is prepared to consider a detailed and fully costed
application (though at first sight it looks as if the level of
expenditure needed would be substantially below the likely threshold
for the authorities involved), I know that he will keep me informed
of events if you do decide to pursue this possibility.

The Government has, of course# as you mention, already rasde a
contribution of £500/000 to the Disaster Fund to help those most
closely affected by the Disaster

Copies of this letter go to. John Moore and Nicholas Ridley,




                                                    KENNETH CLARKE
Dear Secretary of State,

                           Hillsborough Tragedy

     Since Hillsborough seven Local Authorities in Merseyside, plus Cheshire
and Lancashire, together with Mersey Regional Health Authority, Merseyside
Probation Service and numerous voluntary organisations have been providing a co­
ordinated response.   On Saturday last, the 29th April, the Leaders of these seven
local authorities and the Leaders of Nottinghamshire and Sheffield Councils met to
consider a joint approach to the provision of services which will continue to be
necessary for several years to come.

     The attached report, prepared under the independent Chairmanship of the
Professor of Social Work at Manchester University, was agreed in principle. The
report recommends the establishment of a Regional Unit to provide a core of common
services, including:-

     i)       A Helpline to receive calls from anywhere day and night;

     ii)      The Co-ordination of counselling services both within and outside
               the nine local authorities provided by voluntary as well as
               statutory agencies;

     iii)      A Database capable of dealing with all requests for assistance and
               offers of help;

     iv)      A continuing training and staff support programme   in this previously
               unfamiliar area of work;

     v)       The management of media contacts and publicity.


     It was agreed to reconvene the meeting following exploration of all possible
sources of funding.   Recognizing that services will need to extend beyond these
nine local authorities and be available nationally on a scale not previously
experienced by an authority or group of authorities, our first but not only approach
for funding is addressed to Government.   Further work is being undertaken to approach
private industry, charitable bodies and E.E.C.   Already the local social services
authorities in the North West have agreed to jointly sponsor an additional training
officer.

     The Department, we anticipate, would wish to be associated with this
initiative and through Government may be able to make finance available to fund the
Regional Unit at a cost of (£350,000 per year) for a period of three years. Within
all the participating local authority areas it will also be necessary to take urgent
action to strengthen staffing in order to directly help individuals and their families,
according to the scale of the problems which they are facing. As yet these costs
have not been fully assessed but when aggregated are unlikely to be less than £1 millior
per year, spread across the North west.   The Government we hope‘would wish to be aware
of this and may consider making resources available to assist in direct service
provision as well as the establishment of the Regional Unit.

     It is, of course, appreciated that Government has already donated £500,000 towards
the National Disaster Fund.   This fund has quite properly focussed its attention on
the relief of individual hardship.and will provide financial help directly to victims,
but will not do away with the need for other help of a non-financial kind to be
provided.                                                         ^
Secretary of State,                                                        3.5.89.

/continued....




     Given the nature and extent of these services this letter has been copied to
the Secretary of State for Environment and the Secretary of State for Social Security
and also for information to officers in other agencies.

     In view of the importance of the issues involved a copy has been forwarded to
the Prime Minister so that she, personally, can be aware of the state of service
development and needs.
     An early decision on financial support would be most appreciated as it is
anticipated other potential sources of finance will await the response.of Government
before making a commitment.


                                 Yours sincerely,
