                                                                                                         CU3
              l^eJLfUyJl ,                   I
       St. Helens «Knowsley Health Authority
                                          DISTRICT PSYCHOLOGY SERVICE                                     WHISTON HOSPITAL
                                                 When te le p h o n in g o r catling please ask for:        PRESCOT
        Our R ef.:       J M M /.T .G .
                                                                                                               MERSEYSIDE
        Your R ef.:....................
                                                                                                                  L35 5DR.

                  051-426 1600




                                                                              V.-«         ......


2 May 1989




Mr D Mason
Director of Social Services
Hillsborough Disaster
c/o 26 Hatton Garden
Liverpool L3 2AW


Dear David

Thank you for your letter of 26 April 1989 regarding
critical incident stress debriefing (CISD). I enclose a
brief statement of the purpose of this approach in the
context of the Hillsborough Disaster.

By   Monday   8  May   1989 twenty   five  or  so   clinical
psychologists from most of the ten health districts in the
Mersey Region will have received training in CISD from the
Centre for Crisis Psychology.   They will then be available
to undertake systematic debriefing of appropriate staff in
social   services,   health service   and voluntary   sector
organisations who have been involved in providing frontline
help.

At this stage I have advised each District Clinical
Psychologist to establish liaison with local organisations
in order to make arrangements to provide debriefing within
his or her district.     However I recognise that there is
likely to be a concentration of need in Liverpool and its
immediate environs and it may be necessary to pool resources
from throughout the Region and provide a service on a co­
ordinated basis.

May I suggest that in the first instance social service and
other managers seeking to arrange debriefing for their staff
contact the District Clinical Psychologist in their health
district either directly or through the district co­
ordinator in order to make arrangements.


                                                                                                       cont1d .
I shall be meeting my colleagues from other districts on
II May 89 at 5.00pm and, if the need exists to mount a "pan-
Merseyside" response of our own in relation to CISD, we can
consider a way forward on that occasion.        I should be
pleased to receive any feedback you can give in that regard
before that meeting.


Yours sincerely




DISTRICT CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGIST




Enc



cc Mr E Bromley, District Clinical Psychologist,   Liverpool
HA
KERSEY REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER - 15.4.89

ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE PROVISION OF CRITICAL INCIDENT STRESS DEBRIEFING

The Centre for Crisis Psychology who are advising the Mersey social
service departments and Mersey RHA have agreed to provide crash training
for clinical psychologists in critical incident stress debriefing
(CISD). This technique aims to provide systematic debriefing for staff
who have been operating at the 'frontline' of a disaster such as police,
ambulancemen, A&E staff, and who require emotional support and
assistance in 'unloading' their experience. It is considered essential
that all such staff are provided with this service without undue delay
after the experience so as to prevent adverse psychological reactions
from developing and to maintain their effectiveness in their role. CISD
is normally carried out with groups of staff and the sessions are led by
a team of two.

An important aspect of CISD is that the staff leading the debriefing are
from outside the immediate organisation within which those receiving it
operate. This is essential in order to maintain confidentiality and to
allow participants complete freedom to express their feelings without
prejudice to their position in the organisation.     Debriefing in this
context is not an activity that should be undertaken by line managers.

It was agreed at the Mersey Region Disaster Co-ordinators Group
(19.4.89) that CISD should be established systematically across the
Region and that clinical psychologists are the key discipline to
undertake it.  The main groups to whom the facility would be provided
include:

      social services staff manning telephone helplines
      social services staff visiting victims
      health authority staff confronted with victims in the course of
      their work (A&E staff, HVs and community/district nurses)
      voluntary groups in direct contact with victims

The first training course took place on Monday, 24 April 1989 and the
following psychologists attended:

Liverpool HA:
St Helens & Knowsley HA:
Southport & Formby HA:
South Sefton HA:
Halton HA:
Wirral HA:

A further training course has   u e u u       c m c m y e u   a s   e u ix u w s




      Date:      Saturday, 6 May 1989
      Time:      10.00 am to 4.00 pm
      Venue:     Boardroom
                  MRHA, Hamilton House
                  Pall Mall, Liverpool

      Leaders:


                                          -    1   -
It is intended that all districts will have the opportunity to
participate and that at least two teams are trained in each district.
Once teams are trained and operational, it is for the District Clinical
Psychologists in each district to make local arrangements for providing
the service with social service, health and voluntary sector managers.

Organisation of this exercise across the Region is being undertaken by:


        District Clinical Psychologist
        St Helens & Knowsley HA
        Psychology Department
        Whiston Hospital
        Prescot
        Merseyside, L35 5DR

        Tel: 051 426 1600 ext 640/654
        FAX: 051 426 3408 (via the U O T s office, Whiston Hospital)

to whom all enquiries and further nominations for trailing should be
addressed.



25 April, 1989

cisdm
