  ^VORo                                                       s>*ORo0/

                                                                                a.
                                                                                o

   ■s’up?o^                                                    JU p po ^
                   Hillsborough Family Support Group
                       FOURTH ANNIVERSARY SERVICE.

                        THURSDAY 15th APRIL 1993.


   Dear Friends,

   I am pleased to advise that we are now able to confirm the
   arrangements for the fourth anniversary service which will be
   held at the Roman Catholic Cathedral Liverpool.

   1. We have to put a restriction on numbers at the memorial-so
   this will mean initial ticket allocations of 4 per family.
   Please indicate the numbers you need on the slip enclosed.

   2. We understand some families will not be coming and once we
   know the total numbers, "spare" functiori room and coach tickets
   will be made available (depending upon availability oi; course) to
   those who indicate on the slip enclosed.

   3. There is plenty of room in the Cathedral, it holds 2500 for
   friends of families and tickets will not be required.

   4. Ample parking will be available on the "Football Car Park"
   (adjacent the Vernon Sangster sports Centre) and permits will not
   be required, parking is also available for people who wish to
   make their own way to the Cathedral there is an underground car
   park that holds about fifty cars so it will be on a first come
   basis as we are unable to reserve parking places.

    5.For ticket holders please aim to arrive at Anfield between
    1.30pm and 2.00pm via the Kemlyn Road complex - where tickets
    will have to be shown.

    6. At approximately 2.15 we will leave the building and board the
    coaches that will take us to the Cathedral where a section of the
    seats will be reserved for the families - tickets will have to be
    shown to board the coaches.

    7. The order of service will be similar to previous years, and we
    anticipate that it should conclude at about 3.20pm.

    8. We will then board the   coaches that will take us back to
    Anfield where*a basket of   96 red roses will be laid at the
    memorial on our behalf.

    9. Individual families will pay their own respects and then make
    their way back to the function rooms where food and refreshments
    will be made available. (Entry by tickets only).

    10. Families depart at their convenience.

CHAIRMAN                        SECRETARY                     TREASURER

T. Hicks                        P. Hammond                    Mrs. J. Traynor
