              SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT MEMORANDUM



from   :                                         Y o u r Ref    i
  T0   :   To all staff.                           M y Re f     :   PM/BP.
                                                 D a t e Re f   :   27th April, 1989.


  RE   s     'STAFFLINE'.




     I am enclosing a copy of a leaflet publicising the fact that
there is now a STAFFLINE available for members of staff who might find
it beneficial to talk through their experiences following the Hillsborough
tragedy. As you will see the STAFFLINE has a telephone (No. 949-0542)
and I should be grateful if you would ensure that all members of staff
are made aware of this facility.

     I should add that if staff would find it easier to attend the
sessions during the day, then suitable arrangements should be made to
enable them to do so.




                                                 ..............

                            Assistant Director (Administration).




c.c. Vernon Sangster 'Drop-in' Centre.
     'Helpline' Johnson Street.
     A personal message to staff currently working on or whose work
         has been affected by the Hillsborough Disaster.


                        STAFFLINE    051 949 0542


Since the Hillsborough Disaster on Saturday 15th April the work load
for Social Workers and other professional colleagues has increased
enormously. Many of you will have had direct or indirect experience
of the trauma caused by this disaster and Many of you will have
counselled and will continue to counsel people who have been touched
by this tragedy.

Both the British Association of Social Workers and your colleagues up
and down the country became aware that this work is demanding of yourselves
and you in turn may want the opportunity to talk to someone.

Consequently STAFFLINE has been set up which will provide a confidential
service to yourselves by Social Workers trained in staff support from
outside the immediate area. Initially it has been set up with the
direction of Simon Cole CSS Dip.Coun. from the Royal School for the Blind,
Leatherhead and assisting him will be seven Social Workers from Sandwell
Social Services. The latter have been trained as members of a
departmental support group.

STAFFLINE will initially be open weekdays from 11.00.a.m. - 7.00.p.m. with
an answering machine outside of these hours. Arrangements can be made to
see you by appointment at one of the counselling centres and there will
also be an opportunity to meet STAFFLINE Staff at the HELPLINE and
ADVICE Centres at the end of key shifts.

Please do not hesitate to use STAFFLINE if things get difficult;   it is there
to help you.
