                 ^,Ur   «j> v^U              ®-
                              V a ^ ir      ^ > r


© .   C $ 5 ol

                                  \ q^    %&&&> ^ F1-5
                                                    --4
                                                    — i
                                         2 5MAYW89
^ t**T     ^
     tTl((¥fe*-to
                                  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES

                                  Municipal Buildings,
                                  Huyton, Merseyside L36 9UX.

                                  Our Ref: CB/NJ                Your Ref:
    Metropolitan Borough of

v
    KNOWSIEY                  ~
                                                                Date:       24th May 1989

                                  When telephoning please contact: Miss C. Briscoe
                                                                   Tel: 051-443-3439 (Direct Line)

       CATHERINE BRISCOE
       Director of Social Services




       Mr. W.B. Utting,
       Chief Inspector,
       Social Services Inspectorate,
       Department of Health,
       Richmond House,
       79 Whitehall,
       LONDON,
       SWlA 2NS

       Dear Bill

       Many thanks for your kind letter of May 10th. The follow up to the Hillsborough
       disaster has been very stressful for all of the Merseyside Councils and has fallen
       particularly heavily on Social Services though I must acknowledge that our fellow
       Departments, the Health Authority and the Voluntary Agencies have helped and
       encouraged all of us.

       Our staff in Knowsley, both those directly involved and those covering the normal
       services, have been superb. The Departmental Management Group led fcy my Deputy,
       David Riraner, and heavily supported fcy the Chairman of Social Services,
       Cllr. George Howard, deserve particular praise in organising the initial response
       to the disaster while I was on leave in the States.

       However, our concern now in common with other authorities in Merseyside is how to
       keep the necessary support services going for the bereaved, for survivors and for
       others affected, for what appears from the evidence of other disasters to be a
       period of 2-3 years at least. In Knowsley we have identified at 'least. 120 cases
       where support will be needed in the longer term and we;<|re still receiving regular
       referrals from the Merseyside Hillsborough Helpline and*direct from sources in the
       Borough. Our Council has, despite being in the middle of a long;term•strategy to
       reduce its expenditure, allowed us to increase our est&ftli£]rimM& tp. try and keep
       up with the in-house work but we, with all the other authorities involved, are
       deeply concerned about the funding needed for the cross-Merseyside follow up
       work. As you are probably aware David Mason, who has provided a magnificent lead
       to Merseyside post Hillsborough planning, is now working on finding funds for this
       very necessary follow up task. The report of the Inter-Agency Planning Group by
       Professor Howard Parker from Manchester University proposed a regional unit to
       supply:-




                                                                                            /contd.
Mr. W.B. Utting
Social Services Inspectorate                                 24th May-198^




      an ongoing helpline;
      co-ordination of counselling help to deal with referrals within the region
      and from across the country and make sure help is available when and where
      required;
-     a database to match needs and resources as well as to provide essential
      monitoring of use of services;
      a public relations and information function;
      a centre for staff training and support;
      a quality control and assurance role to ensure that services for bereaved
      people, survivors and others affected across the region are of comparable
      accessibility and quality.

I'm sure that you will already have been made aware of the difficulties for the
Merseyside authorities in finding finance for this work. Any help that you could
offer in suggesting paths for funding and in supporting applications for funding
would be a considerable encouragement to a somewhat "battle-weary" but still
active and together group of Social Services Departments.

Yours sincerely,




Catherine Briscoe
Director of Social Services




c.c. Departmental Management Group
     David Mason y/
