                    Notes for 12.00 a.m. - 7.00 a.m. Shift


1.   There is no co-ordinator here till 7.00 a.m. This is because the calls
     during this time are almost exclusively from people just needing to talk,
     rather than calls needing decisions or actions.

2.   Please fill out a referral form in duplicate.   Make sure you fill in the
      date and time of the call, and be clear about where you have left things
      with the caller and what action is required.    Putboth copies in the box
      on the table at the back of the room.
                                                                                  i

3.   There is information available in the folders by the telephones;    also
     some articles which you may find helpful.

4.   Don't let the referral form dictate your response to the caller. Be
     prepared just to listen and offer reassurance;  do not press people for
     information, or bombard them with offers of help. If, however, someone
     is being referred for help, then it is obviously important to make sure
     factual details, especially house numbers, postal districts, etc., are
     accurate.

5.- We suggest that one of you acts as a shift leader to take responsibility
     for checking referrals and making decisions on any action required, should
     this be necessary.

6.    If you do need to call someone out for an urgent visit (i.e. it won't
      wait till normal office hours), ring the appropriate Emergency Duty Team:

           Liverpool - 260 9133.
           Sefton - 920 8234.
           Wirral - 677 9909.
           Knowsley - Changes on a rota basis.

     For any other local authority, ring Liverpool Emergency Duty Team who
will find the number for you.  The Co-ordinator there will also be happy to
offer advice if you need it.

7.    If you're really stuck, ring the Helpline Co-ordinator on call - their
      number is on the desk next to this notice.

8.1 Could you please note the times when calls come in, in the message book
    on this desk.

9.    Heating:  This is on a 4 hour-cycle.  When it goes off (you'll notice
      when it goes cold!), turn it on again by turning the key to "override",
      on the electrical box opposite the door inside the boiler room - this
      is immediately on your left, through the double doors.

      Do not touch the security alarm box next to the door.

      Thank you.
