Liverpool Council for Voluntary Service, 14 Castle Street, Liverpool L2 ONJ                                               Tel. 051 -23 6 772 8




                                                                                                               9th Ray 1989

   Dear Colleague,
   I write to confirm th at the fourth meeting of the Hillsborough Voluntary
   Sector Co-ordinating Committee will take place at 2.00pm on Thursday
   Ray 11th in the Committee Room at th is office. The minutes of the la s t
   meeting and other relevant papers are enclosed and an Agenda is given
   below. I hope you will be able to attend.
    Yours sincerely




                                                                          AGENDA

    1.      Apologies and Welcomes
    2.       Minutes of the meeting held on Ray 4th
    3.       Ratters Arising
    4.       Hel pi ine
    5.       Support and Training
    6.       Regional Support Unit
    7.       Work in Progress
    8.       Liaison and Reporting
     9.      Any Other Business
     10.       Date of next meeting 18th Ray, 1989




C hairm an: Tilly Boyce. H o n Treasurer: Law rence Holden. C hief Executive: Edward M urphy. Financial Services M anager: Richard Jarm an

A n agency to help the local com m unity to fulfil its social needs; adm inistered by Liverpool Council of Social S ervice (In c o rp o ra te d ), a Trust Corporation
for charitable funds and trusts. Registered office as above. No. 1817 59. England. Registered C harity No. 2 2 3 4 8 5
Minutes of the third meeting of the Hillsborough Voluntary Sector
Co-ordinating Committee held on May 4th 1989 in the Liverpool CVS Committee
Room, 14 Castle Street, Liverpool 2.

Present                                 :   Liverpool CVS (in the Chair)
                                        :   Cruse
                                        :   COMPASS
                                        :   Merseyside Youth Association
                                        :   Liverpool CVS
                                        :   Catholic Social Services
                                        :   Wallasey CVS
                                        :   St. Helens CVS
                                        :   Sefton CVS
                                        :   YPAS
                                        :   MCVS
                                        :   Diocesan Board of Social
                                            Responsibility
Apologies                                : Merseyside Youth Association
1.   Apologies
     The minutes of the second meeting of the Committee held on April 27th
     1989 were tabled, considered and approved as a correct record.
2.   Matters Arising
     a)     Department of Social Security
            M H H M i r e p o r t e d th at discussions continued on th is matter.
            He had agreed with NACAB th at two issues arose which had to be
            tackled separately. The f i r s t was the benefit position of
            recipients of payments from the disaster fund. The second was the
            availability now of prompt and accurate advice to those bereaved
            or injured as to th eir current benefit position. I t was f e lt
            counter-productive at th is stage to do much about the f i r s t issue.
            Contact continued to be made with the DSS through the statutory
            agencies on the second issue as outlined at minute 2d.
     b)     Counselling
            I t was reported that a t very short notice on Friday April 28th,
            counsellors had been requested to attend the Royal Iris ceremony.
            There had clearly been some inter-departmental confusion over the
            arrangements for the ceremony which had impeded a coherent
            voluntary sector response.                  thanked those,
            particularly Catholic Social Services and COMPASS who had stepped
            into the breach.
3.   Helpline
     a)     m m m m m m reported th at a man cal 1ed              from
            Cheshire Social Services was now supervising the helpline. His
            telephone number was 051-225 3368.
  letropolitan Borough of                  SEKTON
Social Services Department "
                   Director of Social Services



Your Ref:                                        Social Services Department,
Our Ref:          PMF/PM                                   Burlington House,
Date:             28th April 1989                       Crosby Road North,
Tel Ext:                                                 Liverpool L22 OPF.


Please Contact:                                  Telephone: 051 - 922 - 4040




Chief Executive
Liverpool CVS
14 Castle Street
Liverpool 1


Dear    WB,
Further to my telephone conversation with you I am writing to confirm that
the training day for voluntary organisations will be the 24th May 1989, in
the Assembly Room at Bootle Town Hall.

The presentation will be by                   or his colleagues from the
Centre for Crisis Psychology. There will be two presentations, one
starting at 10.00 a.m. and the other at 2.00 p.m. The room holds a
maximum of 150 so that I should be grateful if you could give me some idea
of how many people will be present at the morning session and the numbers
for the second session in the afternoon.

I should be grateful if you could notify the voluntary organisations of
the details.

Thank you for your help.

Yours sincenely,




Director of Social Services
work BASW were doing) should be brought to the Committee's attention
so th a t some general programme of support and training over the long­
term could be devised.
Work in Progress
Members reported on developments. In particular there was some
discussion of the proliferation of drop-in centres. There appeared
currently to be centres at Anfield, Birkenhead, Crosby, Kirkby,
St. Helens and (in Catholic Social Services) Brownlow Hill with
another centre planned for Formby and Sefton. I t was agreed th a t
these developments needed to be kept under close review.
Liaison and Reporting
Members discussed the use they were making of the referral forms. I t
was f e l t th at a substantial amount of information was going through
t bis-j»ysteni-araUthat--aEPana^^
"WsseminafiorTtsee minute 3 aboveTT"       —
Any Other Business
Membersnoted the information in Liverpool Link about the University1s
offer to transcribe evidence for the Committee of Inquiry into the
disaster. I t was strongly f e l t th a t many young people who had been at
Hillsborough would be very reluctant to give evidence to the Police
inquiry. Arrangements needed to be made, preferably in conjunction
with the local authorities, for th eir evidence to be collected and fed
into the Inquiry.
Date of next meeting 11th May at 2.00pm.
