                                                                        i
                 ACROSS CITY DEPARTRMENTAL GROUP   :   HILLSBOROUGH


                      MEETING HELD ON 19.6.89. AT HATTON GARDEN


 PRESENT:
 Ms. C. Wilkinson       (Chair)     Social Services Dept.
 Mr. J. Whiteley                    Education Dept.
 Mr. R. Williams                    City Treasury Dept.
 Mr. L. Geddes                      Central Personnel
 M r . D . Kennaugh                 Housing Department
 Mr. D. Jones                       Information Technology Dept.
 Mr. D. Gavin                       Purchasing and Supplies
 Mr. D. Kewley                      City Architect's Dept.


 APOLOGIES

 Mr. D. Mason                      Social Services Dept.
 Mr. M. Farley                     Education Dept.


 NOTES

 PURPOSE

      Agreed purpose of meeting to exchange information; update
 colleagues on the different roles and activities relating to Hillsborough
 taking place within the City.  In particular, other Departments
 keen to be informed of Social Services Department's work.  Meeting
 then heard from each Department's representative.

 UPDATE

HOUSING

     Largely low profile, have rehoused one family and where
existing tenants known victims, have adopted 'softly softly' approach
Wish to receive advice and information to ensure future responses
senstive to tenants.

PERSONAL/SUPPLIES

     No direct involvement but have been active in offering
                     ln tHe mai" t0 SoClal Se™ i c e s Department.
Assisted with bills, costs and various supplies.

CITY ARCHITECTS

      Involved in design and negotiations regarding temporary
  ccommodation.  (The Lodge) and the new Drop-In Centre (Stanley
I arkj.   Again largely advisory and consultative role.

EDUCATION


           an,°Un\ ° f work in informing staff of possible outcome
and alerting teachers. Have made major use of Michael Stewart and
his training time. Director of Education has allowed Social
meetings            lenl° \ Mana^ s to address all Heads at various
meetings   Department is also attempting to contact examination
boards and alert them to children affected.
                                  -   2
                                      -




EDUCATION

     Large amount of work in informing staff of possible outcomes and
alerting teachers. Have made major use of Michael Stewart and his
training time. Director of Education has allowed Social Services Department
Senior Managers to address all Heads at various Meetings. Department
is also attempting to contact examination boards and alert them
to children affected.

TREASURER'S

     Initial response has been attempted to find out about families
who are victims where debts have accrued and not put any pressure
on them. Also to investigate implications of Fund Payments on
Housing Benefit. Sympathetic to future information to continue to
respond sensitively to victims in debt.

PERSONNEL

     Role that of a watching brief in respect of how each Department's
Personnel have responded.

SOCIAL SERVICES

     Operating on two levels; City wide and Pan Merseyside.

     The initial work revolved around setting up systems to respond
to immediate need — Helpline (24 hour telephone Counselling Service).
Data Base, and locally the Drop-In Centre. There was a considerable
amount of practical work and organisation, e.g. of Transport
to arrange and manage. After the initial crisis period of approximately
3 weeks moved to maintain service pending more permanent arrangements.
On Pan Merseyside basis it is intended to continue to provide 24 hour
telephone service (at least for 12 months), hopefully operated by
the Voluntary Sector;to have a training and staff support service and
the Database.

CITY RESOURCES _

     The Social Services Department is setting up a CORE TEAM
- a group of Social Workers who will be responsible for Hillsborough
work. When complete the team will have 12.Social Workers and 2
Senior Social Workers. The team is due to start work on 3rd July,
1989, and will temporarily be based in Johnson Street Centre. They
will move to the Lodge in mid-July.  The team should be the point
of contact for other Departments - two Senior Social Workers, Gerry
Flanaghan and Sarah D'Are.y. Initially given 2 year brief - subject
to extensions.

DROP—IN CENTRE

     Will move from Vernon Sangster to the Lodge again as a temporary
home pending the agreement to fund a new building.

     The idea is that that Centre will be managed and run by
Volunteers/Victims with help from Local Authority.  If successful
it should move from a Counselling Centre to a Community Centre and
be a local resource.
FUTURE MEETINGS

     Agreed that it would be useful for group to continue to meet
regularly to keep each other informed. Agreed monthly meeting
VENUE HATTON GARDEN CONFERENCE ROOM, 3RD FLOOR

NEXT MEETING

     Monday, 24th July, at 2.15 p.m.
