DSS/    /89

HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER
PERMANENT PREMISES FOR A DROP-IN, ADVICE AND MEMORIAL CENTRE




Paragraph              Content

   1                   Introduction
   2                   Purpose of Proposed Centre
   3                   Location
   4                   Accommodation Requirements
   5                   Commissioning
   6                   Staffing
   7-                  Management
   8                   Cost


1.0 Introduction

1.1 The crowd crush disasterwhich occurred at the semi-final match
    between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest on Saturday, 15th April,
    1989, at the Hillsborough football ground, Sheffield, resulted
    in IS* deaths and      hospital admissions for injuries of greater
    or lesser severity.

1.2 The crush, the cause of which remains the subject of a public
    enquiry at the time of writing, occurred at the Leppings Lane
    end of the ground reserved for Liverpool Football Club supporters.
    The majority of those who died or were seriously injured ^lived
    on Merseyside although some, including two young sisters ^died,
    came from             and others from as far as Cornwall.

1.3 The Cities of Liverpool, Nottingham and Sheffield immediately
    united in establishing a disaster relief fund. Also an inter-agencies
    co-ordinating group was established at which the Local Authorities
    of Liverpool, Knowsley, Sefton, Cheshire, Wirral, St. Helens and
    Lancashire, combined with the Mersey Regional Health Authority,
    the Merseyside Probation Service, the Merseyside Fire and Civil
    Defence Authority and the Centre for Crisis Psychology to establish
    an appropriate victim support service on Merseyside.

1.4 Three services that were established over the course of the Sunday
    and Monday were (i) a 24 hour "Helpline" telephone service, (ii)
    a 9.00 a.m. to 9.00 p.m. "Drop-In" counselling and advice service
    near the Anfield Park Liverpool Football ground and (iii) a free
    bus shuttle for those visiting relatives who remained in-patients
    at the Northern General or Royal Hallamshire Hospitals in Sheffield
    or who simply needed to visit, or re-visit, the Hillsborough ground.

1.5 The number and nature of the referrals for counselling and other
    services that were received through the "Helpline", the Drop-In
    Centre and through the mainstream service, following the disaster
    indicates a very significant demand for post trauma counselling
    over the next one to two years and perhaps longer.
                                     - 2 -


1.6 Similarly, the response to the opening of the Anfield football
    ground, and the Drop-In Centre and bus services, underlined the
    need for and the benefits of, an opportunity for those affected
    by the disaster to share many of their common experiences.

1.7 Effective post-trauma counselling is highly demanding even when
    undertaken by experienced staff.   In the aftermath of a disaster
    such as "Hillsborough" it is no less important for the counsellors
    themselves, and their own "de—briefing" or support workers, to
    be able to share their common experiences and learn from each
    other.

1.8 For these and other reasons it would seem appropriate to propose
    that much of the counselling and support work generated by the
    disaster should in future be co-ordinated from, and in part operate
    from, premises that have an independent identity associated with
    Hillsborough, rather than with any particular one of the agencies
    providing a post—disaster casework service and that this Centre
    should secure the benefits of such a corporate approach.

1.9 Should such a centre be established the name would remain to be
    determined.   For the purposes of this note the Centre proposed
    is referred to as "The Hillsborough Centre".

2.0 Purpose of the Proposed Centre

2.1 It is proposed that the purpose of the Hillsborough Centre would
    be:-

    (a) To provide a Drop-In centre and meeting place, with support
        services on hand, for those with needs arising from the Hillsborough
        disaster or who may benefit from the sharing of common experiences.

    (b) To co-ordinate all former and new applications for assistance
        arising from the disaster and ensure integration into the
        data base for response and follow up.

    (c) To provide an operational base for a 'de-briefing' and support
        service for any Key Worker, or case worker, concerned in post
        disaster work, and for the in-house line managers of the agencies
        providing such workers.

    (d) To offer a small Memorial rest room.

2.2 (Note) It isnot proposed that all future applications for help
    associated with 'Hillsborough' should       necessarily be referred
    to the centre staff, although that option would be available where
    appropriate, but that the Centre would assume responsibility for
    co-ordinating longer-term and future work and      provide a common
    reference point for de-briefing and support services to Key Workers.
    The Centre would nevertheless retain its own staff, whether provided
    on a seconded basis or directly employed, and would maintain an
    open referral service during the day.

2.3 There seems little doubt that the needs currently identified would
    keep such a Centre fully occupied for two years or more.

2.4 Thereafter, whilst the Centre would continue  to meet directly,
    or sustain indirectly, services to Hillsborough casualties who
                                  - 3 -


   have long-term needs, of whom there will be a significant number,
   itmight also evolve a     more general and yet specialised, brief
   in connection with the personal or family needs arising from sports
   accidents, bereavements or disasters.

3.0 Location

3.1 The    present Drop-Inand counselling service was established with
    the assistance of the Chief Executive of the Merseyside Youth
    Association, on an emergency basis, in the smaller gymnasium of
    the Vernon Sangster Sports Centre, immediately after the disaster.
    The bar—refreshment room adjoining was also made available and
    the W.R.V.S. assisted with refreshments.

3.2 The    Vernon Sangsterhad the advantage of being situated on the
    principal car park serving the Liverpool Football Club ground.
    This served as the departure point for the free bus service organised
    by the M.P.T.A. for those visiting relatives detained in the Sheffield
    hospitals and for the bereaved and survivors visiting and re-visiting
    the "Hillsborough" ground.

3.3 The association of the Drop-In Centre, with the bus shuttle facilitated
    contact between counsellors and many of those who might benefit
    from that service.    In particular an attempt was made to ensure
    that there were at least two counsellors on each bus.         It will
    be remembered that many of those remaining in hospital after the
    first day or so were badly hurt and some indeed critically ill.
    For others, visiting the Hillsborough ground was equally traumatic.

3.4 Other sites previously explored for the counselling service included
    the Liverpool Football Club itself, where there were initially
    difficulties in guaranteeing a 9.00 a.m. to 9.00 p.m. service,
    and the Liverpool Supporters Club, where the available accommodation
    was insufficient for the purpose and rather too far from the Liverpool
    Ground, although the support of the Club itself was unreserved.

3.5 In the case of the Liverpool Football Club it was possible to
    maintain a duty rota of counsellors at the Anfield Park Ground
    and indeed the Director's and Players lounges were made available
    to counsellors for work with the bereaved.

3.6 In considering how best to provide for the future it is important
    to note that many of those traumatically affected by the consequences
    of the disaster are not themselves fans.

3.7 It would seem important for "The Hillsborough Centre" to be free­
    standing, to emphasize its independence from the range of contributing
    agencies to whose corporate work it would be dedicated and for
    it to be located close to Liverpool Football Club and Anfield
    Park.    It seems appropriate also that such a centre be close to
    the    Liverpool Supporters Club and to the Vernon Sangster Sports
    Centre in which the Drop-In Centre was first based and from which
    the    Sheffield hospital bus shuttle, and the Hillsborough Ground
    bus, ran.    It should continue to provide an informed, comfortable
    and quiet meeting place for those who will benefit from a sharing
    of common experience.

3.8 There are severed sites around the Anfield Park football ground
    principal car park, in Stanley Park, which have excellent access
    and    meet all requirements. Some of these are indicated on the
    sketch map overleaf.
                                  - 4 -


 3.9 The quality of modular construction building now available is
     such that a building with appropriate dignity and ambience, having
     a 'permanent' life expectancy, could be fully operational within
     ten to twelve weeks of commissioning.

3.10 The sites under consideration all lend themselves to simple landscape
     screening with shrubbery and perhaps a small fenced memorial garden.
     It will be necessary for ease of access to be combined with a
     degree of privacy.

3.11 For reasons stated under the head of "Commissi^bning", it will be
     important to progress the Centre with the minimum of delay if
     it is to be brought into being.      However it is equally important
     to free the location of the present Drop-In service.       An interim
     location for the Drop-In Service therefore appears essential.
     This should be close to both the Vernon Sangster and the permanent
     site eventually agreed.
     '■/     ««            AIMFIELJ)             park            C£
     CO      d
      lii     £                     L. F . C ,
S
•4
     or
     cc       Z                                    JHAWKLy
                                                                 I
X    ih       Li)                                                te
     ¥                                              G>ATE
£    v»       * V




                            ^ ,■^v:^S&4v.
              "   J/JM/d'tfSM'rt/jt/US
                                                                      s, j.- 'J'
              ;$                                            V
                                                            N.
                                                            tv
            i i                                             §
                                                            N»




                                                            x
                                                                                            #
                           < C A K
                                                            I STA N
                            P   A    R   K
                                                            ti
                                                            *

                                                            vzmou
                                                            SA^STER
                                                                                   \\

                                                            I
                                                            It
                                                                                    \
                                                                                       \
                                                                                   N*-/*

                                                        —
                                                                                        (
                                                                                     -W

                    PaioRy          R*>Ai>
                                    __5^r


4.0 Accommodation Requirements

4.1 The building should afford dignity, security and permanency.
    A single storey pitched roof building of modular construction,
    fully accessible to the disabled, is envisaged.         It should be
    close to parking facilities and to the locations referred to earlier,
    well sign posted, yet provide a degree of privacy from the car
    park and the playing field.

4.2 Although it is anticipated that a small number of staff would
    maintain an open referral point on site, and a certain amount
    of direct service would be offered from the centre, the purpose
    would be essentially as described in paragraph 2.0 and the installation
    overall relatively modest in size.

Element                 No       Occupancy                  Size (metres)

Manager's Office                     1                           14
Administrative Office                2                           23
Social Work Office                   4                           14
Kitchenette                                                       9
Lobby                                                             9
Drop-In Lounge                   15-20 easy chairs               46
                                 40-60 stacking chairs
Interview rooms                    2    2x9 =                    18
Interview rooms                    4                             18
Toilets (accessible to d sabled, staff and users share)
Memorial rest room                  8 easy chairs
Store room

   Total 160 square metres excluding mobility standard toilets and
   circulation space.     The building would also require a level or
   ramped wheelchair access.

5.0 Commissioning

5.1 The small gymnasium in the Vernon Sangster Sports Centre, in which
    the Drop-In Centre is currently operating was fully booked by
    local schools and youth organisations at the time it was made,
    available to the counselling services.  It is a valuable leisure
    facility for the Youth Service and should be released as early
    as possible.

5.2 The Merseyside Youth Association have indicated that they may
    respond favourably to a request for an extension beyond the present
    informally agreed date of 7th May but it would be desirable for
    that to be the latest date of occupation.

5.3 As it seems necessary to allow a minimum of 10 weeks, and with
    more probability of achievement 12 weeks for a building of the
    desired permanence to be ready for occupation. There will clearly
    be a need for a further temporary base for the Drop-In service
    if progress is to be maintained on the present proposal.

5.4 The use of the Drop-In Service is likely to be critically dependent
    upon it remaining in the immediate locality in which it presently
                                  - 6 -

 operates and where it is hoped it will become permanent.   For this
 reason it is suggested that the Centre be temporarilly relocated to
 moveable short-lease Portakabins adjacent to the Vernon Sangster.
 However:-

 5.5 It is understood that the M.Y.A. may be commencing extension building
     onto the Vernon Sangster in May 1989, and it will be essential
     to ensure that the siting of any temporary Drop-In base does not
     impede that work. There is no shortage of space.

 5.6 Preliminary enquiries suggest that a number of modular construction
     building firms would be prepared to provide the interim temporary
     accommodation as part of the overall contract to supply the Centre.

 5.7 it is understood that the Inter Agency City Council planning group
     relating to Hillsborough has resolved to seek commercial sponsorship
     towards all or part of the capital cost of establishing the Drop-In
     Centre and that M.C.V.S. have undertaken to assist in seeking
     sponsors.

5.8 The City Architect's Surveyor,                 is currently examining
    possible sites for the permanent centre.

5.9 It will be necessary to obtain the Council's planning permission.

5.10 Whilst in the longer term it would appear appropriate for the
     Centre to be independently managed, it is probably appropriate
     that theproject is   in the first instance commissioned by the
     City Council.

6.0 Staffing

6.1 The staffing requirements are likely to reduce rapidly in the
    immediate future with the cessation of the bus shuttle to Sheffield.

6.2 It is proposed to establish a "Core Team" of approximately 14
    experienced staff to be responsible, either directly or indirectly
    for post-trauma work in Liverpool.      The staff would be the more
    experienced workers in the field of bereavement and post-trauma
    counselling and would represent each Hospital or Local Authority
    social work team.    These staff would also be the Key Workers for
    many of the victims resident in Liverpool although not all.      It
    will be important to preserve the attachments made by experienced
    workers from other agencies, notably Probation Victim Support.'
    Thus a Core Team Worker may have oversight of the support arrange
    ments for a victim where a Key Worker is from another agency.

6.3 It seems probable that a Core Team of 14 could effectively maintain
    an open referral point at the Hillsborough Centre during the day.'
    at the reduced level of activity envisaged.         The Centre would
    also require a Manager and an Assistant or relief Manager.

7.0 Management

7.1 It would be the task of the Manager to:-

    (i) Oversee the day to day operation of the Drop-In Centre.
   (ii) Co-ordinate information concerning the long term support of victims
        and;
                                 - 7 -

 (iii) Co-ordinate the provision of a De-briefing service to all Merseyside
       counsellors working with victims and where appropriate to those
       workers line managers.     It is envisaged that the Centre would
       provide a base in which his work could be undertaken on a group
       or individual basis.      It is emphasized that the Manager of
       the Centre would not be responsible in any way for the professional
       aspects of the De-briefing Service.

7.2 It is proposed that the work of the Hillsborough Centre overall,
    and those staff employed by or seconded to it should be accountable
    to a Management Committee comprised in the majority or entirely
    of victims of the Hillsborough disaster, drawn from the Merseyside
    region.

8.0 Cost

8.1 A provisional estimate provided by the City Architect is that
    a building of the durability and aesthetic appearance would be
    placed on site, with all services, for approximately £50,000.
    This cost excludes landscaping or the cost of any interim accommodation
    that may be provided as part of the package.

8.2 Revenue, running and initial furnishing, equipment and maintenance
    costs have not been included in that figure.'


Short-term - Interim accommodation requirement

   Portakabin affording approximately 85 square metres which could
   be largely open plan provided the floor and walls, together with
   portable screens, provide reasonable sound insulation and privacy
   for interviewing.

   Area for Manager/staff 40 square metres

    Area for screened bays for interviewing 30 square metres

    Toilets (portable) 10 square metres

   Kitchenette/Galley 5 square metres.
