             PSYCHOLOGY SERVICES AND THE HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE

                      PROPOSED FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

INTRODUCTION

From October 19891 have provided two sessions per week to the Social Services
Hillsborough Team as a Clinical Psychologist employed by Liverpool Area Health
Authority. In general terms work undertaken has been largely client-focused
involving consultations with a client, their family and/or their Social Worker.
Most clients have been seen over just a few sessions, or occasionally- There has
been longer-term involvement with a small number of clients, usually in
conjunction with a Social Worker.

A contribution to staff development was made in early 1991 through a series of
training days concerned with the concluding of specifically Hillsborough-related
work, and the future development of the Centre and of individual members of the
Social Services Team. More generally there has been an informal passing on of
psychological approaches and models, and of knowledge relating to practices and
resources in the Liverpool area in the field of mental health.

FUTURE PSYCHOLOGY INPUT

With the development of the Centre as a Trauma/Crisis Counselling Service it
seems appropriate to review psychological input. This input arose in response to
the extra-ordinary circumstances of a major disaster but now needs to be
considered in relation to both the demands on psychology services throughout
Liverpool generally, and in the context of the various mental health resources city-
wide.

I would like to suggest that Psychology involvement continues at the same level
as previously (2 sessions per week} for a further 12 months i.e. up to April 1992,
but that the scope of the work broadens, and is more clearly-defined as follows.

1.    Contributing to the development of the Centre.

      From a background in mental health I would hope to make a considerable
      contribution towards the development of a service philosophy and structure
      in terms of assessing and managing referrals; establishing the scope of
      provision relative to other services; and providing adequate training and
      support for staff.                      ^

2.    Establishing a network with other mental health services

      In conjunction with team members and/or the team manager I would be
      well-placed to develop links with other relevant services:- (Community
      mental health teams; Psychiatric teams; Psychotherapy Service; voluntary
      sector counselling services etc).
       a)    To clarify referring to, and on from, the centre.

       b)    To avoid duplication of input or other confusion arising from clients
             being seen by a number of agencies.

       c)    To maximize      the   opportunities    for   all mental   health
             workers/couhsellors of sharing with, learning from and supporting
             one another.

      d)     To provide formal and informal support for members of the social
             services team, which could otherwise become relatively isolated from
             similar services which largely fall with the N.H.S.  Ultimately the
             opportunity for such support and consultation afforded either by
             strong informal links, or perhaps a more formal advisory group
             consisting of other mental health professionals, would lessen the
             needed for psychological input within the centre.

3.    Training

      Having been involved extensively in training in other settings I would be
      keen to use some of the year ahead in passing on relevant psychological
      skills and models through a programme of workshops and seminars planned
      in conjunction with the team members.

4.    Consultation

      I would envisage continuing to be available for consultation over specific
      clients, with individual members of the team, and also with small groups
      if a common theme was being addressed eg. anger management;
      termination issues etc.

5.    Direct Client Work

      It seems appropriate that working directly with individual clients be
      minimised for the following reasons.

      a)    To allow time for the tasks outlined above.

      b)     To establish an alternative procedure for dealing with people whom
            team members or others would have previously referred to me, in line
            with psychology input withdrawing in 1992. By this stage it is
            anticipated that links with local psychology depts, among other
            services, would replace my own function in this respect.

Tricia Hagan
Consultant in Clinical Psychology
May 1991
