                                                               Murray, LL.B.
                                                         City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                         P.O. Box No. 88
                                                         Municipal Buildings

LIVERPOOL                                                Dale Street
                                                         LIVERPOOL L69 2DH

                                                         Telephone: 051-227 3911
                                                          Direct Line : 051-225 2 4 3 1
                                                         Fax: 051-225     2427
                                                         DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                         Your ref
 TO:     (i)   Councillor H. Rimmer -                   Our ref     P & R /C M /L J
               Leader of the C o u n c i l ;
        (ii)   Councillors M , Storey and               Date        24th April/        1992
               A. Jennings - Leaders of
               the Liberal Democrat and
               Liverpool Labour Groups;
       (iii)   Councillor H. Chase - Chair
               of the Hillsborough Disaster
               Working Party;
        (iv)    Councillor D. Booth - Chair of
                Social Services Committee;
         (v)    Director of Social Services
                and Senior Officer with
                responsibility for " H il ls bo ro ug h "; and
         (v)   Representatives    of the Hillsborough
                Survivors Group.


 Dear Sir/Madam,

                           MEETING WITHl HILLSBOROUGH
                           DISASTER SURVIVORS GROUP ~
                          WEDNESDAY, 29TH APRIL,

      You will be aware that following recent meetings of the
 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY it was agreed that a
 meeting should take place between the Leaders of the three
 main political groups,   the Chairs of the Social Services
 Committee and the Working Party,       the Director of Social
 Services,   the  Senior   Officer   in    the   Social  Services
 Department with responsibility for "Hillsborough" matters and
 representatives of the Survivors Group.       This meeting would
 discuss various matters of concern to the Survivors Group
 with regard to the role played by the City Council, and in
 particular   by  the  Social   Services    Department,   in  the
 provision of services to the Survivors in the period since
 the Disaster.




                                                      c o n t 1d




When calling or telephoning please ask fo r   Mr. C. Moneypenny
                              - 2 -



      Following consultation with all parties I have now made
the appropriate arrangements and would be grateful if you
could   therefore  attend   the  Survivors Group  Meeting  at
12.30 P.M. on WEDNESDAY/ 29TH APRIL, 1992 in the COMMITTEE
ROOM "B", MUNICIPAL ANNEXE, DALE STREET, LIVERPOOL.


     For your     information I enclose a copy of a Note of the
meeting held     between the Working Party and the Survivors
Group on 1st     April, 1992 which will be used as a basis for
the discussion    at the meeting.

                        Yours faithfully,




                         City Solicitor,
                    Secretary to the Council.
            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

                           of the

              Policy and Resources Committee

                       1st April, 1992



PRESENT:   Councillor H. Chase, Chair;
           Councillor D. Gavin.



           Apologies for absence were received from
           Councillors E. Clein, W. Edwards, S. Ledwich,
           A. Jennings and W. Roberts.




           Ms. S. Coleman of Edgehill College and 18 Members
           from the Hillsborough Survivors and Family Support
           Groups also attended the meeting.



Meeting with Survivors Group

In accordance with the resolution contained in Minute 20 of
the meeting of the Working Party held on 21st February, 1992,
the Working Party considered representations made by Members
of the Hillsborough Survivors Group, based at the Disaster
Centre in Anfield Road, in respect of a variety of matters
related to the role played by the City Council in the
provision of services to Bereaved Families and to survivors
in the period since the Disaster.

Resolved that -

(a) the City Solicitor be requested to produce a detailed
    Note of the matters raised at this meeting; and

(b) following the circulation of the note to the appropriate
    parties, the City Solicitor be requested to arrange, as
    soon as possible, the meeting between Members of the
    Survivors Group and the Leaders of the three main Council
    Political Groups, the Chair of the Working Party and the
    Chair of the Social Services Committee which was
    requested by the meeting of the Working Party held on
    21st February, 1992; and




al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/lst April
(c) two representatives of the Survivors Group and the
    Director of Social Services and the Team Leader or Senior
    Officer in the Social Services Department with
    responsibility for Hillsborough related matters be
    invited to attend the above meeting.




al/cttee/p.andr./finalmin/lst April
                                           PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL



                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY
                 NOTES OF A MEETING HELD WITH MEMBERS
                    OF THE SURVIVORS GROUP AT THE
             HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE ON 1ST APRIL,      199 2



PRESENT:     Councillor Harry Chase, Chair;
             Councillor Dot Gavin.




             Ann Adlington and Colin Moneypenny from the City
             Solicitor's Department and Sheila Coleman from
             the "Hillsborough Project", and 18 members of
             the Survivors Group also attended.




INTRODUCTION

1.   Councillor Chase opened the meeting by explaining that
     it had been called in accordance with the following
     resolution of the meeting of the Working Party held on
     21st February 1992, viz:-

     2 0. Hillsborough Survivors Group

           With the consent of Members, Mr. Peter Rea from the
           Hillsborough Centre, addressed the Working Party on
           matters of concern to his Group in respect of the
           Hillsborough related activities of Liverpool City
           Council, with particular regard to -

             (i)    the lack of information received on Working
                    Party meetings;

            (ii)    the difficulties caused to survivors wishing
                    to attend such meetings because they are held
                    during the day time;

           (iii)    problems encountered with the Social Services
                    Department; and

            (iv)    the perception of the Survivors Group that
                    they do not receive the full support of the
                    City Council.

           Resolved that -

           (A)      a special evening meeting of the Working Party
                    be held with the Survivors Groups at the
                    Hillsborough Centre to discuss these matters
                    of concern; and
    (B)   a meeting be arranged as soon as possible
          between the Survivors Group and the leaders
          of the three main City Council political
          groups, the Chair of the Working Party and
          the Chair of the Social Services Committee to
          discuss the matters which have been raised.

Councillor Chase said it was considered best to have this
meeting first in order to ascertain the problems which
needed to be raised at the meeting with the L e a d e r s .
Thereupon the Members   of the Survivors Group, commencing
with Peter Rea, expressed the matters of concern to them
with regard to the role played by the City Council in the
provision of services to Bereaved Families and to survivors
in the 3 year p eriod since the Disaster.  The main issues/
comments which were related during the evening, in no
particular order, are detailed below.

MATTERS WITH SPECIFIC REFERENCE TO THE ROLE OF
THE DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES

Requests were made for as much information as possible
relating to the people who have used the Hillsborough
Centre and for an Audit of all the Equipment which had
been donated and its present state and whereabouts.


The question of Access to Files was raised.  Who has
such access from the point of view of both Social Workers
and Clients?  How can access be gained without excessive
difficulty?


There was also a belief expressed that confidentiality of
files may have been broken on occasion with for example
addresses given out without permission.


None of the Group as Clients had been consulted on their
views of the service they had received from Social Workers.
Such views had largely been ingnored perhaps in the light
that many considered the service they received as "shoddy".
Yet Social Workers had been to speak to outside bodies
around the country and in some cases received promotion
on the basis, so the group perceived, that they were
"experts" on Disaster associated work.


In a similar fashion there was also   an objection to the
person from the "National Institute   of Social Work" who
had been appraising the Social Work   involved, speaking
on behalf of Survivors as Clients.    This should not happen.


The Group was unclear as to the present role of the Centre
which was now being used for a wider range of Social
Services matters and indeed was uncertain of its future.
It was still called the "Hillsborough Centre" and still
funded as such but was "Hillsborough" still very important
to its role?
        There was also a belief that many peope who may use the
        service were unaware that it still existed and that
        possibly even people had therefore been discouraged
        from using it.  It was claimed that the phone was not
        always staffed which would not encourage potential n e w
        "clients" or indeed existing ones.


7.      It was believed that the Social  Workers felt threatened
        rather than encouraged by survivors wishing to hold
        meetings on their own.  They were being seen as being
        "too independent" and on some occasions as being "too
        political.


8.      There had been a lack of support for Survivors/Bereaved
        Families at the Inquests when at times only Social Workers
        from Sheffield were present and indeed only two Social
        Workers were present when the Inquests verdict was
        announced.   One person claimed that when they asked for
        aid to go to Sheffield they were given a train timetable
        in response.


9.      The Advisory Group meetings were mentioned and it was
        said the survivors no longer attend as they were
        dissatisfied that they were asked to do things by Social
        Workers (e.g. fill in questionnaires), but the issues which the
        survivors wished dealt with were rarely considered.


        General Matters

10 .1   It was claimed that the Survivors Group had until fairly
        recently been unaware of the existence of the Working
        Party and that information about its activities had not
        been passed on to them through the Social Services
        Department.


10.2    There was a worry expressed that the Working Party was
        being run down particularly since the demise of the
        post of Research Officer.  Although a Liaison Officer
        was now in place it was believed this was only a
        secondment assisting in the legal matters beinc p u r s ued
        and that effectively most of the duties of the Research
        Officer were no longer being undertaken.


11.     The matter of the arrangement of visits to the two
        seriously injured survivors was raised though in was
        accepted that considerable sensitivity had to be shown,
        towards their families in determining how best no provide
        support in these c a s e s .
There was a problem mentioned with regard to the
obtaining of statements from West Midlands Police.  It
was believed a lot of useful information could have
been pieced together from such statements had they been
more accessible.


A worry was stated that the Council was trying to
discontinue the Ground Safety Advisory Group which was
considered essential.  (Councillor Chase explained
the recent background in this matter, the fact that
such Groups were not mandatory and that the Council had
agreed to continue with the Group.    Indeed it was
meeting this evening which explained the absence of two
Members of this Working P a r t y ) .


A question was raised about the motivation of one Member
of the Working Party who had previously made statements
against its continuation.  It was believed that these
comments should really be addressed directly to the
Councillor involved.


Conclusion

It was agreed that prior to the meeting with Council
Leaders the Note of this meeting should be circulated
to all appropriate parties to give an indication of the
areas of dissatisfaction to all concerned.


It was also agreed that attempts should be made to hold
the meeting with Council Leaders as soon as possible and
hopefully before the Municipal Elections.   In addition
to the 3 Group Leaders and the Chairs of the Working
Party and the Social Services Committee,   two
representatives of the Survivors Group should attend
the meeting and the Director of Social   Services and the
Team Leader or Senior Officer with responsibility for
"Hillsborough" should also be invited to have the opportunity
to answer the statements which have been made.
