          NORTH WEST ASSOCIATION OF SOCIAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES


                              25th APRIL 1989


          REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES FOR LIVERPOOL




                         THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



PURPOSE

1.   To inform members of the services provided on a regional basis by
     North West Social Services Authorities to the victims of the
     Hillsborough disaster on 15th April 1989. Additionally to seek
     financial support from N.W.A.S.S.A. for all publicity material and
     staff training initiatives that can be made available across the
     region. Finally to seek continuing support for the involved seven
     Authorities to providing a long term service to victims.

INTRODUCTION                                                '

2.   Members will require no introduction to the scale of the disaster
     that occurred at Hillsborough.    Whilst immediate priority has been
     afforded to the bereaved, families and the casualties; it is clear
     that all those people attending, playing and officiating in the foot­
     ball match, plus their circle of family and friends must be regarded
     as victims.   The issue, for the Authorities must,, ultimately be the
     quality of life of the survivors and those closely associated. The
     nature of the service needed must be regarded as preventive mental
     health.

3.   The epicentre of the tragedy will probably be revealed, when accurate
     data emerges, as being Merseyside with adjoining parts of Lancashire
     and Cheshire. However, the facts already available and the nature of
     the support for Liverpool F.C. dictate the Hillsborough disaster be
     regarded as a national disaster. The response to the needs of the
     victims must therefore also be viewed in that context.

4.   It is for that reason that the seven Directors of Social Services
     whose departments are involved, with the full support of their Councils,
     have adopted a joint approach to the issues.   The services provided
     across the region include a 24 hour Helpline, a co-ordinated approach
     to counselling, a number of drop-in and advice centres and a co-ordinated
     voluntary effort.   A similar approach has been taken to information,
     publicity, public and press relations, database, training, finance and
     administration.

5.   To date finance has been made available.   However, members should be
     aware that effectively the services prpvided have been achieved through
     a combination of secondments, staff goodwill, free arrangements and
     reorientation of priorities. Such arrangements cannot continue and it
     is the intention of the seven Authorities, together with the Mersey
     Regional Health Authority, the Probation Service and the Voluntary
     Sector to work towards permanence.
                                            —   2—




ROLE OF N.W.A.S.S.A.

6.   It was realised soon after the disaster by both the seven Directors
     and the Professional Adviser to N.W.A.S.S.A. that the whole region
     would be affected in a number of ways. Firstly, that the members and
     officers of the Authorities most directly impacted on would require
     the support of regional colleagues.   The initiative of the Chair of
     N.W.A.S.S.A. and Ram Ramadhan in this direction are much appreciated.
     Secondly, that any publication produced as a consequence of the disaster
     could benefit the services across the region.   The Chair of N.W.A.S.S.A.
     (through his Professional Adviser) has already authorised the publica­
     tion of "Coping after Hillsborough" (copy attached).   Authority is now
     sought for further relevant publications (posters and leaflets) to be
     similarly regionally published (list is attached).   Thirdly, training
     directed at crisis intervention work and counselling could valuably be
     provided across member Authorities.   Those seven Authorities involved
     have already directly commissioned immediate staff and member training
     through a retained consultant.   For the longer term staff training
     needs it is suggested that N.W.A.S.S.A. should consider funding a
     Training Officer. If such an officer were recruited soon that person
     themselves could receive training from the consultant and continue with
     ongoing work.

CONCLUSION                                                                  •

7.   The seven Directors wish to acknowledge support already received from
     N.W.A.S.S.A. in meeting the needs of the victims of Hillsborough.
     This report seeks further long term support and highlights publication
     and training as areas where specific resources are requested and where
     regional benefit could be derived.

RECOMMENDED    '                     V ’’


8.   That the North West Association'of Social Services Authorities:—

       i)     Note the contents of this report and recognise the long term
              support needs of the seven Authorities most directly involved
              and convert such support into appropriate practical assistance.

              Confirm the funding of the publication "Coping after Hillsborough"
              and authorise that the leaflet "Were you at the Match?", posters
              for schools and "Advice on How to Cope with a Crisis" be
              similarly published.

     iii)     Fund a Training Officer post (approximate cost £18,000 with
              on costs) to be based at an appropriate agency.

ATTACHED

9.    i)      Copy of "Coping after Hillsborough".

     ii)      List of publications with approximate cost per 1,000.




DM/EP
24.4.89.                                                 Director of SocialServices
                                                             City of Liverpool
                                                (on behalf of Authorities involved with
                                                 responding to the Hillsborough disaster)
