                                                       \ VVVV-VVA^U
                                               (F?Z-




T H E     H I L L S B O R O U G H     C E N T R E

                  A N D   T H E

        H I L L S B O R O U G H     T E A M




                                                    O c t , 1990-
                 SUMMARY OF APPENDICES




INTRODUCTION.

PHILOSOPHY.

THE HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE.

(a)   HILLSBOROUGH RELATED WORK.

(b)   NON-HILLSBOROUGH RELATED WORK.

THE WORK OF THE HILLSBOROUGH TEAM AND STATISTICAL DATA.

THE WORK OF THE HILLSBOROUGH TEAM.

(a) WHAT HAS BEEN DONE.

(b) THE FUTURE.

SOURCE OF WORK

SIZE OF FUTURE TEAM.

STAFFING IMPLICATIONS.
                            THE HILLSBOROUGH TEAM


        INTRODUCTION

  1.1   The Hillsborough Team came into existence in July 1989. It
        was set up to provide a medium to long term response to the
        Hillsborough Disaster.

  1.2   The team's establishment was 12 Social Workers and 2 Senior
        Social Workers. The fourteen.  posts are permanent to the
        department/ even though it was anticipated the team would
        only exist for 2 years.

  1.3   This report and its appendices illustrate what the team have
        done since its inception and what it feels the future
        response to Hillsborough and related issues should be.

  1.4   This report concentrates upon the social work team. Mention
        is made of the Hillsborough Centre/ but members will see that
        in many ways the Centre and team are two separate entities.

        PHILOSOPHY

  2.1   People coming forward for help immediately following the
        disaster had/ largely/ no prior contact with the SSD. It was
        anticipated that this was a trend which could continue.

  2.2   The team    were   aware   of the   value  and importance of
        traditional social work methods. However they were equally
        aware  that   social  work   has  a poor public image both
        nationally and locally which might have made people reluctant
        to utilise the team's service.

  2.3   Consequently the team felt that it had to provide its
        services in a way that would make it attractive to the public
        generally. A spin off from this was to give a more positive
        image of the City Council's Social Services Department.

  2.4   The team    have   therefore used   a   variety   of   means   to
        'advertise' what it provides.

2.4.1    .APPENDIXA contains examples of a leaflet and poster which
        were distributed widely around Liverpool advertising the team
        and Centre.

2.4.2   The team have had numerous dealings with the press and media/
        which they have positively encouraged. This has provided an
        opportunity to further advertise and explain what services
        the team provide (APPENDIX B)    as well as helping to give a
        positive image to both the SSD and the City.

2.4.2    The team   have    received many  requests to          undertake
        presentations of their work to a wide range of         local and
        national groups comprising of both professional        staff and
        prospective users of the service.



                                                     contd
                                      2.



2.4.3    An open meeting was held in November 1989 in order to
         further explain the teams works in a positive and non
         threatening way. Approximately 150 people were present.

  2.5    The team has endeavoured to remove many of the barriers
          which frequently make accessto the SSD difficult.  This has
          resulted in an Open Door policy being operated by the team.

2.5.1    The Open Door Policy ensures that people are dealt with,
         with a minimum of formality. No appointment is required
         prospective users can drop in and have a cup of tea or
         coffee. The development of any counselling or group work is
         taken at their pace.

         THE HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE

  a)     Hillsborough Related Work

  3.1     The  Hillsborough Centre is used for a wide range of
        - Hillsborugh Related Work in addition to it being the base
          for the Hillsborough Team. The following provides a brief
          synopsis of its Hillsborough  Related work.

3.1.1    A daily drop-in facility is available in thebuilding (9 -
          5pm Monday - Friday - Thursday until 7.30pm).

3.1.2    The Hillsborough Family Support     Group   regularly   use   the
         building for their meetings.

3.1.3    The  editorial board of Interlink meet weekly in the
         building. The Centre also acts as its major distribution
         and mailing base.

3.1.4     A staff support group for all Hillsborough workers in the
          region meets monthly as does a forum for the regions team
          managers.

3.1.5     With its range of resource material and expertise/ the
          Centre acts as a national focus for anyone working with
          victims or with an interest in this work.

3.1.6     A Community Artist employed by the City is based in the
          Centre. His skills and use of art are a valuable addition
          to the Hillsborough task.

3.1.7     The Centre acts as the centre for a wide range of outreach
          work. , (for details of the outreach work, see APPENDIX 'C1
          Childrens Society report)

3.1.8     A wide range of groups and group activities are based upon.,
          the   Hillsborough  Centre.  Full   details  of  these  are
          contained in APPENDIX D of necessity most of these are
          still staff led/ although increasingly some of the groups
          are moving towards becoming self help. However even this
          change of emphasis future groups are planned which will be
          staff led.



                                                      contd
                              3.


        b) Non-Hillsborough Related Work

  3.2   Members will be aware that suitable accomodation is a
        problem for the SSD. Whilst the Hillsborough Centre is
        by no means spacious and at times is barely sufficient
        for its purpose/ it does provide an additional resource
        which is available for use both by the SSD and the
        local community.

  3.3   The Centre has been and continues to be used by members
        of the department as a suitable venue for access and
        some in house development and training.

3.3.1   Its equipment and   resources    are available        for use by
        the department.

  3.4   The Centre is also used     by    a   range   of   groups   from
        outside the department.

3.4.1   The Friends of Stanley, Park meet regularly in               the
        Centre. They are a group of local people who                 are
        seeking to conserve and regenerate Stanley Park.

3.3.3   The secondment of a youth worker to the team had led to
        the Centre being used as a venue and base for a number
        of youth work activities.

3.4.4   Links with the Alder Centre (a centre providing support
        for bereaved parents) are leading to the Centre being
        used as a venue for some of their activities.

3.4.5   A group of victims of sexual abuse/ who originally met
        through a group run by two workers from the department
        has now become a self help group. They are planning to
        meet monthly from October in the centre.

3.4.6   A Carers group based in the North End of the City are
        to meet regularly in the centre also from October.

  3.5   All of the above have indicated to the team that the
        location of the Centre has helped to fill a large gap
        in actual physical resources in the North End of the
        City.

  3.6   No staff time has been involved in meeting any of these
        needs. Many of these groups meet outside of normal
        hours/ the groups are therefore given free access to
        the building and its facilities. In over one year of
        operation this has not presented any security problems/
        bar occasional difficulties in setting or resetting the
        alarm system.

        The Work of the Hillsborough Team & Statistical Data

  4.1   As of 30.8.90 the Hillsborough Team had dealt with 438
        referrals.APPENDIX E. shows a monthly breakdown of these
        referrals together with a broad indication of the
        nature of each referral.


                                                      contd
                                       4.


   4.2      The 438 referrals were allocated as follows:-

            Allocated to Staff at Centre.           277
            Referral solely for Group Work.         125
            Dealt with at point of referral.        134

   4.3      Most of the referrals relate to survivors    (266)/ but      a
            sizeable proportion relate to the bereaved (123).

            There have   also   been   (45)   for non Hillsborough related
            work .

            The Work of the Hillsborough Team

       a)   What has been done - (1)     Hillsborough Work.

   5.1      The Major brief of the Hillsborough Team has always been
            to provide social work support for all those effected by
            the disaster.

   5.2      The past year and a half has seen a number of key events
            which have directly required input from the team.

 5.2.1      The start of the 1989-90 football season/ Liverpool's F.C
            return to Hillsborough in November 1989/ Christmas 1989/
            the first anniversary/ the inquests and the test cases
            regarding compensation have all required a planned
            social work response and presence.

 5.2.2      Other incidents and events have served as triggers for
            peoples distress; a T.V. documentary in February 1990/
            the decision by the DPP not to prosecute together with
            other   significant   anniversaries/  dates  and   other
            publicised disasters.   None of which it was possible to
            truly predict.

 5.3        This has gone alongside and increased the day to day work
            of the team.

 5.3.1      No amount of therapy/ however skillful/ can take away the
            pain of Hillsborough or bring back a lost child or
            partner.

 5.3.2      Social workers on      the team are daily involved with
             helping victims of   the disaster to come to terms with
             what has happened to them.   Increasingly it has resulted
             in work being done with members of extended families/
             especially partners    and children.    In the words of
             Michael Stewart/ the work involves

            "Staying with questions which have no answers"

5.3.3.      Workers use a wide     range of techniques and skills in
             their undertaking of this task.    Traditional social work
             skills and tasks are much in evidence.    But in addition/
            workers are using new and varied skills in their work;
             principally   counselling    based    skills/   but   also
             considerable work involving media based material.


                                                              Cont/
                                      5.

5.3.4. The type of social work intervention depends upon the
       needs of     the user.    Intervention ranges from formal
       therapeutic group work/ through to informal discussion in
       the drop-in setting. Often work with individuals is long
       term for   months even years.   Centre users often need a
       long term    commitmentfrom counsellors/ and they need to
       work at their own pace.

5.3.5. The Teams work has been greatly enhanced by joint work
       with other     professionals.   We have had an Education
       Welfare Officer seconded      to the Centre for the last
       twelve months.. A clinical psychologist has been here for
        one day    a week for the last year(APPENDIX .G •)   more
        recently ayouth worker has joined us again/     seconded
        full time and an educational psychologist is spending \ a
        day a w§ek with us starting in September.

b)        The Future.
5.4       Predicting  future  of  Hillsborough related  needs  is
          difficult.     No dedicated disaster team has continued
          beyond 18 months post disaster.

5.5.      It is known that seemingly innocuous events can trigger
           off a wide range of emotions.

5.6       The team are still dealing with (5-10) new referrals per
          week - a figure which has remained constant for quite
           some time.

5.7.      The    recent  decision  of  the DPP will     require the
           re-opening of the inquests at an as yet undecided/ future
           date.   This will have major implications for the team in
           terms of the demans made upon it.

5.8.      To date all of the teams work has been very demanding in
           terms of staff time and commitment.      This has been a
           necessity.   However it is hoped that part of any future
           work will be to encourage a move towards self help
           skills.   This will however demand input from the team in
           terms of training and support.

5.9.      A sad fact of life is that a future disaster will occur.
           The team have developed certain skills in responding to
           disasters.    They have participated in a number of
           training sessions for other local authorities.

5.9.1. It is likely that any future disasters may result in
        requests for the Hillsborough team to provide some input
        and training.

(i i )    None Hillsborough Work.
     a)   Work done.

5.10      As has been indicated previously a significant number of
           referrals have been made to the team that do not relate
           to Hillsborough work.

5.10.1 The team have not sought this work.          However the
        "Hillsborough Experience" has made many people aware that
        there are many personal disasters in the lives of people
        in this City.

                                                          Cont/.
                                      6.


5.10.2     Many of the issues apparent on a grand scale following
           Hillsborough/ are present on a smaller scale in many of
           the smaller scale crises.

5.10.3     The skills of the team are as much needed by/ say a newly
           bereaved child/ as they are by the child whose father
           died at Hillsborough.

5.11       A full list of the areas of non Hillsborough             work
           undertaken by the team is contained in (APPENDIX F)
           Briefly/ however the major input in this area of work has
           been where death has occured suddenly and violently (e.g.
           murder)/ where an injury has been caused suddenly and
           violently/ and death of a child or newborn baby.

5.11.2     Increasingly/ working alongside workers with specific
           skills relating to children (Youth Worker/ E.W.O. and
           Childrens   Society  Worker)  has increased   the   teams
           awareness of the needs of children and young people.

5.11.3     In addition the team has twice been requested to respond
           to  violent   incidents   occuring in  the  department's
           establishments.

       b   The Future.
5.12       The number of referrals in this area is an indication
           that there is a considerable gap in trauma       work
           generally.

5.12.1     In the same way that Hillsborough related work is a major
           piece of preventative mental health work/ so too is the
           more general trauma work.

5.12.2     All districts and hospital teams have the skills to
           undertake this work.       However they do not have the
           capacity/ because of the statutory and service delivery
           nature   of their  work.      Also the  approach of the
           Hillsborough Team/ whereby users are made positively
           welcome and encouraged to utilise their services makes
           people more prone to seek their support rather than the
           departments other field work teams.

5.12.3     If members feel it to be appropriate/ this is an area of
           work the team would like to develop in the future. -Use
           of skills developed through the department's response to
           Hillsborough/  can thus be used in a positive way to
           contribute towards the wellbeing of the City generally.

5.13       As well as undertaking direct work in this area, the
           teams skills can/ and ought/ to be shared with other
           groups  of  staff.     This  will  involve the team in
           undertaking some training initiatives.

           Source of Work.
6.1        Work referred to the team has      come from a   variety   of
           sources.    A  full   breakdown    of referral    agents   is
           contained in (APPENDIX F)

6.2        It is of note that the major      source of referrals (77%)
           have  been  from  family or       friends/  or were • self
           referrals.

                                                            Cont/
                                      7.

6.3      Clearly therefore the team have been successful              in
         encouraging members of the public to refer to them.

6.4      In the case of Hillsborough work this is understandable
         bearing in mind the publicity the team have received.
          But 19 referrals of the 45 non Hillsborough have also
         been either self referral or referral through family and
          friends.

6.5      These figures do indicate that even without advertising,
         members of the public feel that the Hillsborough Team can
         offer a service to people other than those directly
         affected by Hillsborough.

         Size of Future Team.

7.1      The present establishment of the team is 12 Social Work
         posts and two Senior Social Workers.

7.1.1    There are in addition 3 administrative and clerical
          staff/ 1 scale 5 admin officer/ 1 scale 1 clerk/typist
         and 1 Mersey Temp.

7.2      It is anticipated that      the   demands   upon   the   team's
          resources will diminish.

7.2.1.   It is therefore proposed to reduce the establishment to
          6 social worker/ 1 Senior Practitioner/ 1 Team Manager -
          with appropriate admin support (A seperate report on the
          Centre looks at Clerical Support in greater depth)

7.3      It is hoped that some of the input from other disciplines
          may be allowed to continue (e.g. Youth Worker/ E.W.O./
          Children's Society Worker and Education Psychologist and
          Clinical Psychologist) thereby continuing a truly multi
          disciplinary team.

         Staffing Implications.

8.1      The work of the team has been all embracing.    Workers
          have mirrored the emotions expressed by victims.   The
          effects  upon   staff  have  been both physically  and
          emotionally draining/ whilst at the same time being
          stimulating and challenging.

8.2      Given that it is proposed to reduce the size of the team/
          considertion needs to be given to the implications this
          has for staff.

8.3      Some staff will need   to move to a position either within
         or beyond the department.

8.3.1    For staff moving within the department/ preparation needs
          to be    undertaken both  with   them and their future
          sections.

8.3.2.   All staff on the teamwill need some support and training
         to move into new areas of work.
8.4      No one can ever lose   sight of the Hillsborough Disaster.
         Nevertherless for the emotional and physical well being
         of all staff/ it is vital that- they all receive some
         support to enable them to look towards the future.
