                NORTH WEST ASSOCIATION OF SOCIAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES

                             MEETING ON 15TH SEPTEMBER 1989


                           Report of the Professional Adviser

                THE FOLLOW UP AND CO-ORDINATION OF DISASTER COfflMSELLING



Part I:    Summary of the recent NWASSA questionnaire


1.    During recent years there have been three major disasters in the North
      West involving a largo aoalo lose    life.


2.    Most Social Service Departments have designated someone - at least
      nominally - responsible for the co-ordination of disaster counsel ling.
       This is usually the Director, an Assistant Director or a Staff
      Development/Training Officer.

3.    A number of Social Services Departments - Liverpool, Sefton, Knowsley,
      Wirral and St. Helens - have set up disaster counselling teams in
      response to Hillsborough, subject to review in the light of long term
      developments. Others, including Lancashire, Cheshire and Oldham, have
       identified suitable counsellors and training is underway.

4.    Liaioon with ths voluntary              r'sgar'H■)ng r.oimsfilling appears
      generally to have been limited. But there are exceptions - Sefton's
       Director had specific responsibility for liaison and co-ordination
      with the voluntary sector for Merseyside in response to Hillsborough.
       St. Helens has been actively involved with the Bereavement Counselling
       Service and the Council for Voluntary Services.

5.    (a)       Most departments are drafting staff deveiopmerit f>l£tfts ffti*
                 disaster counselling, and its follow up for this process is still
                 in its infancy.

          (b)    There' is certainly a read interest in using the services of the
                 NWASSA Training Officer, but the Social Service Departments are
                 not yet clear about how this will be done, and await further
                 developments.

6.        Merseyside, Lancashire and Cheshire, plus contacts with Nottingham and
          Sheffield, are involved in a consortium, in the form of the Inter
          Agency Group. This was set up in response to the Hillsborough
          disaster, to promote a uniform response and act as a forum for the
          exchange of ideas and information, and promote continued mutual
          support.




                                              yjjiAajy itujoy hioujy   Ed-.m   by. w djy
As a result of the increasing number of major disasters, and
especially in the light of the Hillsborough tragedy, there is a real
recognition amongst the regional Social Service Departments of the
need for a co-ordinated response to disaster counselling. Co­
ordination   is necessary,   both within departments and between
authorities, and needs to be ongoing.
     Recommendations



 Taking into account the response to the questionnaire, the example of
 Hillsborough and discussions with people involved with the response to that
 disaster, the following points should be considered in the development of
 plans to co-ordinate disaster counselling and its follow up.


 1.        There is a need for a comprehensive long term approach to disaster
            counselling. The psyuhulugieal effects on victims can last for months
            or even years, and certainly outlast the span of the media's
            attention.

 2.        The demands on counsellors are intense and draining.             It is vital
            that:-

           (a)   They are well trained in disaster counselling.

           (b)   Social Service Department Managers should ensure that volunteers
                 from amongst their staff have the necessary personal qualities
                 for the role of disaster counsellors.

           (c)   There needs to be adequate support for counsellors in the event
                 of a disaster. This requires sppropriate training for management
                 as well as those doing the counselling. Management should
                 provide practical and political support, and good supervision
                 (which is essential if staff are to remain sane).

           (d)   De-briefing sessions are vital for those involved with disaster
                 counselling,  as well as sympathetic support from their
                 colleagues.

 3.       Counsellors should be      drawn from a wide number     of teams and
           localities, so that there is not a concentration of counsellors in a
           small number of teams or areas. This enables the remaining team
           members to cope more adequately with the normal workload in the event
           of a disaster (for they are also providing help in a disaster by
           trying to carry on with the routine duties).

 4.       Each authority should      have a co-ordinator and an assistant co­
           ordinator. They would also act as a first point of contact for
           matters relating to disaster. The co-ordinators should meet on a
           regular, perhaps annual basis, to exchange ideas and information.

 5.        The cotab lioh men t of a Regional Training M n H
           essential resource for all relevant training sessions          and meetings.




*d                                          S3DIAd3S TdlDOS N01J3S   1 7 2 :0 1   68/ T0 d3S
     The NWASSA Training Officer would provide support for those involved
     in disaster counselling, and may find it useful to work closely with
     other organisations which have appropriate expertise and knowledge,
     including those in the voluntary sector.

6.   Each authority should liaise with voluntary organisations to share
      knowledge and skills, and facilitate working together in the event of
      a disaster.

7.   Crisis counselling skills are not only vital          for coping with
      disasters, they can be of immense value for coping with any area of
      crisis/grief/loss and transition. For instance, there are many small
      scale disasters involving domestic conflagrations, car accidents and
      abuse cases, where crisis counselling skills may be invaluable when
      dealing with the victims. Staff with such skills would be a human
      resource, available to be mobilised whenever they are needed. They
      would also be professionals with a high level of interpersonal skills,
      of value in many social work situations. Indeed, there is a strong
      case for including for crisis counselling in social work courses, as
      part of a greater emphasis on human development and interpersonal
      skills.

8.   The media - and especially the popular press - can add to the stress
      experienced by those involved in a crisis.      This can affect both
      victims and their helpers. Social Services Departments will have to
      recognise the importance of being pro-active in supplying informed and
      professional support to the Press Officers in their difficult dealings
      with the media in the immediate aftermath of a disaster.




                                      S3DIA&OS 1WID0S N01J3S S2:0T 68. T0 d3S
