                                 INTER-AGENCY MEETING


                                      23rd JUNE 1989



                                          AGENDA




         Minutes of the meeting on 16th June              Appendix 'A'

                                      Minute 237          Appendix 'B'

                                      Minute 240          Appendix 'C'



2   .    Report from Nottinghamshire County Council - Appendix 'D'



3.       Any Other Business.



4.       Date of next meeting.




(Note:     The following papers have been circulated, viz:

             Appendix   'A'       —       Minutes of Last Meeting

             Appendix   'B'       -       Visit of Chief Inspector, S.S.I.

            Appendix    'C'       -       Letter to Asst. Chief Constable

            Appendix    'D'       —       Report from Nottinghamshire C.C.)




                                                                    *
PLEASE NOTE THAT THE MEETING OF THE GROUP AT 4.00 P.M.

ON 23RD JUNE WILL NOT BE HELD IN THE USUAL VENUE, BUT IN THE

DIRECTOR'S OFFICE, 3RD FLOOR, SOCIAL SERVICES HEADQUARTERS,

HATTON GARDEN, LIVERPOOL L3.
                   INTER AGENCY MEETING

                  FRIDAY, 16TH JUNE, 1989.



PRESENT:

  . W. Twist, in the Chair, Social Services, Lancashire.
  . D. Mason, Director of Social Services, Liverpool.
  . P. Marley, Assistant Director of Social Services, Liverpool.
  . P. Farrell, Director of Social Services, Sefton.
  . T. Owen, Social Services, Cheshire.
  . D. Evans, Social Services, Wirral.
  . S. Roberts, Social Services, Wirral.
  . A. Guthrie, Personal Services, St. Helens.
  . C. Morris, Social Services, Knowsley.
  . R. Adams, Merseyside Probation Service.
  . G.P. Davey, City Solicitor's, Liverpool.
  . A. Horner, City Solicitor's, Liverpool.
231.   Trust Fund.
       It was noted that the Trust Fund Manager has not yet suggested a
       possible date for a meeting between the Trustees and this Group and
       it was agreed that the meeting should, if possible, await the
       opening of the Drop—in Centre at Stonelodge..

232.   B.A.S.W. - Staffline.

       David Mason reported that he is currently arranging to notify
       Serge Paul of the decision (Minute No.222) of this Group of
       9th June about the payment of the B.A.S.W. account in respect of
       Staffline.

233.   Finance/Service Provision.

       (i) David Mason circulated a package of costed proposals, which
       Liverpool would be prepared to underwrite whilst negotiations
       continue to identify alternative sources of finance, which are
       designed to stabilize service provision and ensure that the service
       does not disintegrate through lack of financial resources. The
       package bears little resemblance to the original proposals presented
       by Professor Howard Parker but is seen as a realistic, feasible and
       acceptable alternative, which gives manageable costs for this
       financial year.

       The package was welcomed by the Group as a method of taking matters
       forward and a full discussion ensued on whether it would be
       appropriate to submit it to a further meeting of politicians of all
       Authorities (given that there is an outstanding resolution from
       their last meeting calling for a report of methods of financing the
       services proposed) but more importantly, so that Liverpool s
       position on underwriting the costs involved is not misinterpreted.
       It was suggested that a further meeting of the politicians would
       keep the consultation process going and may result in offers of
       financial support from Authorities, especially as the Group had today
       been advised that Cheshire has agreed a firm commitment to support
       the Regional Unit byip to £50,000 on a continuing basis.

       However, after further discussion it was agreed that at this stage,
       a meeting be not convened and that David Mason be asked to arrange    D.Mason.
       for an appropriately worded letter to be sent from the Leader
       (Liverpool City Council) to the Leaders of the other core Authorities
       explaining the current situation regarding the funding of services
       and presenting, in an inclusive way, the package of proposals now
       submitted and the offer of Liverpool to underwrite them - with a
       reference to the possibility of convening a further meeting of
       politicians at a more appropriate stage in the future.

        (ii) Copies of a letter of 15th June, 1983, from the Association
        of County Councils to Local Authority Chief Executives about the
        Bellwin Scheme were circulated, copies having already been faxed to
        Authorities on 14th June for consideration by Chief Executives,        All to note
        Finance Officers and Directors of Social Services. David Mason
        reported that he had arranged to meet with Derek Morrison (Task
        Force) during the week commencing 19th June to discuss and gain
        advice on how the Group can best bid for resources within the rules
        governing the scheme.

        (Lii) David Mason reported that receipts from the Charity Shield
        are not disbursed until October and it was therefore unlikely that
        the Group would obtain an early answer from the F.A./L.F.C. to
                           -   2-



       its request for a contribution towards the costs of the Regional
       Unit. In noting this, the Group asked that the contribution be
       sought on the basis of assistance towards the cost of services        D.Mason.
       generally, in which connection it also requested that a "shopping
       list" comprising the various strands of the service being
       provided (e.g. Helpline, Newsletter, Staffline etc   ) be drawn up,
       and costed, and then be used in discussion with L.F.C. and others
       in attracting contributions towards those costs.

234.   Offers of Help.

       It was agreed that consideration of the progress being made by the
       Ed Murphy group of C.L.O's etc... in sorting through the various
       offers of help, be further deferred. Pauline Farrell reported that    P. Farrell
       she hoped to have a response by the next meeting on how to proceed
       with the proposed visit of injured or traumatised young people
       (teenagers/early 20's) to the U.S.A.

235.   Co-ordination After Hillsborough.

       Wilf Twist reported some further, early progress on the database
       aspect of the evaluation work being organised and referred to a
       problem he anticipates of attracting information from a variety
       of sources about referrals dealt with, for inputting onto the
       database. Pauline Farrell reported that she had been advised by
       Ed Murphy that the voluntary sector is reluctant to pass on details
       of referrals because of the assurances that have been given about
       confidentiality. David Mason agreed to pursue this with Ed Murphy     D.Mason.
       and stress the need for the information.

236.   Film Footage.

       It was noted that the video material of the disaster presented
       to the Judicial Inquiry would be circulated by John Peet in due       J.Peet.
       course.   Wilf Twist circulated a copy of the video of the
       Anglican Memorial Service to the core Authorities and undertook to
       provide further copies for the Probation Service, Sheffield and       W.Twist.
       Nottingham. Paddy Marley reported that a copy of the video
       material for use in expert counselling sessions had already been
       made available to the Ambulance Service by the television
       companies and with their agreement, he was obtaining a copy direct    P.Marley.
       from the Ambulance Service.

       It was agreed to ask core teams to be aware of the amount of
       material about the disaster which is now circulating in a variety of All to not
       different forms and to request that each keep other core teams
       notified of any useful information that comes to their attention.

237.   Chief Inspector S .S .I.

       David Mason reported that the format for the visit of Bill Utting,
       Chief Inspector, S.S.I., had, as requested by this Group, been
       discussed at the meeting of staff representatives from Wirral,
       Knowsley, Liverpool and Sefton at Cherry House on 12th June. The
       staff accept the need to publicise and politicise the work being
       undertaken and expressed the wish that the arrangements enable
       staff from two Authorities to meet Bill Utting in the morning and
       two in the afternoon, with a break for lunch, which the Group
       agreed should be with Directors of Social Services and David
       Mathieson. David Mason was asked to make the necessary                D.Mason.
       arrangements for the day's programme, which it was agreed should be
       scheduled for 12th July.
                             -3-


238.   University of Liverpool Counselling Service.

       The Group considered the terms of a letter of 8th June from Bill
       Farrell, University of Liverpool Counselling Service, seeking
       information and assistance from this Group in connection with
       counselling work being undertaken by the University with members
       of the University community affected by the tragedy.

       The view of the Group was that David Mason should respond to the
       letter with a suggestion that the Counselling Service may wish to     D . Mason.
       link with the non—statutory sector (via Ed Murphy) and could
       consider utilising the services of Guy Mitchell for a one-off
       training session. An invitation for a representative to attend the
       meeting of staff at Burton Manor during August could also be made.
       The response should make clear that the Group is unable to provide
       any information held on the database abput members of the
       University community.

239.   Helpline.

       It was reported that with effect from 5.00 p.m. on 16th June all
       out—of—office hours and weekend calls to Helpline will be
       diverted automatically to the Emergency Duty Team at 1 Schomberg
       Street.Liverpool 6. This allowed the Group to agree the following
       revised shift patterns, viz: —

       Mondays to Fridays.

       0000 hours to 0830 hours                  E.D.T.
       0830 hours to 1700 hours                  Agencies.
       1700 hours to 2400 hours                  Agencies.

       Saturdays and Sundays.

       0000 hours to 0900 hours                 E.D.T.
       0900 hours to 1700 hours                 Agencies
       1700 hours to 2400 hours                 Agencies

       The duty rota for the period 17th - 24th June was circulated and
       it was noted that only one counsellor is required for each out-of-
       hours shift, but the advice of the Group was that it is a matter      All to not-
       for each Agency to decide whether it wishes to send more than one
       member of staff.

       A breakdown of calls to the Helpline for the period 7th to 14th
       June inclusive was circulated and arising from its consideration
       thereof, the Group agreed to remain alert to whether the E.D.T.
       should assume responsibility for all weekend calls to the
       Helpline, given the small number of calls received, and to give
       further consideration to this once the revised arrangements agreed
       above have been in operation for a short period of time.

       The suggestion that the Group should enter into discussion with the
       voluntary sector to co-ordinate and train volunteers to run the
       Helpline in association with the E.D.T. was agreed and the Group      D. Mason
       requested David Mason to pursue this with Ed Murphy.

240.   Hillsborough (Police) Inquiry Team.

       The meeting received a letter of 7th June from the Assistant
       Chief Constable (Hillsborough Inquiry) to David Mason seeking a
       categorical assurance that persons visiting the Hillsborough ground
       do not touch any aspect of the terraces at the west end, such as
       the gates, fences, barriers etc.
       The Group expressed its incredulity    and dismay at the terms of the
       letter and the insensitive message it contains. Pauline Farrell
       reported an incident of which she was aware, of a father who had in
       recent days visited the ground, accompanied by social work staff,
       only to be denied, his wish to stand in the place where his son had
       died - which had given rise to great upset and distress. The Group
       requested Paddy Marley to respond to the letter querying the
       reasoning behind the decision and stressing the insensitivity of the    P.Marley.
       current arrangements. The response is to be copied to Lord Justice
       Taylor, in whose name the requirements have been laid down.

241.   Benefit Payments.

       The meeting considered the terms of a letter of 31st May from
       Nicholas Scott (Minister of State for Social Security) responding
       to enquiries made on behalf of this Group about the effect of
       payments from the Disaster Fund to people receiving an income—related
       benefit. It was agreed that Derek Evans would arrange for the letter    D.Evans.
       to be considered by the group of welfare benefit advisers established
       previously by this Group and for their comments to be reported back,
       for onward transmission to the National Association of Citizens
       Advice Bureaux and the Minister.

242.   Date of Next Meeting.

       It was agreed that the next meeting of this Group be held at
       4.00 p.m. on Friday, 23rd June, 1989, in Mr. David Mason's Office,      All to note
       3rd Floor, Social Services Headquarters, Hatton Garden, Liverpool 3.
                                                                                               ftPPwi})\x




      ILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                                                                                      MmqpoIiuhi
                                                                                                                Serewgh •» Wirrai
    C h e s h ire    liv b rp o o l   3
    County Council   O zty CtK~b^U            m    .     County.^^.
                                                                                    P cO U N Q L
                                                         Council
                                                                IXJf     StHolons

c/o 26 HATTON GARDEN
    LIVERPOOL
    L3 2AW      FAX (051)                         225 3916                  Telephone: 051         225   3800

Your ref:                                     Our ref:        Dm/jb.                   Date:       22nd June,        1989.
    This letter sent to:-

    D. Rickard, D. of S.S. Wirral;                                       c.c. P. Farrell, D of S.S. Sefton
    C. Briscoe, D. of S.S. Knowsley;                                          B. Harrison, Asst. Chief
    T. Brown, D . of S.S. St. Helens;                                                   Inspector, S.S .I. Man.
    N. Singleton D . of S.S . Cheshire;                                       Gary Davey for Info.
    T. Foster, D. of S.S. Lancashire;
    N . Kay,    D . of S.S. Sheffield;
    D. White,   D. of S.S. Nottingham



                                          Visit by Chief Inspector S.S.I.
                                                 12th July, 1989

         Bill Utting has agreed to spend the whole day with us looking at services
    post Hillsborough and meeting front line staff, with whom he particularly wishes
    to engage.   The staff were consulted and their request was that he should meet
    teams.   Four teams will therefore be included in the programme in order to minimize
    travelling, these are all relatively close to Lime Street, as agreed at Friday's
    Inter Agency Meeting.

           The suggested programme is therefore:-

                      9.00 a.m.           -10.30 a.m.          -    Wirral

                     11.00 a.m.           —12.30 p.m.          —    Sefton

                     12.30 p.m.           — 1.30 p.m.          —    Lunch

                      2.00 p.m.-            3.30 p.m.           -      Liverpool including Helpline

                      4.00 p.m. —           5.30 p.m.           —   Knowsley

         This programme is subject to change to accommodate any revised travelling
    arrangements and it may be necessary, if the programme is too long, to arrange three
    slightly shorter visits in the morning and one in the afternoon.   The negotiation
    is obviously not finalized with S.S.I.

         Pauline Farrell has kindly agreed to offer hospitality at Lunch time for Bill
    and his colleagues from S.S.I. and Directors.   Would you please*try to join us for
    lunch and could you confirm that you will be present with Pauline's Secretary.


                                                                                     /continued
When calling or telephoning please ask for:
                           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


/continued...                                        1      22.6.89.




     I thought it better to write now ahead of the arrangements being confirmed
so that you can diary the date and advise your staff.


                                  Yours sincerely,




                                  Director of Social Services.
                                                                                               ftP^OfNTl) | X       o


                                                         I                           I
                                                                  Lancashire
    C heshire
    County C ouncil
                      livbrpool ^
                      C c t^ C o o ^ d l          m  W
                                                     BoroM
                                                         q«o<ij
                                                 IjCNOWSLEY,
                                                                  Countyjfc
                                                                  Council      StHelens
                                                                                            SEFTON
                                                                                          U COUNCIL


c /o 26 HATTON G A R D E N
     LIVERPO OL
     L3 2AW                                                                     Telephone: 051     2 2 5 -3 7 7 5



Your ref:        jmj/vsc.                        Our ref:           pm/bp.                  Date: 19th June, 1989.

     Mr. J. Mervyn Jones, M.Sc.,
     Assistant Chief Constable,
     Hillsborough Inquiry Team,
     West Midlands Police Headquarters,
     P.O.Box 52, Lloyd House,
     Colmore Circus Queensway,
     Birmingham B4 6NQ.


     Dear Mr. Mervyn Jones,

                                           Access to theWest End Terraces, Stands,
                                           Gates and Turnstiles.

          Thank you for your letter of 7th June regarding the restricted access
     to parts of the Hillsborough football ground.

          In your letter you ask us to ensure that those who visit the ground
     do not touch any aspects of the terraces at the West End. In effect this
     means that there is no point whatsoever in us arranging visits to Sheffield
     Wednesday Football Club, as the reasoning behind victims of the Hillsborough
^    disaster paying such visits is for them to actually relive the experience
     encountered by those who were involved in the tragedy. I recall Lord Justice
     Taylor's comments to the press when he visited the scene of the tragedy which
     were, in essence, that he needed to be in the Leppings Lane part of the
     grounds to get the feel of the terraces so that he could better understand
     what happened on the day. In that sense Lord Justice Taylor's feelings are
     a mirror of the feelings of the victims and to deny them access to the very
     spot where they or their relatives or friends were subject to the horrors of
     the tragedy is to deny them any opportunity of overcoming their feelings of
     loss.

          I am sure you will understand that it is an essential part of the heeding
     process that people are given the opportunity of visiting the scene of a
     tragedy, and in the Lockerbie disaster you will recall arrangements were made
     for relatives from the United States to be flown to the disaster area so that
     they could better understand what had happened and assist them in coping with
     their grief.

          Whilst I am sure there are good reasons why Lord Justice Taylor might
     have thought restricted access to the ground was necessary, I am equally sure
     that he would understand the necessity for selected groups with whom we are
     involved, being afforded every consideration to help them deal with the
     tragedy. Could I, therefore, ask you to share the contents of this letter
W hen calling or telephoning please ask for: Mr. P. Marley.
                            - 2   -




with Lord Justice Taylor with a view to some arrangement being made
which will enable us to continue with the essential work of helping
the victims of Hillsborough.

     I      have copied this letter to Mr. G. Mackrell, Secretary at the
Club, for his information.




                                      Yours sincerely




                             Director of Social Services
                           Nottinghamshire                County Hall
                                                          West Bridgford
                           County Council                 Nottingham NG2 7QP
\                                                         Telephone
                           Social Services                Nottingham (0602) 8 2 3 8 2 3
                                                          Telex 3 7485 call back code NCC G
                           Director David R. White M A.   Fax (0602) 8 1 7 9 4 5
                                                          Direct Line (0 6 0 2 )



M r \ D < Mason,                                          Your ref
Director,
                                                                             DSS/CMC
Social Services Departme                                  Our ref
26 Hatton Garden,
Liverpool,                                                Please ask for
L3 2AW                                                    Tel extension
Personal
                                                                             19th June, 1989
                                                          Date




Dear David,

I thought you may be interested in the attached Committee report which was
well received at the last Social Services Committee meeting on 15th June.
As we have not been in touch with each other for a while I was wondering
whether you had any news to report on the financing of the Support Unit?

Keep in touch.

    t wishes.




 Director
report



meeting         SOCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE


date            1 5 th J u n e , 1989       agenda item number   12-




                    REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR OP SOCIAL SERVICES


                                   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


(1)       Following the tragedy at the Hillsborough Football Ground,
          Sheffield, on the 15th April, 1989. I reported to Members verbally
          on the involvement by the Department at the last Social Services
          Committee on the 17th April. Although no Nottingham Forest
          Football supporters were killed in this incident, several were
          injured, and substantial numbers traumatised by their experiences,
          both at the ground and subsequently by media coverage of the
          event. There were also several Liverpool supporters who live
          within Nottinghamshire who were similarly traumatised and injured
          at Hillsborough. This report updates Members on action which has
          been taken and discussions which have been entered into.

(2)       On Monday, 17th April the Department approached Nottingham Forest
          Football Club to offer advice and assistance, and following
          discussions with them, it was agreed we would set up a "help line"
          to deal with members of the public traumatised as a result of the
          disaster. The Help Line was established in the Executive Stand at
          Nottingham Forest Football Club during the afternoon of Tuesday,
          18th April, and became operational at 9.00a.m. on Wednesday, 19th
          April. The Help Line offered a facility either for members of the
          public to make telephone contact with Social Workers at the
          Ground, or to come to the Ground to see them personally. The Help
          Line was operational at the football ground until Monday evening
          the 24th April, at which point, due to a fall in referrals, the
          line in service was transferred back to the Social Services
          reception area in County Hall. A Help Line facility was available
          from this point until Tuesday 2nd May, I989 when on the basis of a
          dramatic drop in the number of calls received, this free phone
          service was finished.

(3)       During the time the Help Line was based at the Football Ground,
          three Social Workers, an Admin. Officer and the Group Principal
          Social Worker, Queen's Medical Centre, were constantly available
          to deal with enquiries from the public, and from the media.
          Approximately 700 contacts were made with members of the public,
          and although some of these were fairly brief encounters, evidence
          of major disasters suggests that these would, nonetheless, be very
          significant to those concerned. Approximately 150 people were
          counselled for more intensive periods of time, and for some of
          these the process will continue in the months ahead.
 (4)     Staff of the Department were supported by a consortium of
         voluntary sector organisations, who were originally established to
         help with victims of the Kegworth Air Disaster. It was possible to
         refer on to this consortium, a number of individuals who required
         ongoing assistance. Members of the Chaplaincy Department of the
         Queen's Medical Centre were also available to offer spiritual
         comfort and counselling.

 (5)     The experience of responding to the Air Crash earlier this year,
         resulted in the Department being able to provide a swift and
         efficient response to this disaster. The leaflet, "Coping with a
         Major Disaster", which was produced for victims of the Air Crash,
         was reproduced and personalised for this incident, and the cost of
         printing borne by Nottingham Forest Football Club. In the light of
         the Department's experiences gained from involvement in two recent
         disasters a revision will take place of our emergency planning
         procedures.

 (6 )   Throughout this period, both myself and other Senior Officers of
        the Department have maintained close contact with colleagues in
        Liverpool to ensure a co-ordinated, tripartite response to the
        disaster, and this has involved meetings in both Liverpool and
        Sheffield. We have agreed that information which we have collated
        to be shared with staff in Liverpool as this will enable a total
        picture to be compiled of the work of all Local Authorities
        involved in responding to this tragedy.

(7)     On the 28th April the Chairman of Social Services, the Group
        Principal Social Worker, Queen's Medical Centre, and myself
        attended a series of meetings in Liverpool to consider a way
        forward for co-ordinating and delivering services on Merseyside
        for those effected by the tragedy. The attached report "After
        Hillsborough" (Appendix A) was considered and formally agreed at a
        meeting attended by the leader of the Council, Chairman of the
        County Council, Chairman of Social Services, Opposition Spokesman
        on Social Services, and the Chief Executive at a meeting in
        Liverpool on 29th April, I989.
(8 )    The main recommendation of the "After Hillsborough" report is that
        a Support Unit be established for a minimum period of two years.
        The Unit should have an executive officer, and support staff-
        operate the central Help Line; set up an efficient database-
        oversee the pattern of services to enable resources to be used
        e fectively; see that districts provide systematic support and
        training for all staff; develop clear channels of communication
        and form partnerships with all relevant authorities and non-
        statutory agencies in the region; set up monitoring, evaluation
        and performance review systems.

(9)
        fU^ ° rL JhaS ?6en giV6n by the County Co^cil to the Merseyside
        Authorities in seeking funding from Central Government for the
        es a    s ment of this Unit. Once the funding arrangements have
        been secured, it is likely that the Authority will be asked to be
        represented on the Unit's Management Committee.

(10) I will keep the Members informed on developments.



                                      2
It is

RECOMMENDED:

              that the action of the County Council be noted.


County Treasurer's Comments

The County Council's involvement with the aftermath of the Hillsborough
Disaster has not led to any additional expenditure being incurred. The
additional workload has been accommodated within existing staff
resources. At this stage, the impact for the future cannot be predicted
although the continuing involvement of Social Services Department staff
is anticipated. The Director will be reporting further on developments
which will include the Government's response to the request by the
Merseyside authorities for special funding.




DAVID R. WHITE
Director of Social Services


Background Papers available for Inspection
None.


389/DSS/JFG




                                      3
