                                                      C ity solicitor, secretary to the Council
                                                      P.O. Box No. 88
                                                      Municipal Buildings
       LIVERPOOL                                      Dale Street
                                                      L IV E R P O O L L69 2D H
                                                                               t


                                                                      •>'%   '-I...-,   1 ' ’'*!
      C ityQ otvh & jt
                                                    •• " i " ,%   '


                                                      Telephone*: 051-227 3^11
                                                       Direct Line : 051-225   2436
                                                      Fax: 051-225
                                                      DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                     Your ref
                                                     Our ref          S S /G P D

          TO: The Director of Social Serivces.      Date              15th March,                  1991
              - Wirral MBC      - Cheshire CC
              - Knowsley MBC    - Lancashire CC
              - St. Helens MBC - Nottinghamshire CC


•
              - Sefton MBC      - Sheffield City


          Dear Sir/Madam,

         Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group

         At its meeting held on 8th March, 1991, the Hillsborough Inter-
         Agency Group reviewed its role and considered whether a
         continuing need exists to meet bi-monthly, as at present, in
         order to progress a co-ordinated response to Hillsborough related
         matters, or whether an alternative, less formal method of
         consultation could now be put in place for use as and when
         necessary.

         The view of the Group was that whilst alternative consultation
         arrangements should be put into effect shortly, it would be
         appropriate for one further meeting to be held after the
         conclusion of the Sheffield Inquests and following the
         'termination' staff conference at Burton Manor and the second
         anniversary of the disaster, to wind-up the business of the Group
         and to receive a final report on the Group's activities.

         Accordingly, arrangements have been made for a concluding meeting
         to be held at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, 10th May, 1991 in the
         Committee Room, Town Hall, Castle Street, Liverpool, 2.

         As this will be the last meeting, the Group is anxious that all
         those local authorities which have at any time participated and
         contributed to the pan-Merseyside response to the disaster should
         be invited so that all outstanding items of business may be
         concluded satisfactorily, and I have accordingly been asked to
         write to Directors seeking representation.

         I hope that it will be possible for your Authority to be
         represented.

         Yours faithfully,


         City Solicitor.
    When calling or telephoning please ask fo r
                                   15th March,             1991



                                   Chair,
                                   Hillsborough Inter-Agency
                                    Group,
                                   Lancashire County Council,
                                   Eastcliffe County Offices,
                                   PRESTON.   PR1 3EA




 Dear Colleague,

                                     n u   u   i i u   i




     The Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group proposes to hold
its final meeting at 11.00 a.m.  on Friday, 10th May, 1991
in the Committee Room, Town Hall, Castle Street, Liverpool,'
  •




     As this is to be the concluding meeting, it was thouqht
appropriate to make arrangements for existing and former
members of the Group to meet informally following the
business meeting.

     Accordingly, arrangements have been made for a buffet
lunch to be held immediately following the business meetina
at approximately 12.30 p.m., in the Town Hall.              '


  _ As an existing or former member of the Group I am now
writing to invite you to the buffet lunch (and the final
meeting if you wish), and hope that you will be able to
accept.

     May I mention that the cost of the lunch is not
expected to exceed approximately £5 per head, and it would
be very helpful if you could let              Clerk to the
Group, telephone 051 225 2436) know your intentions.

                     Yours sincerely,




SS5ABA
