p




                         INQUEST   TRAINING       DAY

                             6 October 1989




                                   CONTENTS


                                                        Page

    Introduction                                          1


    The Inquest                                           2


    Optional Legal Strategies                             6


    Provision of Deceased Personal Detail
    to the Bereaved                                      13


    Zeebrugge                                 •          17


    Summary and Recommendations                          22


    Addresses/Telephone numbers                          26
                                   1


INTRODUCTION


The information contained in the following pages has been summarised
from the Inquest Training Day held at Lodge Moor Hospital, Sheffield
on the 6th October, 1989.

The day was chaired by John Pilling, Assistant Director, Sheffield
Family & Community Services Department.    In his opening address, he
acknowledged the reason for our need .to come together on-such:a’Training
Day and therefore asked for one minute's silence as a mark of respect to
all those who died at Hillsborough on the 15th April, 1989.

The talks of each of the main contributors have been reproduced and
therefore some duplication of facts and points will be found. The major
recommendations however have been summarised at the end of this document.

It must also be noted that some of the information is general to
disasters and some specific to particular ones, e.g. Zeebrugge and King's
Cross. The information on inquests is also general, as at this stage it
is not possible to say exactly what the scenario will be for the
Hillsborough Inquests. It is, however, hoped to run a further Training
Day once the date and details of the Inquests are known.




Hillsborough Task Team
Sheffield

February, ]QyO
MR. K. D. POTTER - Coroner, South Yorkshire East District

Mr Potter began by indicating that he would be unable to comment
Specifically on the Hillsborough disaster. He stressed that he had
no connection with the incident and that as such his knowledge of
what had happened on the day of the disaster was the same as (no greater
than) any intelligent individual who read newspapers and watched television.

Mr Potter then talked about the history of the Coroner's Court and how
it has evolvedinto its present form with specific reference to the
inquisitorial, as opposed to accusatorial, nature of the Court. For
the purpose of this paper, it is not necessary to go into detail
about the the history of the Coroner's Court. Suffice it to say that
over the years, many of the previous responsibilities of the Coroner
have been shed, until the Coroner of the present day is involved almost
totally with the investigation of death, though some vestigial
interests such as treasure trove still remain.

The Coroner today•is an independent officer appointed by the Local
Authority. He/she is independent of Central or Local Government and
must be qualified either medically and/or legally. The Home Secretary
offers support and advice to the Coroner but he has no control over
him/her. A Coroner is appointed for life or until voluntary retirement
and cannot be dismissed, except for a grave breach of behaviour. .

Circumstances requiring an Inquest

Certain types of death cannot be disposed of without an inquest.
These comprise criminal cases (murder, manslaughter and infanticide);
suicides; road, rail, aviation, domestic and other accidents;
industrial accidents and diseases; deaths in prison or police custody;
deaths where negligent medical treatment is alleged; deaths from
neglect and any other case where the Coroner feels that a public
hearing would be beneficial.

Certain of these cases must be held with a Jury (see Section on Jury).

Adjournment of Inquests

In some cases , it is necessary for a Coroner to open an inquest and
then adjourn it. This would be the case if the death was an obvious
criminal one, in order to allow time for criminal proceedings to take
place. An adjournment also is necessary if the Director of Public
Prosecutions is asked to examine the circumstances surrounding a
death in order to make a decision whether or not to prosecute. This
has been the case with the Hillsborough disaster.

Functions of'the Coroner's Court

The Court has two functions in relation to a death:

(1)    To establish the medical cause of death;
(2)    To enquire into the circumstances and cause of a death if the
       death is violent or unnatural.

The Coroner has the power to order a post mortem if he feels it
necessary. As all accidents are reportable to the Coroner, a major
incident involving a number of deaths, as in the case of Hillsborough,
would be referred to a Coroner, and post mortems would be required to
establish the cause of death in each case.
                                     3


Reporting of Deaths

The majority of reports of a death are made by the Police, but in
some cases, a doctor or the Registrar will notify the Coroner of a
death in his/her jurisdiction.

Jurisdiction

The Coroner to whom an inquest would be referred depends on where the
body of the deceased is found. In the case of the 95 people who died
at Hillsborough, it will be necessary for the Inquest to be held in
Sheffield under the jurisdiction of the Sheffield Coroner.

The Jury at an Inquest

There are four circumstances where a Coroner must summon a jury.
These are:-

(a)         that the death occurred in prison.
(b)         that the death occurred while the deceased was in Police
           custody.
(c)         that the death was caused by an accident, poisoning, or
           disease, notice of which is required to be given under any
           act to a Government department.
(d)         that the death occurred in circumstances where the continuance
           or possible recurrence of which is prejudicial to the health
           and safety of the public or any section of the public.

Under category (d) therefore the Hillsborough Inquests will have a Jury.

Qualifications of Jurors

 The same rules and qualifications apply to Jurors summoned to attend a
 Coroner's Inquest as those who might be summoned to attend a Crown Court.

 Number of Jurors

 The Coroner shall summon no less than seven and no more than eleven
 Jurors.

 ¥erdict

 A unanimous verdict must be sought; the majority can be accepted
 with no greater minority than two, but the Coroner is only oblige
 to accept a unanimous verdict. If the minority is greater than two
 then the Jury is discharged and a further Inquest must follow wi
 a fresh Jury. In order to reach the verdict, the Jury must retire
 from the Court and consider their verdict in private, without either
 Coroner or anyone else present.

 The Jury can visit the scene of an incident where the death occured
 if it helps them to reach a verdict. Dr Popper may decide to take
 the Jury to Hillsborough to look over the scene of the incident.

 After summing up, the Coroner or Jury must consider what verdict is
 to be returned.
                                     4


The List of possible verdicts includes:

         Natural causes
         Industrial disease
         Dependence on drugs/non/dependent abuse of drugs
         Suicide
         Accident/Misadventure
        •Sentence of death
         Lawful killing
         Open verdict
         Unlav;ful killing
         Stillbirth
         Want of attention at birth
         Attempted/Self induced abortion

Further explanations of these verdicts can be found in Jervis - Book
on Coroner's 16.12.

Mr Potter gave further details on an unlawful killing verdict and
noted that it covers murder, manslaughter, infanticide, and causing
death by reckless driving. A gross negligence manslaughter verdict
requires proof beyond reasonable doubt 01 gross negligence - going
beyond a mere matter of compensation and showing such disregard for
the life and safety of others as to amount to a Crime against the
State and conduct deserving punishment.

Witnesses

All witnesses at an Inquest are under oath, but the rules of evidence
are not applied as strictly as they are in other Courts. For example,
witnesses in a Coroner's Court have three privileges:

(1 )        Against Self incrimination
(2)         Privacy between their lawyer and themselves
(3)         Public interest immunity.

Any person who satisfies the Coroner that he falls within one of the
following categories of person is entitled to examine witnesses at an
Inquest, either in person, by counsel or a solicitor:

(a)         Parent, child, spouse and any personal representative of
            the deceased;
(b)         any beneficiary under a policy of insurance issued on the
            life of the deceased;
(c)         the insurer who issued such a policy of insurance;
(d)         any person whose act or omission orthat of his agent   or servant
            may in the opinion of the Coroner have caused, or contributed
             to, the death of the deceased;
(e)         any person appointed by a trades union to which the deceased
             at the time of his death belonged, if the death of the deceased
             may have been caused by an injury received in the course of
             his employment or by an industrial disease;
(f)         an inspector appointed by, or a representative of, an enforcing
             authority, or any person appointed by a government department
             to attend the Inquest;
(g)         the chief officer of police:
(h)         any other person who in the opinion of the Coroner is a properly
             interested person.
             Jervis 13.2
                                   5


The evidence given by witnesses at an Inquest is usually oral, but
documentary evidence can also be used, including photographs. Written
statements made earlier by witnesses can also be used.

A witness must first be examined by a Coroner, after the conclusion
of which any properly interested party may examine the witness. The
witnesses' own representatives should examine him/her last of all.
An important point to note here is that Legal Aid is not yet available
for representation in Coroner's Court.

Joinder of Inquests

Where an incident involving many deaths occurs it is common for the
Inquests to be held concurrently. It is the right of each person to
have his/her own seperate inquest even where as at a multiple inquest
the cause of death may be the same in many cases.

The Hillsborough Inquests

If th;e Director of Public Prosecutions decides not to bring charges
the Coroner's Court can commence and will take place with a Jury and
witnesses.

IF however the D.P.P. decides to bring a charge of manslaughter then
Section 16 of the Coroner's Act 1988 requires the Coroner to adjourn
the Inquest until after the conclusion of the relevant criminal
proceedings.

The findings of the Inquest as to the cause of death must not be
inconsistent with the outcome of any relevant criminal proceedings,
i.e. IF the ensuing verdict is a conviction of manslaughter then the
Inquest Jury must return a verdict of unlawful killing, but if there
had been an aquittal then presumably only a verdict of Accidental
Death or Misadventure or an Open Verdict would be allowed.

IF no charges are preferred, then in due course the Coroner's Inquest
will;toe resumed and verdicts returned. Should there be a verdict of
Unlawful Killing the Coroner could refer all the papers to the D.P.P.
for further consideration.




HTT.AG.BW
7.2.90
                                   6




Optional Legal Strategies

Doug Fraser - Solicitor from Liverpool Steering Committee


Mr Doug Fraser is a partner in the Liverpool firm of Silverman and
Livermore, which was contacted within the first week of the disaster.
He is also a member of the Liverpool Steering Committee. Within that
first week, Liverpool's local Law Society thought about forming a
Steering Committee. This Committee was duly elected at an open meeting
at the Law Society in Liverpool. Six lawyers were elected and they
have gone on to represent over 130 firms of solicitors around the
country who are acting for the bereaved and injured. They call them­
selves the Hillsborough Solicitors Group. The Steering Committee see
their priorities as falling into five main areas. These are:-

(i)       The Inquiry. To represent relatives en bloc. The Home
          Office had given approval for this to happen and paid for
          this representation.

(ii)      Inquests. To represent relatives en bloc once again. This
           had worked well at the Inquiry and seems an appropriate way
           of handling the Inquests.

(iii)     Trust Fund. To have some legal input to the Fund.

(iv)      Civil claims. To represent families in any claims they
          might wish to make for compensation.

(v)       Information. The Committee publishes regular bulletins
           which are sent out to various firms of solicitors which
           make up the Hillsborough Solicitors Group. These solicitors
           are then able to take from the Bulletins relevant information
           to pass on to their clients.

Having given a background description about the Steering Committee, Mr
Fraser went on to describe how his talk would give a flavour of other
legal matters, including the Inquests themselves, and he divided this
part of his talk into eight sections

I.        Effects of the Disaster on families.
2.        Timetable of events.
3.        Criminal Proceedings.
4.        Public Inquiry.
5.        Civil Claims for damages.
6.        Distribution of Trust Funds.
7.        Inquests.
8.        Questions and Answers.


Effects of the Disaster

It is recognised that the physical damage incurred as a result of an
accident or disaster is easier to see and assess then emotional and
psychological damage. The lawyers have to try and assess-the emotional
damage in financial terms for compensation. This, by necessity, will
take some time,as it needs to be at least a year after the event before
the full extent of the damage is known, i.e. is it permanent; has it
passed and if so how long did it last for? One area that the Steering
                                        7



     Committee is looking at is the Press and the effect it had in terms
     of psychological damage.

     Timetable of Legal Events

     (i)     . xhe original timetable of events would have been as follows:-

               (a)    Public Inquiry and the publication of its findings in
                      two parts.

               (b)    Inquests. They had been due to start in January, 1990
                      and would have had a very high profile.

               (c)    Civil Claims.

               (d)    Steering Committee would then have invited the Director
                      of Public Prosecutions to look at all the papers and
                      evidence available with a view to a question of criminal
                      proceedings.

     However, asPeter Wright, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, sent
     a copy ofLord Justice Taylor's report to D.P.P., the timetable of events
     has had to be revised.

     (ii)      The revised timetable is as followss-

                (a)   Public Inquiry.

                (b)   D.P.P. must now consider Lord Justice Taylor's Report
                      and evidence being gathered by West Midlands Police.
                      If no. charges or minor charges are brought then the
                      original timetable won.Id come back into effect, with
                      either the Inquests or the Civil Cases coming first.
                      However, if the D.P.P. recommends Prosecution then
                      those charges must be heard before either the Inquests
                      or the Civil Cases.

     If there are serious prosecutions, i.e. manslaughter, then solicitors
     would expect every procedural opportunity and device to be used that
     would prolong and delay the event. Those prosecuted will almost
     certainly seek an oral committal before Magistrates, and seek to have
     it thrown out. Then there would be a full blown Crown Court trial,
     this would extend the timescale by some months, meaning that the Inquests
     would be severely delay'ed.

3.    Criminal Proceedings

      Since   the Zeebrugge disaster, it has been possible to charge a corporate
      body with manslaughter. This is because manslaughter can carry a fineas
      a sentence, whereas the sentence for murder is life imprisonment.
      Currently, the West Midlands PoTice are investigating various agencies
      and bodies in a corporate sense, and individuals within these organisations,
      These include the South Yorkshire Police; Sheffield Wednesday Football
      Club and the Football Association; Sheffield City Council;
      engineeering company who designed the barriers in the pens, an      _i.h_r,C!
      in their broadest sense are under consideration. There may also
      who are being investigated. The charges that could be brought range
      from manslaughter to minor breaches of rules and regulations.
                                           8



    4.   Public Inquiry

         The injured and bereaved were represented at the Public Inquiry by way
         of bloc representation. The Liverpool Steering Committee therefore had
         a team of lawyers at the Inquiry. This bloc representation took the
         form of:- '

         (a)       A Q.C.
         (b)       A junior barrister.
         (c)       Input from the six lawyers representing the Steering Committee.

         At the Inquiry, the various solicitors in the Hillsborough Solicitors
         Group gave information obtained from their clients to the six lawyers
         representing the Steering Committee. They then acted as filters of this
         information, i.e. as information came-in, it was sifted and then
         presented to the barristers.

A        There was a massiveamount ofevidence      tobedealt with at thePublic
          Inquiry arid it made sense to havebloc representation in order to avOid'
          a situation whereby over 150 solicitors were acting onbehalf of
          individual clients.

         The Steering Committee believe that bloc representation should also be
         used at the Inquest. Doug Fraser has already discussed this with the
         Coroner, Dr Popper, who also agrees that it is an appropriate way to
         represent the bereaved at the Inquest.

    5.   Civil Claims

         In Doug Fraser's opinion, the system of compensating the victims of
         disaster in this country is woefully inadequate, but it can only be
         changed by Parliament.

          In relation to civil claims, the Liverpool Steering Committee met the
          insurers of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the Police in
x        July, 1989- Theinsurers denied liability    so writs wereissued  by the
          Committee and statements of claims served.

         Since this time, the Police insurers have in fact agreed to pay in full
         claims for killed, injured or those suffering from shock as a result
         of their experience at the match. Seven hundred (700) claims have been
         dealt with.  Liability has not however been accepted and the insurers
         have not agreed to compensate any other category of people affected by the
         disaster. The Steering Committee are seeking to extend the category of
         compensation to include those who saw the events unfold on the television
         and were severely affected by what they saw. Test cases have been selected
         from this group of people, including relatives of the deceased and
         injured, and will, be put before the insurers in June, 1990.

         The Steering Committee believe that the victims of disaster who suffer
         from post traumatic stress disorder should be adequately compensated
         and they are seeking to push back the barriers of compensation to include
         this group of people.

         It is also the opinion of the Steering Committee that someone was
         responsible for the disaster at Hillsborough, that it was not "just one
         of those things", which the denial of liability might suggest.
                                         9




     In relation to payments made to individuals from the Trust Fund, it is
     important to note that civil claims are not affected by Trust Fund
     payments. It is therefore possible for people to be given money by the
     Trust Fund and claim against insurers. The main difference to note is
     that money paid to children in Civil Claims will be invested by the
     Court who have absolute authority to do this.

6.   The Trust Fund

     The Trust Fund was set up with the intention of making financial payments
     to people affected by the disaster from donations given by the general
     public as an expression.of sympathy.

     At the present time (January, 1990) the total amount of money received
     into the Trust Fund is £11.5 million.    The Trustees have paid out
     approximately £6 million to the bereaved and £2 million to the seriously
     injured. Seven hundred and fifty (750) claims have been received and
     four hundred (400) have been dealt with.

     The Fund is administered by a group of Trustees who are experienced
     lawyers and accountants. Individual levels of need have been, and
     continue to be, assessed by a group of doctors and lawyers who contribute
     to the decision as to who should get what.

     The Liverpool Steering Committee have no active part in the decisions of
     the Trust Fund, but they are in a position to offer financial advice to
     families, many of whom will receive substantial amounts of money. Never
     having had vast amounts of money before, they will benefit from professional
     advice on investing the money for their children, etc.

7.   The Inquest

     At the time of writing •(January, 1990), the date of the Inquest remains
     unknown.

     (1)      Where the Inquest comes in the.timetable of events.
     (2)      What the "opposition" are going to do.

     Both of these will influence the type of profile that the Inquest has and
     therefore the nature of the Inquest.

     Listed below are possible scenarios that will dictate the nature of the
     Inquest.

     HIGH PROFILE                               LOW PROFILE

     IF the D.P.P. decides not to make          IF the D.P.P. decides to prosecute
     criminal charges the Inquest will          and brings minor charges, the
     be used to try to bring a verdict          Coroner may decide to defer the
     of unlawful killing and will               Inquest, in which case the
     therefore be high profile,                 Inquest will not be held until
     involving many witnesses and               after the Criminal proceedings
     substantial representation from            and will therefore be low
     Solicitors.                                profile.
                                  10




HIGH PROFILE                               LOW PROFILE

IF the D.P.P. decides to make              IF the D.P.P. decides to bring
minor criminal charges, the                major charges, e.g. manslaughter,
Coroner may decide to go ahead             the Coroner must defer the
with the. Inquest. A verdict of            Inquests until after the
unlawful killing by the Inquest            criminal proceedings and again
jury could still be sought and             the Inquest will be low profile.
the Police and the Club decide
to have representation at the
Inquest, thus making it high
profile.

It is the Coroner's reponsibility to each individual family to investigate
into the cause of death of a relative;  the main questions being where,
when and how the person met his/her death. Every family is entitled to
have representation at the Inquest. Themajority of families will be
legally represented by the Steering CommitteeSolicitors.

Doug Fraser has had a number of discussions with the Coroner, Dr Popper,
and will remain in contact with him to discuss issues arising regarding
the Inquest.

Dr Popper is likely to hold the Inquest in two parts. The first part will
be a generic inquiry into the events of 15th April, 1989. This may be
done in a relatively short time because Dr Popper will have the information
from the public inquiry available to him.

The second part will be the actual Inquests. Dr Popper is keen to have
95 separate inquests, one for each bereaved family, to give them as much
information as possible about the way in which the relative met his/her
death.

In fact, many of the families have already had access to post-mortem
reports, because the Coroner has released them to solicitors if the families
have requested them.

At Dr Popper's request, the West Midlands Police are currently preparing
95 files, one on each of the deceased. Solicitors so far do not have
access to these files.  (See question iv).

Timetable of Inquest

In Doug Fraser's opinion, Dr Popper is likely to structure the order of
the inquests around the Pathologists who examined the bodies. This means
that the order may appear to be random.

Logistics of the Inquest

According to the Steering Committee, the Medico Legal Centre is not big
enough to hold the Hillsborough Inquests even if they are low profile.

The bereaved families have already told their solicitors that they would
like certain facilities made available to them, and these include:-

(1 )      a private room to get away from the attention of the media and
          where they can sit quietly if things get too difficult.
                                   11



(2)         Separate facilities for the client to talk to the lawyer in
            private, should they so wish.

Finally, Doug Fraser stressed that individual families should make sure
that their lawyers spend sufficient time with them before and throughout
the Inquest.




HTT.AR.MH
26.1.QO
                                 13




THE PROVISION OF THE DECEASED'S PERSONAL DETAILS TO THE BEREAVED

Sophie Tarassenko - Chairman, Kings Cross Action Group

Aileen Walker-Smith - Team Leader, Kings Cross Support Group


Following a disaster, a significant number of bereaved want, need,
detailed information concerning - in the words of one of the bereaved
following King's Cross - "exactly what happened to the person they
loved: how, where, how quickly they died."

Following King's Cross this was done in private consultations with
Public Inquiry lawyers representing victims. These took place during
the Inquest.

Following Clapham Junction this was done by Individual Inquest for each
family.

This information, and the manner of its transmission, can be of very
great importance in the process of coming to terms with grief. The
following points have emerged.

1.       It must be remembered that not every bereaved wants this
          information, but every bereaved person should be offered it
          without having to request it. Naturally, if the bereaved
          person does not want the information it does not have to be
          given.

2.       The- information when given should be both full and frank
          and not edited (much less distorted) with kindly intent to
          be less hurtful to the feelings of the bereaved.

3.       Timing is important. Experience indicates that the need to
          know arises after months rather than weeks (with one exception,
          see para. A below). It is often prompted by the media coverage
          of the public inquiry. In some cases, the need to know arises
          after a year or more has elapsed. Therefore, the bereaved
          should be told both that they can have access to the information
          at an Individual Inquest (see para. 5 below) and that a proper
          documentary record of that Inquest will be available to them.

4.       The exception is seeing the body. Whereas the great majority
          will not be strong enough to want or need the detailed information
          with which we are here concerned for at least several weeks it
          appears that the strongest member of a family has often wanted
          to see the body in the immediate aftermath. Out of a wish to
          avoid injury to feelings such a request has on occasions been
          discouraged or refused. This has sometimes given rise to long-
          lasting anger. Every deceased should be offered the opportunity
          to see the body without having to request it. This should be
          done with skilled support before, during and after the viewing.
          The bereaved should also be told that they can have access to
          any photographs taken of the body. Even where these offers are
          not taken up the fact of their having been made is important.
Questions & Answers - D o u g Fraser

Robert Quinn of Knowsley Borough Council asked if T.V. companies
were being considered for liability, as some people had suffered
shock through watching the event on T.V.

"The Steering Committee looked at T.V. companies and newspapers»
but you have the option to turn off your T.V. set. The Steering
Committee decided to concentrate on one or two people to blame.
If we receive specific instructions from clients, as individual
solicitors, to look at other issues like T.V. we will do so."

Mary Gaylor of Gloucestershire Social Ser*VICe3 commented that
as the Steering Committee had said they were not going to have
anything to do with the national press, could some sort of
statement be made that would help to deflect some of the press
interest.

"The Steering Committee have a press officer. We are not
prepared to give lertgthy interviews to the media. We would be
prepared to give a press statement, but these are often not
published. Television is different; it has an air of
respectability. We will talk to the T.V. if our clients want
it, but not to the press."

David Alexander of Sefton wondered how clients would get on
at the Inquests if the Inquests were managed in an adversarial
fashion and those clients were represented by solicitors who
were outside the umbrella of the Steering Committee.

"The Steering Committee would like to think that those
solicitors who had the best interests of their client at least
would come under the Steering Committee umbrella, but if a
particular solicitor did not want to be represented under the
Steering Committee then Dr Popper would be informed of this."

David Wilkins replied "One family at the Zeebrugge inquest
was represented by a very eminent Q.C. outside the bloc
representation. He did a lot to probe into the area of
corporate responsibility. A solicitor working on his own
can do some good work."

Anne Harvey of Sefton commented that in relation to files
held by the West Midlands Police on the 95 deceased, social
workers had already had access to these files and been able
to pass on relevant information to the families.

 "I know that social workers have seen the files, but lawyers
 haven't. With respect it's not the same as a lawyer seeing it
 and explaining the legal implications. The main thing is that
 families are entitled to the information and should get it."

 Phil Hynes of Warrington asked if it was still possible for
 people to make claims to the Trust Fund.

 "The Steering Committee can only deal with those people who
 come forward. People should be encouraged to come forward.
 People see the Trust Fund for people who were bereaved or
 seriously injured and would rather claim against Insurers.
 The Trustees decide who gets paid, not lawyers."
                                     14




5.          Returning to the provision of detailed information, the best
             approach seems to be by individual Coroner's Inquests
             expressly focused on these details, held several months
             after the disaster, and where the bereaved are represented
             by one of the team representing the victims in the public
             inquiry if there is one.

6.          This approach leans heavily on the Clapham Junction experience,
            which appeared to work very well. Apart from ensuring that
             there is formal structure for addressing the question this
             approach has the following advantages

            (a)    it treats each deceased individually.

            (b)    where both Coroner and public inquiry lawyer are involved
                    it doubly ensures that all information will be brought
                    out.

            (c)    since the inquests will be consecutive, bereaved will be
                   brought together in a way which affords a natural
                   (rather than contrived) opportunity for sharing their
                   grief, which can, for some, be valuable.

             (d)   there is, or should be, transcripted record so that where
                   bereaved do not attend, given that the detailed information
                   will be elicited in just as exacting a way, there will be
                   a proper record in case they should one day feel the need
                   to know (see para. 3 above).

7.          Some further matters should be noted.

3,          Where there is no public inquiry, the bereaved should still have
             legal representation for the Inquest. Experience indicates a
            compelling case for a lawyer to be at their side to de-mystify
             the procedure and explain everything in layman's terms.

9.          it should be emphasised that the Individual Inquests would be
            limited to this purpose. In the usual case they would all then
            be adjourned to deal with the other statutory obligations of an
            Inquest in such form as the Coroner deems appropriate.

10.         At the Individual Inquest a room should be set aside for private
            consultation. Sometimes, this detailed information is best
            transmitted initially in private.

11 .        If Recommendation 151 of the Fennel Report becomes law (the
            duplication involved in holding both >a public inquiry and a
            coroner's inquest should be avoided), the Inquiry Inspector-
            should hold Individual Inquiries.




HTT.AR.MH
30.1.90
Questions and Answers
- Aileen Walker-Smith and Sophie Tarasenko


Bill Pemberton, a member of the H.F.S.G., asked whether or not
the claims for liability were settled before the Inquest or
afterwards.

Sophie Tarasenko replied that most of them were not settled
yet. Writs had not been issued before the Inquest and liability
had not been admitted to date (6.10.89)*

Bill Pemberton then queried whether or not the Inquest result
would have any bearing on liability claims.

Sophie Tarasenko said that the Inquest result would only have
a bearing on Criminal proceedings, not civil liability.

Doug Fraser said that although in theory it doesn't, the
result of the Inquest does have a bearing on ci\/il liability.

Tony Rothwell', social worker, Sefton, asked whether there were
any families at King's Cross who were not represented or did
not want to attend the Inquest.

Aileen Walker-Smith - Yes. Several families were not present
initially, because some members of families had tried to
dissuade those who wanted to attend the inquest from doing so.
Not all families were represented initially, but by the second
day, all the families were represented because there was a lot
of anger about the way the families were being treated. Eventually,
one lawyer represented all the families.

David Wilkinson stressed the role of the caring profession,
which had to be to help people to do what they want to do.
This can be problematic because of conflict with other family
members. Social workers themselves will need strength and
support around the Inquest to support the families.

Julie Smith, Runcorn Social Services, asked whether families
had information about their relatives' death prior to the
Inquest.

Sophie Tarasenko - The King's Cross families had a death
certificate but had to wait ten months for this. They had
post mortem details indicating carbon monoxide levels prior
to the inquest, but no details of where their relative was
in the station and how long they may have survived for. At
King's Cross, this was important because where they were
affected how they died.

Bob Jones, Sefton, asked if the families do not want to attend
the Inquest, will it do them a disservice.

Doug fraser indicated it won't make any difference in legal
terms, but may in psychological terms.
                                          16




                  Sophie Tarasenko recommended individual inquests with
                  transcripts of the dialogue between the lawyer representing
                  the family and the Coroner. Details of how, where, when
                  their relative died are a necessity so that families can
                  look at them if and when they are ready.

                  David Wilkinson - At Zeebrugge, the individual lawyers got
                  the transcripts to hold for families for the future. He
                  indicated that it may be two years before a family might
                  want to see the information and that it could be useful for
                  social workers to have the information available to them
                  for counselling purposes.

q   .   5.        Cynthia May, social worker, Alder Hey Unit, asked if the
                   individual time spent with the lawyers answered the questions
                   that the families wanted. '

A.                Sophie Tarasenko - Yes. With the Inquiry and Police reports,
                  it was possible to establish the whereabouts of people. The
                  lawyer showed them a map of where their relative was and also
                  showed them the fuller pathologist report, which answered
                  all their questions.

q   .   6.        Bill Pemberton asked whether the alcohol levels in blood were
                   taken into account.

A.                Sophie Tarasenko - No. The only blood levels measured were
                  carbon monoxide and cyanide and the general state of the body,
                  whether the person was fit and healthy, overweight or
                  whatever.




        HTT.MH
        31.1.90
                                     17




David Wilkinson - Area Manager, Swale Social Services

Involved in the Herald of Free Enterprise disaster at Zeebrugge


In the Herald of Free Enterprise disaster, 193 people died and there were
346 survivors. Potentially, every one of the survivors with relatives,
and bereaved relatives, could have attended the Inquest and been
represented. This could have an intimidating impact on 'carers' and as
much preparation as possible is important.

The Inquest was the first time the families came together again since
the tragedy as they were scattered around the country. The Inquiry
had had little impact on families, many of whom were still in a state of
shock. Therefore, the Inquest was their first opportunity to take in
what actually happened.

Preparing Families

It is very important to share as much information with families as early
as possible before the inquest. Some only heard the details of what
happened to. their loved ones for the first time in the Inquest. (This also
applies to survivors and their families). So, they need to have heard the
description of the body and the circumstances (e.g. where and when) of
death before they go to the Court. At Zeebrugge, a body's appearance had
been changed by chemicals in the water. The family had not known this and
the 'wrong' description they heard gave rise to false 'hope' and great
distress - an unforgivable mistake. Social workers therefore need to do
their homework on all the reports available - although you can never
eliminate all risks.

Survivors

Survivors will also be present at the Inquest in large numbers as
interested parties, or many may be called as witnesses. They and their
families must not be forgotten and considered to be the "lucky ones".
They too will need the offer of care and support.

The Inquest

 Number of People

 At Dover, in addition to the Coroner, his/her officers, and the jury,
 there were lawyers for groups of families, individual families, survivors,
 crew, company and Police. With all these groups and individuals and their
 legal representatives, the Court fills up very easily. All^of these are
 potentially in need of some sort of support at some stage of the hearing.

 The local Coroner's Court was inadequate, so the Inquest was held in
 the ballroom of the Town Hall.

 Scheduling of Individual Inquests

 Families were told beforehand on which day they could expect to have their
 individual inquest heard. There were problems however when (as can happen
 in the case of a full-scale adversarial affair) arguments over points o
 law arose c a u s i n g .adjournments for adyice or rulings. If this haPP^s, it
 can mean delays of minutes, hours or days. There is no way o avoi
                                    18




this and it does need to be anticipated by carers - what do you do when
families have travelled for their particular inquest and have to wait?

Needs of Families

Exhibits, such as models or drawings, can be valuable so that families
can identify precisely where their loved one died. At Dover, it was
important for carers to be with them as it was at this point that people
could put different pieces of stories together, perhaps for the first
time.

Some families may wish/need to sit through the complete hearing, which
at Dover lasted    weeks. Consideration needs to be given to how such
families may be provided for. Even families who are there throughout
will not hear and take in all of what is said, and may need to go back
over the information at a later date.- Social workers need to take this
into account.

Conflicting Needs

What lawyers need to do in order to establish blame, and what the families
need to hear can often be very different. Ultimately, the end result may
come together, but the process of getting there may involve conflicts of
needs.

Similarly, a very upsetting aspect of the inquest can be if bodies are
identified as numbers, e.g. during pathologists' evidence. This makes
things easier for the pathologists but it is extremely distressing for
relatives. Thought and attention need to be given to this before coming
to the hearing.

Some family members may be called to give evidence as well as to hear it,
which can be doubly difficult.Thought has to be given to caring for
these people as witnesses and observers.

Private Rooms

In Dover, there was inadequate provision for rooms where people could
speak with their lawyers and carers in private or just take 'time out'
-protected from the public and press.    It is important for people to
have this. Families may also need a base in Sheffield, separate from the
hearing venue, where they can go.

The need for accommodation also has to be considered.

Role of Social Workers

David Wilkinson felt that the inquest was more difficult than the 'impact'
phase, with carers having to sit and listen, calmly and quietly, watching
what is happening in all quarters for long stretches of time. There was
therefore a need for adequate numbers of carers, but there has to be a
limit.

They always had present in Court three members of the Herald Assistance
Unit who were not connected with the individual family, as well as any
particular carer that a family may wish to have with them.
                                     19




In advance, they tried to establish what would be the role of the Herald
Assistance Unit during the Inquest. This included:

(i)       To support families and individuals through the Inquest and
           afterwards.   (Families may not wish to leave immediately after
           the Inquest, but stay and talk to other families); and to
         ' provide 'time out' facilities within or near Inquest setting.

          This involved negotiating with families and individual carers
          what support they required: This ranged from meeting people
          at the station and taking them to the Unit, to holding their
          hand and comforting them when giving or hearing evidence. It
          is about responding to what the individual needs - including
          them not wanting you!  (But still being available just in case).

(ii)      To respond to   requests of assistance form anyone in the Inquest
           setting.

           This means that social workers have conflicting roles working
           with bereaved fEmilies and survivors as well as with the
           'culprits' and 'villains'. In Dover, this particularly meant
           the crew (in Sheffield, it could mean Police, club employees,
           stewards, council employees, etc.). Some of these may be
           facing charges. They will be under extreme pressure at the
           Inquest (Witnesses can refuse to answer questions which m a y .
           incriminate them - in Dover, no-one refused to answer questions).
           They are people who made mistakes and who deserve care and
           support if they require it. A person needs to be allocated to
           this group.

           This can be hard for the vereaved relatives to understand, and
           carers may be subjected to their anger for helping the 'culprits'.

Other Participants

All witnesses should be offered support,

Pathologists often appear blase and callous, but the one iri Dover was hurt
by the experience and was changed as a result. Who cares for them?

Who cares for the Coroner? They could not get near theirs in Dover, but
he did write a lto about it and may have had some influence on others.
(Although not ideal, the Zeebrugge inquest was’handled sensitively).

 The jurors may require support after the Inquest.

 Press

 Another aspect of the social worker's role relates to the press. They will
 be there and will focus on the most distressed people. The job of the
 carers is to protect people when required. It is useful for local carers
 to know the building well - e.g. knowledge of rooms, corridors and exits,
 and making an ally of the janitor - in order to enable people to avoid
 the press as much as possible.
                                    20




 Visiting Ground

 David felt that many people will also want to visit the place where
 their loved ones died when they come for the Inquest. This may be
 difficult to organise, so that it is dealt with sympathetically, and
 have the 'press kept away. Negotiations would need to be made with the
 football club to discuss this.

Caring for the carers

The Inquest will also be a very stressful experience for the carers.
Despite preparation they cannot predict what will happen, and will be
trying to support people they have never met in some cases, not knowing
how they will react or what they will require of them. As has been said,
they may be treated in a hostile manner when they try to help the 'villains'.
Thought has to be given to caring for the carers.

Also, it is only natural that during the course of events there may be
some things which happen or are said which are funny. Nobody can be
serious for weeks. This can feel difficult and awkward in the circumstances,
but despite the pain around we are all human and have to laugh.

After the Inquest

Reports

Families should be able to have access to verbatim reports of the Inquest
hearing, although a family who does not wish to attend may want the social
worker to tell it to them in his/her own words. If a family is not in
attendance, the social worker needs to pay special attention to what is
being said, or make sure the lawyer knows that you want that information,
so that JjT at a later date the family ask you for it, you have it. This
service has to be made available for when the family feel they need it,
even if it means the social worker taking notes and storing them.

Jurors

In Dover, a de-briefing service for jurors was offered for after the
Inquest. The Coroner agreed to this and wrote to jurors but they did not
take it up.




HTT.MH
2.2.90
                                               21



         QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS - DAVID WILKINSON


Q.       Does the Inquest help the healing process?

A.       Getting the information is very important and can help some families
          move forward.

         Getting the death certificate, having identification positively proven,
         knowing how a person died, etc. are things that people may take away
         from an Inquest which may allow them to move on. For others, it is a
         resurrection of the feelings, particularly for survivors who have to
         re-live the events.

Q.       How do you prepare people for the Inquest?

A.       In Dover, they were not in a good position to prepare people. They went
         into it cold - most had not previously been to an Inquest, or to a
         Training Day. They did not know what to expect, and in any case, it was
         not like an ordinary-inquest - more 'theatrical' with large numbers of
         lawyers and press.

         When verdicts were given, the foreman of the jury had to readout 'Unlawful
         killing' 192 times, and three crew   members had to listen to it -how do
         you prepare for that?

Q.       Number of workers in Court?

A.       This has to be gauged in accordance with what is reasonable for the
          families.  You must not swamp the Court with carers.

         In Dover, they had permission from         the Coroner to come and goas required.
         He would call on them, if he felt a        witness needed assistance.

Q.       How aid you liaise with other agencies?

A.       There weren't any other agencies as such. The large number of people
          scattered all over the country made it difficult to ensure that all had
          support agencies involved. For those people outside the immediate vicinity,
          it was very difficult as people forget very quickly and did not understand
          the families' needs, leaving them extremely isolated.

          The Dover team visited 80% of the families 'away' from the area, used
          lawyers and contacted local branches of CRUSE and Social Services
          Departments.

q    .    (a)       Was there provision for accommodation for families wishing to
                    stay over?

          (b)       Is there a role for the clergy or medics at the Inquest?

A.        (a)       Families did wish to stay in Dover and Zeebrugge.       Whenever
                     this was needed Townsend Thoresen paid the bill.

          (b)       People should be allowed to have whatever support system they
                     require, so clergy should certainly be available for those who
                     wish to have them.



          HTT.MH
          2.02.90
                                   22




SUMMARY   AND    RECOMMENDATIONS


These recommendations have been summarised from the text of the various
contributors to the day.

In the afternoon, the participants were divided into groups to look at
reactions to the day and to plan for the future. Their contribution is
also included in the following summary.


General Observations

1.        In all the build up of the Inquests, it is vital to remember
          that the most important people there are the families.

2.        The verdicts for the families are not just a formality to be
           gone through. The outcome for them will be important.

3.        it was thought important to note that Sheffield's feelings
           around the time of the Inquest may be quite different to
           those of Liverpool.

4.        The study day was useful as a way for people to meet; exchange
           views, ideas and information.

          A refresher study day to be held, once the date of the Inquests
          is known.

Social Workers

1.        Social workers need to help famililes be as informed and
           prepared as possible before the Inquest re circumstances of
           death and description of body. To do this, the social workers
          need to do their homework and be as well prepared as possible.

2.        Social workers could arrange locally to attend a Coroner's
           Court for a day to help them in their work with families.

3.        There may be conflicts within families about whether or not
           to attend the Inquest. The role of carers is to help people
           do what they want to do.

4.         Numbers of carers needs to be gauged carefully. There need
           to be adequate numbers, but there has to be a limit - should
           not swamp the Court.

5.        Social workers should provide a rota cover for the Inquests.
           The role of the social worker at  the Inquest could be
           discussed by all the authorities who would provide cover
           for this rota.

6 ..      The Inquest is not a place for counselling, but for support
           and clarification of what is going on.

7.         Social workers should negotiate their role/relationship with
           people, responding to what they want.
                                     23




8.         Survivors also need care and support. They are not the
           "lucky ones."

9.         All those involved in the Inquests may need some support
            at some time. (Families, survivors, witnesses, jurors,
           Coroner, Sheffield Wednesday F.C. and council staff.)

10.        There would be a need to support the Police and other agencies
           during the Inquest. The question was raised as to whether the
           social work support for the various agencies should come from
            a different group of social workers than those working with
            the bereaved.

11.        Witnesses may be cross-examined very severely.   They will need
            support.

12.        Carers need to be supported and cared for during and after
            the Inquests, and need to prepare themselves for it.

13.        Sheffield Team should be kept informed of which social workers
            and families are likely to be attending the Inquest.

14.        Social workers from teams other than core teams often feel
            isolated and lacking in information. Could they be linked
            or adopted by core teams?

15.        Co-ordinators of core teams should take responsibility for
            disseminating information to isolated workers.

16.        As some teams may not be in existence at the time of the
            Inquests, it was considered necessary that managers needed to
            take this into account when closing teams, to ensure a
            continuation of a smooth flow of information and to help
            reduce administrative problems.

Families

1.         It was acknowledged that families need to be aware of what
            information is available to them and the importance of having
            access to this information before the Inquests. They should
            be offered the information without needing to request it. -

2.         Post mortem reports are available from the Coroner.
            Families should be offered the opportunity to see these before
            tne Inquest.

3.         West Midlands Police have files on each of the deceased.
           Social workers can contact the West Midlands Police for
            information contained in the files which can then be passed
            on to families.

4.         Information should not be edited or distorted in an attempt
            to protect the feelings of the bereaved.

5.         All bereaved should have legal representation and if possible
           someone to sit with them to de-mystify and explain the
           procedure.
                                  24




6.       Families should make sure lawyers give them sufficient time
         before and during the Inquest. It is important for people
         to get to know their lawyer before the proceedings.

7.       There should be 95 separate inquests to give as much
         information as possible to bereaved families.

8.       The Sheffield Medico^-Legal Centre will not be big enough
         for the Inquests even if low profile.

9.       Whether or not the bereaved attend,a transcript record of
         the Inquest should be made and kept, so that information is
         not lost to the family and can be referred to at a later
         date.

10.      A schedule of individual inguests helps families. Carers
         need to try to be prepared for the delays in the schedule.

11.      Families may wish to attend the whole Inquest.   They need to
         be catered for.

12.      Provide a close—circuit T.V. for families or relatives if
         they feel unable to go into the Court itself.

13.      Telephones should be provided so that families can keep in
         touch with relatives to give information and receive support.

14.      It was stressed now necessary it would be for the deceased
         to be always referred to by name during the Inquest, and never
         by number.


 15.     Accommodation may need to be provided for families who need
         or wish to stay in Sheffield.

 16.     Private rooms should be provided for relatives to have
         'space1 and privacy, and to be able to consult with lawyers.
         A separate room should also be provided for witnesses ior
         the same reason.

 17.      Families may also need a base, separate from the Inquests.

 18.     Bereaved families may wish to visit the ground at the time
         of the Inquest. Negotiations need to be made in advance.

 19.      People should be allowed the support they want, e.g. clergy,
          social workers, relatives, friends, etc.
 20.      Families will be assisted by the Coroner being prepared to
          listen to them, and direct information to them as well as to
          lawyers.

 Press

 1   .    Press be excluded from the Coroner's Court itself - maybe
          watch the proceedings via closed-circuit T.V.
                                    25




2.          The families should be protected from the Press.

3.          Social workers to be given advice/training on dealing with
             the press and the media. It helps for them to know the
             building and the area.

4.      ' A t the Kings Cross Inquest, the families got together and
           nominated a group of four to represent them with the press.
           These gave prepared statements to the press while the rest
           left by a back door.




HTT.AG.MH
2 . 2. 90
                                               26




   LIST OF U S E F U L A D D R E S S E S AND T E L E P H O N E   NUMBERS


Name                           Address                                     Telephone No.

Mr. B. Pemberton               Hillsborough Family Support Group
Vice Chair

                               LIVERPOOL,

Doug Fraser                    Silverman and Livermore
Steering Committee             11-13 Victoria Street
Solicitor                      LIVERPOOL
                               L2 5QQ                                      051 227 1871

Assistant Chief                West Midlands Polcie H.Q.
Constable Jones                Lloyd House
                               BIRMINGHAM
                               B4 6NQ                                      021 238 5000 Ext 2025

Dr. S. Popper                   Medico-Legal Centre
Coroner                         WateryrStreet
                                SHEFFIELD, 3.                              0742 738721

Superintendent Taylor           West Midlands Police H.Q.
                                Lloyd House
                                BIRMINGHAM
                                84 6NQ

Aileen Walker-Smith             c/o London Borough of Camden
Co-ordinator                    Social Services Department
King's Cross                    Willing House
                                356 Grays Inn Road
                                LONDON
                                WC1X 8BH                                   01 837 3353

David Wilkinson                 Area Manager
                                Swale Social Services Dept.
                                Divisional County Offices
                                Avenue of Remembrance
                                SITTINGBOURNE
                                Kent
                                ME10 4DD                                   0795 473333
                                           27




LIST OF U S E F U L   ADDRESSES   AND T E L E P H O N E NUMB E R S

CORE TEAMS


Hillsborough Centre         Stanley Park
                            1 Anfield Road.
                            LIVERPOOL 4                              051 263 5366

Knowsley Helpline           Staff House No. 1
                            The Connaughtons
                            Tarbuck Road
                            HUYTON
                            Merseyside
                            L36 5XW                                  051 443 3549

Sefton Helpline             Marbent
                            14 Marine Terrace
                            Waterloo
                            LIVERPOOL
                            L22 5PR                                  051 928 1571

Wirral Support Team         c/o Birkenhead Town Hall
                            Brandon Street
                            BIRKENHEAD                               051 647 2306 or
                            Merseyside                               051 547 7000 Ext 260


Sheffield
Hillsborough Task Team      c/o Hillsborough Library
                            Miaalewood Road
                            SHEFFIELD, 6.                            0742 734666/7




John Pilling               Family & Community Services Department
Assistant Director         Redvers House
                            Union Street
                            SHEFFIELD, 1.                     0742 734843
