                                MEMORANDUM

TO:          David Mason, Director of Social Services|
             Liverpool City Council
FROM:       Edward Murphy, Chair, Hillsborough Voluntary
             Sector Co-ordinating Committee
DATE:       8th. August, 1989
SUBJECT:     The Future of the Hillsborough Helpline



1.      Introduction
1.1 It has always been the intention of the statutory services
    that the Help-line should cease being the responsibility of
    those services at some early stage and that the running of
     the Help-line should devolve to voluntary agencies.
1.2 The time is ripe, now that the initial heavy use of this
     Service has stabilised at what appears to be its likely
     long-term usage, to take      forward this transfer of
     responsibility.
1.3 The following desiderata for         a re-organised service have
    been established.
        1.3.1 The service should be available for twenty-four hours
              a day seven days a week for at least two years with as
              little use as possible of intercepts, answerphones
              etc.
        1.3.2 Counselling should be provided by volunteers with
              experience of telephone counselling and, preferably,
              with relevant training and prior experience of service
              on the Hillsborough Help-line.
        1.3.3 A back-up (debriefing) facility for volunteer counsellors
              needs to be available.
        1.3.4 Administratively, the Help-line needs to be tied in as
              closely as possible to statutory services so as to
              facilitate referrals.
        1.3.5 Physically, the Help-line needs to be located in a
              secure, welcoming space with twenty-four hour access and
              existing telephone capacity.
        1.3.6 Generally, the Help-line needs to be managed by an
              established general counselling service who can make
              supplementary use of Help-line volunteers.
A Proposal;
A large number of agencies have provided volunteers to work on
the Hillsborough Help-line. They are listed at Appendix 1.
Only two agencies. Family Link Line and Walton Hospital
Relatives Support Group, have themselves experience of running
day and night counselling services. W.H.R.S.G. have undertaken
to run the Help-line provided thats-
2.2.1 Satisfactory arrangements can be made with Walton Hospi­
      tal management for the use of hospital premises and
      facilities.
2.2.2 There is a firm commitment from other voluntary agencies
      to augment the present pool of volunteers working at the
      Hospital with Help-line volunteers meeting the criteria
      at 1.3.2 above, and to provide back-up as at 1.3.3.
2.2.3 There is a firm commitment from the statutory services to
      provide administrative and training support for the
      Group, or financial assistance with which they can
      acquire such support.
2.2.4 It is clearly understood that the Group will not be
      required to recruit volunteers for the Help-line,
      although they will continue to offer this as an option to
      their volunteers.
Finance;
It is envisaged that funds will be required for start-up costs,
(such as telephone equipment, extra lines, installation etc.)
for premises costs (heat, light, perhaps rental of rooms from
the hospital) and for the costs outlined at 2.2.3 above. There
will also be additional volunteers' travel and other associated
costs for agencies supplying volunteer counsellors for the
Help-line.
Some early indication from you of the availability of finance
to meet these costs would be welcome.
Catholic Social Services

NSPCC

Children's Society Resource Team

Diocesan Board of Social Responsibility

COMPASS

CROSE

Young Persons' Advisory Service

Walton Hospital Relatives' Support Group
