DRAFT




Dear Colleague,

                              Re: Hillsborough Disaster

     Following our meeting on 29th April a number of officers have pursued
enquiries to procure financial support for the Regional Unit to co-ordinate activity.
The services we envisaged being provided by the Unit, which were described in the
report, have been maintained on a limited basis through co-operative arrangements
between local authorities.   However, this is far from ideal and as well as imposing
additional responsibility on services which are already overstretched it cannot do
justice to the tasks.

     Neither the E.E.C. nor Government have agreed to provide any financial support
other than their donations to the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Fund.   The
Government in their reply, a copy of which is attached, have indicated that they are
prepared to consider an application to the Department of the Environment, under the
Bellwin Rules. It seems clear that any funding will require a protracted period of
negotiation before it is available.   During this period the service co-ordination is
at great risk of breaking down which I find very unsatisfactory as I am sure you do.

     The impact of Hillsborough upon individual authorities varies considerably as
does the capacity of each Council to commit any further resources.   I am only too
well aware of the resource issues in the light of the commitment that has been
necessary for Liverpool City Council.   A close examination of the requirements and
the expenditure to date does reveal a possible way forward.

     Given the direct service requirements within the City I would be prepared to
underwrite the initial operation of the Regional Unit on a more limited basis than
originally envisaged.   This would enable the position of the Helpline, Database and
Outreach co-ordination to be properly managed and at the same time allow continuing
input of staff time from all local authorities as they are able.   It would not
provide an ideal or perfect solution but rather establish a core on which we can build.
It also recognises the prompt action of NWASSA in financing the appointment of a
training officer which further reduces the need for resources, identified in the
Report of the Directors of Social Services.

     My aim would be to sustain action across 'therange of activities provided by the
Regional Unit and the attached schedule shows the total costs for this stage of
development.   At present I am not expecting any explicit commitment of finance from
individual authorities unless they are in a position to offer it.    I would propose
that the matter should be progressed as quickly as possible and funding should
continue to be pursued.   The circumstances can be kept regularly under review by
our officers and they can report back at the earliest opportunity, when any finance
is offered.   Requests are being made to the Football Association and Liverpool F.C.

     At the conclusion of our meeting on 29th April it was decided to hold a further
meeting when the outcome of our requests for resources from EEC, Government and other
sources was clarified.   To date there have been positive responses from just a
couple of private section bodies and £20,000 promised by CCETSW, but the authorities
have already made a discrete commitment on training and briefing for staff. I would
be happy to host a further meeting in Liverpool or to attend a meeting in another
venue.   Perhaps colleagues would let me have their views on this.

                                  Yours sincerely,




                                  Leader.
Enc.
