HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM SHEFFIELD

A brief outline of places and events Saturday, 15th April, 1989.


1.   Following the start of the disaster,       casualities were taken to
     3 local hospitals, but eventually only 2 of these were used — viz
     Northern Hospital which took most, and had a childrens ward (so
     the childrens hospital wasn't used) and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

2. Casualtieswere brought to       the Hospitals and when the scale of
    the disaster became apparent the dead were taken back to the football
    stadium and places at one end of the gymnasium, which is underneath
    the stand.    Screens were erected and refreshments and counselling
    were offered at the other end.     An announement on local radio sent
    a large number of social workers and helpers to the major centres.

3. The first     centre was    the Boys Club, which became the reception
    area for the following 8 hours.        Alarge collection of helpers
    were at hand to meet distressed relatives and friends, and 2 workers
    were allocated to   eachgroup or    individual.  Communication at the
    centre was almost non existent and social workers had to bring
    in emergency radio phones.

4.   Survivors v e e e brought to the stadium/gymnasium in groups for identification
     of the dead.        On arrival at the stadium in the early hours of the
     disaster    some families complained of        serious delays and having
     to stand in the cold before being aloud in to view the bodies.

5. Identification was in 2 phases.      Firstly a photograph was produced
    by the Police who took responsibility for the whole operation and
    who also were on the receiving end of a fair amount of abuse.
    If a positive identification was thought possible, the individual
    body was   brought from the main area (in an attempt to minimise
    distress).    The counsellors accompaning survivors/relatives offered
    refreshments and the police took the opportunity to take detailed
    statements from survivors/witnesses.       They also, took names and
    addresses of relatives of the dead.

6. Survivors were then given the opportunity to move on to Forbes
    House, a church hall where further refreshments were available.

7. Some families arrived directly at the 2 hospitals and were met
    by helpers and offered advice plus what information there was about
    the dead and surviving victims.

8. In the early hours of Sunday morning, the Boys Club was closed
    and help moved to Forbes House.      Later on the dead were moved on
    from the stadium to the Medico Legal Centre.




Owen Hagan
