WHAT HAVE BEEN SOME OF THE DIFFERENCES

 IN THE WORK AND PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE

  OF THE LIVERPOOL HILLSBOROUGH SOCIAL

   WORK TEAM WHEN COMPARED TO THAT OF

       CONVENTIONAL SOCIAL WORK?



             AN ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDY r<-   ■




                   ROY CRATE

                   MAY 1993
                         ABSTRACT

     Since 1985 Social Services Departments have been providing a
social work service to those suffering psychological trauma
following major disasters. Social work practice associated with
such services, whilst being different in some significant ways
from conventional social work, is still in its infancy and the
literature is small. Liverpool's Hillsborough Team has been
providing such a service for nearly four years, and this study
attempts to identify some differences in professional practice
between this team and conventional ones. A literature survey is
provided and the practice of the team is compared to what appears
in the literature. The study employs ethnographic techniques.
Five team members are interviewed, and their comments quoted. The
main differences to emerge are:, the client population is more
varied and reluctant to seek help; proactive techniques are used;
clients want to control the theraputic interaction as far as
possible; record keeping is shared; records are concise; the work
is stressful and extra staff support is required; despite the
stresses the work is usually very satisfying for the workers. In
conclusion; there is much that other social work practitioners
can learn from the way disaster.social work teams operate. A
description of the research methods used, and their limitations,
is provided.




ACKNOWLEDGEMENT:

     Thanks are due to all the respondents, and especially to
those who were current members of the Liverpool Hillsborough Team
at the time of the interviews, who patiently submitted themselves
for interview despite the difficult circumstances in which they
had been placed by the decision of Liverpool Social Services
Committee to close the Team.
                       INTRODUCTION

     There is now quite an extensive literature about the social
and psychological impact of disasters. One of the most famous
pieces of work was conducted by Professor Kai Erikson into the
effects of the Buffalo Creek flood of 1972. His book In the Wake
of the Flood (K.Erikson 1979) provides a description of the coal
mining community in which the disaster occurred, and a very
moving ethnographic account of the disaster and its aftermath.
Erikson's book illustrates the profound emotional, psychological
and social effects of disaster and points to the need for
effective community support systems to deal with the trauma. It
is included in the bibliography as a suitable introduction to the
subject area, and as an example of how an ethnographic study can
be presented.

     Literature about how to provide psychosocial support to
those affected is comparatively small, but growing. Until the
late 1980's most of this had been produced in the U.S.A. and
Australia (T. Newburn 1993 p27), but since then, following a
succession of British disasters, there have been a number of
significant contributions from the U.K. In the British literature
the most often quoted source appears to be from Australia; it is
Professor Beverley Raphael's When Disaster Strikes (B. Raphael
1986). To judge from the frequency with which it appears in the
lists of references this book has influenced all the British
authors in my bibliography; and provides a good survey of the
theoretical aspects of psychsocial-care following disasters.

     In chapter II of his monograph An Introduction to Disaster
Theory for Social Workers (R.Brook 1990)y Richard Brook points
out (p4 et seq) that it was the response of Bradford Social
Services to the Bradford Stadium fire of 1985 that set the
pattern for social services intervention following British
disasters, and that this pattern was followed fairly uncritically
by other Social Services Departments (ibid pp8-12). The Bradford
model was endorsed in the report produced in 1991 for the
Department of Health by the Disasters Working Party (HMSO 1991).
Brook acknowledges the influence of Michael Stewart, the ex-
Bradford social worker, in pointing out the need to understand
the way disasters affect people psychologically and "the severe
effects the work can have on helpers themselves." (M.Stewart
quoted by R.Brook 1990 p l O ) .

HELPERS CAN BECOME VICTIMS.

     One thing that is made abundantly clear in the literature is
that by working with people who have been affected by disasters,
helpers run the risk of becoming affected themselves. Michael
Stewart, whom I have already quoted in this connection, refers to
the phenomenon he calls "mirroring" and describes the strong
emotions which have affected social workers who were involved
after recent British disasters (M.Stewart 1989(a)), Beverley
Raphael (1986 p237 et seq) and Peter E.Hodgkinson & Michael
Stewart (1991 pl87 et seq) describe these effects in social
workers. Marion Gibson(1991 pl08 et seq), and Tim Newburn (1993
p39 et seq) describe the the pressures placed on social workers,
and all of the literature referred to in this paragraph offers
suggestions about how these pressures can be coped with. The
Disasters Working Party recommends that Directors of Social
Services should "organize psychological debriefing for all staff
members."(HMSO 1991 Parti pl3) and gives some more detailed
advice in Part 2 (ibid Part 2 p54/55). Even NWASSA, which is an
association of social work employers, recognizes the need for
strong staff care in these circumstances (NWASSA 1992 pl54), and
sets out a strategy to help managers provide it (NWASSA 1992
P155-161).

THE NEED FOR A PROACTIVE SERVICE.

     "The word 'proactive'......means to reach out to those
affected rather than to wait for them to come and ask for help.
Such outreach has been described as being to a 'reluctant
population'." (P.Hodgkinson & M. Stewart 1991 p92).

        Apart from the enlightening statement above, Hodgkinson and
  Stewart make no other attempt to justify using an approach which
  is still regarded as inovative in mainstream British social work.
  I find this surprising since Michael Stewart; in his role as a
  consultant, has been a leading figure in pointing out the need
.for a proactive approach in preventive mental health social work
  following disasters. He provides a cogent rationale in his
  article "Selling Social Work"(M.Stewart 1989(b)); the main points
 he makes are:
  * Mo$t British people l.ike to believe that they can manage their
  own lives perfectly well' without outside help;
•'.* Even if they recognize their need for help they like choose who
 they will.go to and when;
  * Disaster populations are usually random groups and will contain
  only a very small proportion of people who have had previous
  contact with social services. Most people take a negative view of
  social workers and their clients, and will bie reluctant to seek
  help from them because involvement carries a stigma,
  * Most people do not know where to go to find social workers, nor
 what kind of help they can give.
  * For all of the reasons above, social workers should:
        (a) actively offer help rather than waiting for requests and
        reacting to them;
        (b) give out information in "simple, understandable
        langauge" (ibid) about the way the disaster may affect them,
        and where they can get help.

      Tim Newburn supports what Stewart says (T.Newburn 1993
p52/53) and mentions particulrly the "macho" attitude of many men
as being a significant cause of the reluctance to seek help from
social workers(T.Newburn 1993 p50). He includes two further
points not mentioned by Stewart:
* It is not uncommon for survivors to feel that they are not
worthy of help (T.Newburn 1993 p51/2) This phenomenon is a part
of "survivor guilt" (see B.Raphael 1986 p87+89, P.Hodgkinson &
M. Stewart 1991 p4~6).
* In the first few days, or even weeks, after a disaster
survivors often suffer from an emotional numbness (T.Newburn 1993
p49).(See also B.Raphael 1986 p64 oh "disaster syndrome").
Obviously people in this state do not often realize that they are
about to be confronted by a difficult psychological crisis, and
even if they do they are usually too stunned to instigate any
purposive action.

     Marion Gibson makes a sketchy case for proactive work
(M.Gibson 1991 p99/100), and the Disasters Working party endorse
the idea (HMSO 1991 Part 1 p 7 ) but without attempting to justify
its use.

WHAT SHOULD SOCIAL WORKERS ACTUALLY DO FOLLOWING A DISASTER?

     Of the literature included in this survey the following give
direct advice about what social workers can do, and how to do it:
D.Tumelty & P.Seed 1990; M.Gibson 1991; the Disasters Working
Party (HMSO 1991), P.Hodgkinson & M.Stewart 1991 and T.Newburn
1993. As far as I can see, apart from one or two other short
articles in social work journals, this represents the bulk of the
existing British literature on the subject.

     Tumelty & Seed's book describes the methods used by Grampian
Social Work Department following the Piper Alfa explosion and
fire, and was the first British book on the subject. They start
by pointing out that identifying who is likely to need social
work help may be quite a. complicated process (D.Tumelty & P.Seed
1990 p20-25), and point to the desirability of setting up a good
computer database system to keep track of potential clients {ibid
p26/27). They suggest sending letters to people aidvising that a
social worker will visit, and give advice about the timing of
these letters. They stress th‘e heed for good liaison with •
voluntary agencies (ibid p25/26) aad then briefly discuss is’sues
to do with record keeping. Here they acknowledgie that great care
must be taken with the confidentiality of computerized records,
but seem to accept without question that detailed personal
records will be needed (ibid pl7/28).

     Chapter 9 (ibid pp78-89) deals with the service which can be
offered to those bereaved in the disaster. Traumatized survivors
are the subject of Chapter 10 (ibid pp90-96); practical help is
mentioned here but emphasis is given to helping people to talk
through their experiences, and to linking them up with others who
shared the same experiences.

     Marion Gibson has had first hand experience of offering a
service to people affected by terrorist activity in N.Ireland
and of helping after the Kegworth plane crash. She makes
reference to some well known writers, including Beverley Raphael
and Michael Stewart, and her advice, which is essentially very
similar to that of Tumelty & Seed, embraces fully the idea that
the service should be proactive. She suggests:
* contacting as many of the potentially affected people as
possible, directly or by letter, and following up with a visit.
* distribution of the now standard leaflet publicizing the
possible effects of post traumatic stress.
* publicity about support services, using the media.
* further contact with those involved around significant events.
* having staff available at significant public events connected
with the disaster.
* encouragement of self-help groups.
* individual support and counselling.
(M.Gibson 1991 pl00-103).

     Part 2 of the The Disasters Working Party report (HMSO 1991
part2) provides an "Action Sheet" which identifies tasks to be
done by a social services department, in which it refers to
"support workers" who would, presumably, be social work staff.
This advice is plainly intended to help senior managers rather
than basic grade practitioners and appears to be a synthesis of
the advice given elswhere.

     In Chapter 4 of their book Hodgkinson & Stewart provide a
list entitled "Methods of Disaster Outreach" (P.Hodgkinson &
M.Stewart 1991 pl05), but they do not say how they have derived
the list or quote any sources for it. Many of the tasks listed
would appear to be suitable for social workers to undertake and
include 'emotional triage' immediately after the event.  During
the first month they suggest "Proactive visiting.     including
debriefing of survivors, crisis counselling, at-risk assessment
and providing referral networking" and provision of short term
practical help (ibid pl05). For the long term they provide a list
of tasks which includes individual counselling, theraputic group
work and various methods for disseminating information to the
community at large about the psychological effects of disaster
(ibid pl05/6).

     Hodgkinson & Stewart go on to give some lengthy advice about
how to. conduct a.first visit, wjiich they see as crucial in the
process of convincing a potential client that the :social worker
can provide a service which they need      (they actually use the word
"selling")(ibid. pl07-116).

     Whilst they make littie reference to other sources in this
chapter, I believe that this advice should all be taken seriously
because of the authors' practical experience and involvement in
several recent British disasters, including Bradford, Zebrugge,
Lockerbie and Hillsborough, but I also agree with Brook's
remarks (R.Brook 1990 p8/9) that there has been a certain lack
of critical evaluation of the techniques which were first used in
this country at Bradford and which are expounded by Hodgkinson &
Stewart here. One of the first serious attempts to assess the .
effectiveness of post-disaster social work is Tim Newburn's
research (see preface to T.Newburn 1993). His study is of great
relevance to this piece of work.

     Some of Newburn's findings are provided in his short book
"Making a Difference?" (T.Newburn 1993). Newburn has been
canvassing the views of service users and social workers about
the social work response to Hillsborough. His field research has
covered a period of two years starting about one year after the
actual disaster took place, and has investigated the social
services effort in all of the areas affected by the tragedy,
including Sheffield and Nottingham. Hopefully the full results
will be published separately in due course.

     On pages 16-24 Newburn gives a summary of the descriptions
he has accumulated about "The Nature of the Service" (T.Newburn
1993 pl6). This is divided into six parts:

* Practical and personal support:
     Practical help appears to have been valued, particularly in
the days soon after the event. Newburn remarks that the
"counselling" described by his respondents seems to have been
typically of a very informal kind. Much of what the Hillsborough
social workers did with individual clients should, he suggests,
not be described as counselling (ibid pl7).
* Personal support and counselling:
     "Whilst one of the central components of the work was
listening to survivors' and relatives' accounts of the tragedy,
social workers also encouraged people to 'record' their
experiences,"(ibid pl9). Imaginative use was made of press
photographs and video material of the event, which facilitated
more formal one-to-one counselling.
* Individual counselling:
     "Where something akin to counselling was evident, what
actually took place was, in itself, quite varied       .."(ibid
p20). "The ability to be flexible and adaptable appeared to be
the key, and it was those workers who were perceived to have been
trying to rigidly impose a 'model' (of post traumatic stress, for
example) or pre-given structure on to the work who drew the most
criticism. '*(ibid. p21).
* Group work or counselling:
     Each of the several social work teams providing-a service
after Hillsborough rah some groups. The nature of these varied
considerably. The Liverpool team hosted groups for bereaved
parents, survivors, partners and families, carers (of the badly
injured), young persons, women'sr^partners-and relatives, (ibid.-
p22/23).. ;
* Newsletter:
     Social Services staff set this up originally, and it was
taken over by those involved in the disaster (ibid p23/24).

     The opinions of service users provided by Newburn offer
interesting critical insights into the techniques of social work
being used after Hillsborough, arid which have been generally
applied following each major disaster since the Bradford Fire. In
his conclusions (ibid pp63-73) he provides suggestions about how
services can be improved. He appears to accept that the service,
as it has been provided, is helpful, and his three main
conclusions are:-

"* Social workers must be clear about what they can offer to
    people affected by disasters.
 * Crucially, social workers require good 'listening skills'.
 * Providing practical support is at least as important a
    function in the aftermath of disaster as 'counselling'."
                                                      (ibid p 7 0 ) .
                           REPORT

     Five members of the Liverpool Social Services Hillsborough
Team were interviewed in order to compile this report. All five
joined the team when it was originally set up in the months
following the Hillsborough Disaster which happened on 15th April
1989. Four still work for the team, but will not do so for much
longer because it is in the process of closing down following a
decision by Liverpool Social Services Committee. The fifth left
the team after working in it for just over two years. All are
professionally qualified, and their main social work experience
prior to joining the Hillsborough team appears to have been
either in hospital social work teams or local authority district
offices, or a mixture of both.
     The conversations lasted between 15 minutes and half an
hour. Some of the most significant content is provided here,
segregated under appropriate subject headings. The exact words of
the respondents have been used as far as practicable, but some
minor changes have been made where the colloquial speech did not
make good sense in written form. Where it has been necessary to
add words, these are written in standard1 print, whilst the words
used by respondents appear throughout in italic print. Where
words have been omitted, this is indicated by a series of dots
thus:-....... An asterisk denotes the start of each separate
quote.

Fundamental differences in the nature of disaster social work as
opposed to more conventional forms of sdcial work:

*    In disaster social work...... it was the sheer size, the
dramatic effect, really, of the numbers of people. 1 don't think
anything prepares you for that; both the size and the extreme
nature, the unpredictable nature, of disaster when so many people
die at once, and so many people are injured at once, and so many
people have gone through the same incident at once......... .It’s
just the overall chaos and the beurocracy and the massive effect,
I think, on people , the community, and families - the ripple
effect...... It's very overwhelming and I don't think anyone is
prepared for that, whatever their profession, not just social
work .

*    I think the essence of what you're dealing with is some kind
of disturbance in any persons life that's so monumental to them.
I think the only thing that disasters offer thats different is
the scale, and possibly the fact that it's less discriminating.
It's a less discriminating form of tauma than the trauma of
family breakdown or marital problems or where a child has been
abused.

*    I think it's about the sequence of events that happened to
people and the sheer helplessness in it - that this is something
that has happened to them that could happen to any one of us -
that it involved being in the wrong place at the wrong time -
something that people very often have no control over at a l l ....
Some of m y experience in social work    had been with people who
....... did have some degree of choice....... but they'd chosen
the wrong way of dealing with things. It was more about doing for
people. This sort of work is more about enabling people, giving
people a chance to normalize feelings and responses after an
event, whereas very often with (other) social work i t ’s about
helping people to look back at past responses that have been
inappropriate and to try to modify or alter those. So, t h a t ’s
where there's quite a big difference, really.

Further differences in the characteristics of the client group
were described

*    You get a client group that's more articulate - sometimes
more assertive a n d ...... with clearer expectations of what you
should provide in your role as social worker, which differed very
much from district or hospital work. I think that for me one of
the big differences in working with a disaster client group is
the power issue...... the power balance became a more equal power
balance.

*    Being in a post-trauma situation with a person strips the
layers so quickly and the acheivements come fast and furious....
.....You can be slogging away on the district for so long but
those acheivement don't come. The motivation of the clients is
different....

Other perceived differences in the nature of'disaster social work
included:-

*     In district office wor k..... you're going from crisis to
crisis and it" becomes blurr&d        .Unless y o u ’re' constantly
using critical path analysis, it's very easy to sort of lose
track of where we should be goin g ..... In this kind of work...
........it was much more manageable. .... that was a big difference.

*.   I think it differs also in so far that if you're in any job
in social work there are always people that will tell you stories
that are quite traumatic, right. A key thing with Hillsborough,
though, was that the story was the same almost. That it was day
in, always the same sort of thing, you know. They were either
describing what it had been like at Hillsborough or they were
describing how they had heard that their child was killed.
Although in a sense it was helpful because you knew the story,
therefore you could actually allow the person to talk to you
safely, I think in time I began to think "Hold on, I'm getting
slightly blase about this whole thing now. "

Being "Proactive"

The next four statements were made in reply to a question about
whether the team had followed the advice given in the literature
about writing to those known to have been involved in the
disaster, and then following up with a visit unless the person
had indicated that a visitor would not be welcome (Tumelty & Seed
1990 p25, Gibson 1991 plOO, Hodgkinson & Stewart 1991 pl05). Only
one person seemed to think that the idea was a helpful one.

*     I certainly think that is a good strategy, particularly in
the light of the people in the tail end of our existence, the
 third year and the fourth yea r, who (had) found it very easy to
 get locked in denial. One of the big problems about Hillsborough
 was, because of the lack of preparation by the emergency services
 in the aftermath, people who shouldn't have been allowed to walk
 away from the scene, did, which reinforced their own belief of
 "I'm O.K.". Whereas if every single person in that ground had
 recieved some basic form of acknowledgement saying "You have been
 in a traumatic situation", which in itself is a form of pro­
 activity, it wouldn't have been as difficult, then, for people to
 come forward.

*    I don't think the team felt comfortable about going round
knocking on peoples' doors, but if somebody was involved in the
disaster we could actually write to them to say "We're here if
you want to use u s n. Then the decision is very much up to them...
...... Write and invite them, that's the tack I took, and I think
that's the tack most people took in the team as well.- I can't
remember anybody going knocking on doors.

 *     ..... but if we're going to say that we're giving people
 choices in controlling their lives..... *we weren't going to get
■into’ the game of knocking on people's doors.

*    We couldn't do that because there were twenty four thousand
survivors, so that was why we had to out reach the community
generally.                    '•

The question of how to respond to referrals from relatives and
other third parties was discussed by respondents; here is a
representative example of the views expressed:       rv             *

*    We would frequently take referrals from an individual’s
parents, partner etc. Initially we would attempt to get that
person to bring their problem in to the Centre, right? We
occasionally would respond, but I think our view was increasingly
that we should explain to the third party that we would prefer
it if the person concerned chose to contact us themselves. We
trod a fine line on that one, I think.

Some other forms of outreach recommended in the literature
(Gibson 1991 pl00/101; Hodgkinson & Stewart 1991 pl06/106) had
evidently been taken very seriously:

*    We've had a lot of contact with GPs, with CPNs, with the
various agencies. What started off as outreach in terms of
presentations in order to encourage people to use the centre
inevitably had a spin off that was in training. We were going out
to various places doing outreach, but then were asked to do
training as well so that the training was partly outreach.

*    We had an open door policy and that was part of the
outreach, if you like. We enabled people to come along. We tried
all different things like being open on match days and things
like that, but none of that worked.

*    Yes, we tried (to be proactive) on the Hillsborough team. I
think, with hindsight, that we ought to have tried harder.
Equally, though, I'm not sure that we had the scope to meet the
demands from that anyway

*    We certainly did a lot of outreach to professional agencies
and community groups and education, and we were actually telling
people what we did and getting referrals that way, and also in
terms of using the media to advertize the service, leafleting,
posters and those sorts of things...... Telling people exactly
what we did, what we could offer, which again is something that
I think is very adaptable to everyday practice because there is a
lot of mystery about what social workers do.

The two respondents with the most experience in hospital social
work pointed out that being proactive is not new:

*    I think, with hindsight, that it (being pro-active) wasn't
that new to some of us. In hospitals I think you frequently have
to sell yourself as a social worker. You need to convince the
ward staff in the first instance; you need to      persuade the
patients that you are there for them.........

*       Vie used to contact everyone who came to (the children's
hospital) with a dead child, so I was used to that.really. We
used to write and say we were coming to see them, and then go and
visit them, or we'd just go actually, go to the house and knock
on the door......... We'd already been doing that - we'd pioneered
ar. lot of that work at the hospital .


The practical differences    of disaster- social work.

Particularly in the early    days of the' Team's existence,long
hours and .intense workrates seem to have been the norm:

*    In the short term I think that we worked a lot more hours
than we were used to working. I became more flexible in m y
working time. I didn't expect to get home on time like I would
have normally.

*    In the early days we worked more than five days a week to be
frank because we had this   vision. It was new so it was
challenging, it was interesting, and I think in the ealy days
people were putting in twelve hour days. It was iust crazy, with
hindsight.

*    The concentration of pure face to face contact with people
was greater. Here it would be see a client, have a break and
write it up for five minutes or ten minutes, see a client    ....
That would be very much the whole of the eight hour day. As a job
sharer, which I was initially when the team started, I would be
seeing eight to ten clients a week for heavy, in-depth, sessions,
and that's for a 2% day week.

The need to be constantly available was another feature which was
frequently mentioned:

*    It's about being available to meet an immediate need. It
would be things as silly as going downstairs to make a cup of tea
and seeing somebody at the door, answering the door and finding
somebody totally distressed. It's about being available to meet
immediate need.

*    I suppose compared to traditional child care work it was
different because you had to be accessible to people, you had to
be there for people and its not so much about telling people that
"we will do this", it's more about allowing an individual to talk
to you. In terms of hospital social work it is, I think, a kind
of work that happens a lot in hospitals anyway, you know. I
think, though, a key factor was that there was not the same
demand for there to be a quick turnover in cases.

The point that disaster social workers spend more time actually
listening and talking to clients than do their counterparts in
other teams was often made:

*    There's not so much telephoning other agencies like the DSS
and Hatton Garden (departmental HQ) but I think you do a lot more
actual talking to people on the phone, especially new referrals.
We spend longer doing telephone counselling, that's a difference,
and getting proper information, not just date of birth and
address but actually not having to get those details but ma.ybe •
those details comimg out later, which is a different practice and
I think it's good practice anyway.     ,

Another recurring theme was that the service was offered on the
client's terms, and that the clients Were encouraged to exert
control over the procedings.

*    I think I spend more time in the .building. Pepple are more
motivated to'dome to us. It's actually people taking control of .
their lives rather than seeing themselves as being controlled,
and I guess that's another fundamental difference, that people
are highly motivated. Thats really important.

There were several suggestions that the methods used in disaster
social work should be applied to other branches of the
profession. Here is one;

*   What I try to get m y team to do now is probably far more in
line with, and influenced through, m y Hillsborough experience.

Record keeping

The Team appear to have been able to be less bureaucratic in
their approach than most other social work agencies. An example
is the way in which clients could remain anonymous:

*    If somebody wants to come here as an anonymous referral then
they are able to do that      ...We have had people who have come
here and given us names like "Boots" and all sorts of things,
because they didn't want their identity divulged, and we've
respected that in a way that the districts might not have been
able to      We've kept a record of dates of visits, but not
minute detail.

*    For a lot of the referrals we took we didn't even have a
name, we just talked to people and it would just be an anonymous
referral....... We'd just put a number. Even people that dropped
in said they didn't want to give a name. We'd keep an anonymous
record for our own statistics...... The record keeping is much
less elaborate......... we shared records a lot more with people -
there's much more open access.

Client access to records, and using records as a part of the
therapeutic process, appears to have become a well developed
technique:

*    I found in the counselling situations that I was persuing
with people we actually shared record taking as part of the
theraputic process. I would encourage and invite people to
actually record their own sessions either at the end of the
session or following the session, and then t h e y ’d bring it back
to the next session and w e ’d use that as a starting point. I
believe very much that your own perception of w h a t ’s gone on in a
session is markedly different from the client's and from what
they percieve as being the important points. And that worked
quite well. It served a theraputic purpose for a number of
people.

The ability to clearly monitor a client's progress seems to be a
feature of disaster social work:

*    I know several of us tried to do this and I did as well, I
tried to involve people in keeping records. Because we were,
having to sell social work to people who would, perhaps, never
have used the social work service normally, that was an issue for
them. We made it very clear that our record keeping would bis to
an absolute minimum. That suited

*    Records were much briefer. It's easier to plan in
counselling work after specific trauma........it's much easier to
see where you're going because I was constantly evaluating
things.

Personal issues and the rewards of the work.

The personal costs of doing this kind of work were frankly
admitted by some, and the extent of the psychological support
provided was criticised:-

*    Three and a half years of dealing with very heavy emotional
tragedy and death does have a major emotional impact on you, or
on me personally. It can be quite draining. It can also raise an
awful lot of personal issues as well .........What I feel is that
we were thrown in at the start as sponges to absorb sort of true
life tales of death and horror, really........I don't feel the
support structures were there. We deal with caseloads in
supervision, but in a team like this I don't think that's
enough........In terms of the sort of ammount of death and
tragedy we've come across in these last four years I definitely
don't think there's been proper supervision structures put in.

*    Initially after Hillsborough I think there was a sort of
freneticism, really, about the p l a c e .........doing as much as
possible and trying to take away p e o p l e s ' pain. I think that at
that stage maybe I was seeing five, six or seven people a day,
and listening to them telling their story. For a while that
seemed to be O.K. but after a while it sort of caught up, and I
realized how burnt-out I'd become with it, and how depressed I'd
become with it. So, since that realization I actually went for
counselling myself. I was doing a counselling course at the time.
The counsellor on the course, the group leader, told me I was in
a mess, which was probably the best thing I'd heard because I was
still sort of pretending that everything was O.K. and everything
was fine; and I was blaming myself for not coping, whereas it was
the external pressures of work to a large extent, and also the
personal issues it was raising. It was really driving me down. So
since that time I vowed not to see more thantwo or three people
a day, which I haven't.......

*    I t ’s about being willing to look at yourself more, to
subject yourself to a lot more pressure in terms of emotional
demands because it is emotionally stripping. It actually tears
away on your own emotional defences and leaves you very, very
naked. That's why it's so different as     well.

The apparent high clarity with which a client 's recovery could, be
monitored has already been pointed out (see previous page). As a
result there appear to be few doubts amongst the respondents
about the value of their work:

*    It's being able to see more clearly that you have done your
job, and because largely y o u 're involved on a one-to-one basis
you're able to have more influence than you can where you're
trying to juggle solicitors, .and trying to take cases back to
court, and foster parents .......... For me, I think, a main
reward has been being able to look at something, io look at a
case and think "I did that. " Which also gives you'the opportunity
to see when you've made mistakes, how you made your mistakes, and
to learn from it.

*    A satisfaction of a job well done is obvious when you're
working with somebody who you can see physically represents all
the trauma that they've been through; to see somebody actually
moving through that is incredibly rewarding. To see somebody
who's stuck in their grief and their pain and to see them
actually recognize' that stuckness is just absolutely phenomenal.
I can't think of anything that would as rewarding......... It's
about seeing people actually moving and making so much progress,
because in generic social work you can see if people are making
progress sometimes, but i t ’s so slow you don't feel that you've
actually enabled that in the same way.

The emotional stresses have led to benefits for some workers,
too:

*     The rewards for me have been tremendous personal growth. It
has necessitated tremendous personal growth otherwise I would
have been just driven down into the mire, really....... actually
feeling that I'm giving a good service, and I'm confident in what
I ’m doing. That ’s nice. And again I suppose a measure of that to
some degree is that people keep coming back.
Nobody said that they regretted becoming involved in the work.
Personal costs have evidently been rewarded with high job
satisfaction.

*    Really it was a unique experience...... It's had it's ups
and downs but overall I'd say it's been positive, very rewarding
and very different and unusual work.... I don't think I'd want to
manage another disaster team.....

*     In a sense I suppose it's equivalent to a fairground, sort
of thing. You go on a ride which, although at times is
pleasurable, and equally at times is bloody awful, at the end of
that ride you think "That was alright", you know? But it's not an
experience that I would choose to go through again, though.

*    Sometimes I think there are tremendous rewards. Other times
I think "What in the name of Jesus am I doing this for?” The
rewards - I suppose the rewards come from the buzz of seing
somebody grow out of being a victim.




                               13
                        CONCLUSION
     Strictures on the word length and time have limited this
study to only a few of the many possible topics related to
disaster social work. While considering the results it is also
sanguine to remember that whilst the literature relates to the
role of social workers in the immediate aftermath onwards, the
Liverpool Hillsborough Team came into being more than two months
after the disaster had occurred. This means that some of the
advice provided in the literature will not have been entirely
relevant to the jobs of the respondents. The team is now in the
process of closing down, and it seems highly probable that some
of the views expressed in the Report have been coloured by the
feelings of the respondents about the closure.

     In addressing the nature of the fundamental differences
between disaster social work and the more usual types of social
work, the respondents identified the overwhelming and
indiscriminate nature of disasters, and pointed out that the
majority of the people affected would not in normal circumstances
seek social work help. This is a point that is well recognized in
the literature (see Introduction p2/3), and which leads the way
into the arguments in favour of a proactive social work response.•
The respondents pointed out that the disaster client group tend
to be iftore articulate, more discerning and more able to make
decisions for themselves than the clients who see social workers
in more usual circumstances. This plainly has an effect on the
way the social workers approach- their job, -but these effects are
not, in the'main, acknowledged'^by the literature which seems to •
be aimed mostly at managers arid those responsible for organizing
the social services response.

     An exception to the statement above is to be found in
P.Hodgkinson & M. Stewart 1991. ppl07-117. where they spell out
in great detail how they believe a first, proactive, interview
should.be carried out. This proactive interviewing technique was
one which was not employed by the respondents in this study.   The
reasons given to the interviewer were that they felt it would
compromise the clients' right to self determination and that in
any case, the large numbers of those potentially affected would
have made this an impossible task (see Report p8). Marion Gibson
discusses the point about client self determination (M.Gibson
1991 plOO) and concludes that the circumstances warrant the
breaking of this fundamental principle of social work. She does
not acknowledge that, even when social workers turn up on the
doorstep, the potential client will have the opportunity to tell
the social worker to go away. Hodgkinson & Stewart suggest that,
"As far as possible the client should be offered choice."
(Hodgkinson and Stewart 1991 pl09) If this is bourne in mind when
the proactive visit is made, then it could be argued that the
client is being offered a greater chance to exercise self
determination than if no visit had been made at all.

     Much of the proactive outreach suggested by Gibson and
Hodgkinson & Stewart (see Introduction, p3/4) was carried out.
however (see Report pp7-9). A point of particular interest is
provided by the comments of the two respondents who had worked in
hospitals before joining the the Hillsborough Team  (Report p9)
that a proactive approach had been used by hospital social
workers before the arrival of disaster social work as specialist
discipline. This is not acknowledged in any of the literature
that I have seen, and hence one can only assume that managers
have not been taking full advantage of a ready source of
expertise when recruiting staff for disaster work. (I know from
personal contacts that this was felt to be the case by hospital
staff at the time of Hillsborough.)

     When talking about the practical differences between
disaster social work and more conventional forms, all the
respondents said that in the early days they were drawn into
working long hours and that, with hindsight, they now feel that
this had been a mistake. They would, presumably, endorse the
statement made in the "Action Sheet" of the Disasters Working
Party Report (Part 2 p54), which recommends that "work
discipline" should be made a priority in the sense that staff
should not be allowed to work more than their standard hours.

     Other points were made which are not to be found in the
literature (see Report pp9-l1). These include:

* Liverpool Hillsborough Team members have spent more time
talking directly with their clients, either face to face or on
the telephone, and less time in talking to other professionals
than do most social workers. The descriptions of their work given
by respondents indicated that they have been providing-
counselling of a quite disciplined kind. This does not accord
with Newburn'svcomments (see Introduction p5 and' T.Newburn 1993
pl7). It should be remembered, however, that Newburn is
describing the .social work done by the Hillsborough teams in all
of the local authorities which had them; most of these were
closed some time ago leaving the Liverpool team to provide a
unique service for about the past two years. It is presumably
this unique, latter-day service which was in the minds of the
respondents to this survey.

* Whilst at work, the respondents have had to be constantly
available to talk to clients who "drop in" whenever it suits
them.

* The clients can (and do) exercise control over their contacts
with social workers. This is in marked contrast to much of
conventional social work where the social worker has power and
exercises control over the interactions.

* Reflecting the previous point, clients were not obliged to
reveal their identities. If they wished, they could be referred
to by a fictitious name or even a number.

* Another indication of the clients’ ability to control the
service they received is that written records were shared with
clients to a greater degree than is usual, and were sometimes
used as part of the therapeutic process. One respondent talked
about clients writing the records after counselling sessions (see
Report pll), as does Newburn (see Introduction p5 and T.Newburn
1993 p l 9 ). All of the respondents indicated that the records kept
were very brief when compared to conventional social work
recording. This contrasts with the impression given by Tumelty
and Seed who seem to imply that standard style records were kept
by the Piper Alfa team (see Introduction p3 and D.Tumelty and
P.Seed 1990 p27/28).

* The nature of the counselling work was such that it has been
easy to monitor the progress of each client. This is in contrast
to much of conventional social work where personal progress in
clients is often markedly absent.

     In his section about the lessons to be learned about the
nature of disaster services from the Hillsborough experience,
Newburn draws three main conclusions (see Inroduction p5 and
T.Newburn 1993 p70). Having listened to the respondents it is
clear that they endorse the idea that "Social workers should be
clear about what they can offer to people affected by disasters."
and that "     social workers require good listening skills.".
What is not clear is whether they would support his assertion
that "Providing practical support is at least as important      as
counselling.".

     The.personal stresses of being a disaster social worker were
referred to by all of the respondents, and at some length by one..
of them.-Of relevance to the quote from the Disasters Working
Party Report on p2 of the introduction, one respondent felt that,
there had not been enough psychological debriefing offered during
supervision (Report pll). This comment seems to add support to
Tim Newburn's .reconvmendation that:

    "The -role- of the team leader as manager, professional
    supervisor and major source of support for workers needs t o ;
    be radically rethought." (T.Newburn 1993 p67).

These personal stresses, however, eventually led to gains in
terms of personal growth (Report pl2/13).

     Job satisfaction appears to have been high amongst the
respondents. Four out of the five admitted that there had been
times and parts of the work that they had not enjoyed, and two
said that they would probably not volunteer themselves again if
another disaster arose. Everyone said, however, that they were
glad that they had had the experience of working in a disaster
social work team.

     Finally, a point worth making which is not apparent in the
literature, and which was alluded to by several respondents
although not in a quoteable form, is that the methods of work
described here are very much in line with what is now considered
to be good social work practice. Both of the major new pieces of
legislation affecting social work in this country, the Children
Act and the National Health and Community Care Act, place heavy
emphasis on enabling social work clients to take control of their
own lives by encouraging them to say what services they want, and
to dictate the terms of their relationship with social workers.
The Hillsborough Team have been doing this by being highly
responsive to clients wishes about the service they receive and
practical issues like record keeping. The rest of social work
could learn a lot by studying the way disaster social work teams
such as this one have been operating.




                               17
                          APPENDIX
METHODS US E D .

     Four of the respondents were, in a sense, self selected. One
of them was asked personally by myself to take part and was
interviewed at my workplace during a business visit. The other
four presented themselves for interview during a visit to their
workplace arranged in advance with the team leader. I do not know
how much discussion, if any, had taken place between members of
the Hillsborough Social Work Team as to who would be interviewed.
All of the respondents were known to me from previous contacts of
a professional nature.

     The purpose of the interview was explained to each
respondent at the start, and they were told that their names
would not be used. They were promised a copy of the completed
paper, and the agreement of each was gained before launching into
the main substance of the conversation.

     The interviews were conducted as informally as circumstances
would allow; the shortest lasted about 15 minutes and the longest
about 3.0 minutes. A list of questions was prepared and shown to
each respondent and left available for them to see as the
conversation progressed. Subsidiary questions were put to the
respondents and commehts made in order to try to encourage them
to expand on issues about which they had strong feelings. The net
result was that., whils,t everyone was invited to talk about the
same topics, the answers varied considerably in'their' range,
depth and content. Hopefully the differences reflect to some
extent the differing opinions and concerns of each individual.

     The interviews were all carried out using a tape recorder.
Rough transcriptions were subsequently made, and these were used
to make an initial selection of passages which might be suitable
for inclusion in the Report. These passages were then transcribed
verbatim, and a draft of the Report was compiled and then edited.
Some of the original quotes were cut down in length, or omitted
altogether. Those that remained were given punctuation as
appeared appropriate to convey the meaning which I believe was
intended by the respondent. In some places it was necessary to
add or take out words in order to make the meaning clear and
unambiguous, and to make the text readable.

     The criteria used to select material from the interviews for
quotation in the report were:

     (i) that the passage should contain facts or sentiments
which were representative of those expressed by several
respondents, and/or
     (ii) that the passage raised issues which had strong
connections with material found in the literature, or
     (iii)that the passage expressed some hitherto unexplored
facet of the possible differences between disaster work and
conventional social work, and
     (iv) that the passage could be quoted without having to
alter it to any major extent in order to make it intelligible to
the reader.
Significant points and issues raised in passages which did not
comply with criterion (iv) above were taken account of and
alternative quotations sought.

CRITIQUE OF METHODS.

     Many of the limitations of this project seem to me to have
been caused by the strictures of time and the word limit imposed
on the researcher. One obvious one was the brevity of the
interviews. Longer conversations would have allowed for deeper
exploration of the respondents' opinions and feelings, and would
possibly have enabled them to relax more than they did and hence
become less inhibited. Fetterman talks about the desirability for
the observer to be as "unobtrusive" as possible (D.M.Fetterman
1989 pll6/117): whilst it is plainly impossible for an
interviewer to be totally unobtrusive, his or her presence can
become less of an inhibiting factor if there is enough time to
put the respondent at ease. Longer conversations might also have
provided the interviewer with oportunities to check the validity
of some the answers by asking the same questions in different
ways (D .M. Fetterman 1989 p91/92).                              .

     An expanded project could have included more respondents
(there are several others who have been members of the team since
it was inaugurated), and hence elicited.a more balanced and
representative set of comments. As it Stands, it is impossible to
tell to what extent the comments received represent the general
feeling of the whole Hillsborough Team,

      This proj.ect would also have benefitted by other forms of
triangulation (D.M.Fetterman 1989 p89-92).: It would have been
interesting to compare the answers given here with those of
disaster social workers from other local authorities, including
some who have been involved with other disasters (but this would
have made the project much bigger in scope). Re-interviewing the
same respondents would be another way to check validity, possibly
using a different interviewer; this would tend to counteract any
tendency for the interviewers to influence the the respondent
(however unintentionally) by their tone of voice, manner or any
other me a n s .

     Further methods of triangulation might include the use of
different research methods alongside the interviews. A
questionnaire circulated amongst the team (and possibly other
disaster social workers), or group discussions involving the
respondents are possibilities, although they would make further
demands on the patience of the respondents and their colleagues
who I understand have been subjects of several research projects
during the lifetime of the team. Not least amongst these has been
Tim Newburn1s NISW project in which he and his helpers have
interviewed service users and compared their accounts of what has
gone on with those of social workers (see T.Newburn 1993 and p5
of the Introduction to this project.) Consulting service users
would seem to be the most reliable method of judging the
effectiveness of the service provided.

Word total: about 8,500.
                              BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. K.T.Erikson,   1979,   In the Wake of the Flood, George Allen &
Unwin, London.

2. B.Raphael, 1986, When Disaster Strikes: A Handbook for the
Caring Professions, Unwin Hyman, London.

3. M.Gibson, 1991, Order from Chaos: Responding to Traumatic
Events, Venture Press, Birmingham.

4. D.Tumelty & P.Seed, 1990, Social Work in the Wake of Disaster,
Jessica Kingsley, London.

5. P.Hodgkinson & M.Stewart, 1991, Coping with Catastrophe: A
Handbook of Disaster Management, Routledge, London.

6. R.Brook, 1990, An Introduction to Disaster Theory for Social
Workers, Social Work Monographs, Norwich..

7. North West Association of Social Services'Authorities
(NWASSA), 1993, Social Services Civil Emergencies Planning
Manual, NWASSA, Oldham.

8. M.Stewart,   1989(a), Mirrors of Pain,    Community Care, 2nd
February.

.9. M.Stewart, 1989.(i>),.Selling Social Work,   Community Care, 9th
 February.

10.Tim Newburn, 199.3, Making a- Difference?, N.I.S.W. London.

11.Disasters Working Party, 1991, Disasters: Planning for a
Caring Pesponse, HMSO, London.

12.David M. Fetterman, 1989, Ethnography Step by Step, Sage
Publications, Newbury Park, California.
