         Advice for those who have lost a friend

               o f   relative at Hillsborough.




SSDA£C
       INTRODUCTION


            Your immediate anxiety may be that you want to see your
       dead relative or friend again. This may be. possible and you
       can contact Liverpool Help Line 051 - 225 3413 or 225 3414.

       Sheffield Help Line at the Medico Legal Centre 0742 738721
                                  Watery Street,
                                  Sheffield

            These telephone numbers will introduce you to people
       who can help.

       NECESSARY PROCEEDUREfa

       1.        When you have confirmed the identity of your friend or
                 relative, because the dearth was unexpected the law
                 requires that there will need to be a post mortem to
                 determine the exact cause of death,

       2.        When the post mortem is complete a Death Certificate
                 will have to be issued at the Coroners Office in
                 Sheffield.  This is at the;™

                            Medico Legal Centre,
                            Watery Street,
                            Sheffield,

                  Please note due to the circumstances 'of the disaster
                  there may well be a-delay.of several days before the.
                  coroner can issue a Death Certificate. •

       3.       When you do get your Death Certificate you    willhave to
                 register the death, at;-

                            Sheffield Registrars Office,
                            Surrey Place,
                            Sheffield.

       4„         The Registrar will need the following informations-

                            Full    Same
                            Date    and Place -of Birth
                            lour    Address
                            iJamo   of Next, of Kin

        5.      The Registrar will issue two forms.

                   Green Form
                   To be given to the Funeral Director.

                   White Form
                   For"The Department of Social Security.   This is the
                   Certificate or Registration of Death.




        SSDAAC
•K -         Co<'<r>,va->            v
          The Registrar's Office does not automatically
     issue a copy of a Death Certificate but one can be
     purchased for the cost of £2.00 if obtained at the time
     of registration.

          Insurance Companies require a copy of a Death
     Certificate.




SSDAAC
    FURTHER HELP FOR ALL THOSE AFFECTED BY THE DISASTER


      When a friend or relative dies unexpectedly, and when
all the arrangements that have to be made are completed,
many people feel they have been left alone to grieve,
abandoned even.   Acute feelings of anxiety and dispair may
emerge, also physical feelings like illness may give you
concern.   Emotions may come and go, feelings of anger or
guilt, intense feelings of tiredness and distress.
Misunderstandings between friends and family members may
cause upset at a time when you expect to be supported.    If
there are children in the family, however small they too
will grieve for their dead, brother sister, father or
moth er .

     People respond differenctly to a death, some friends
are helpful other may feel at a loss, about what to say or
do and they may not realise just how long it takes to get
back to some kind of normality.

     If you feel stuck and unable to see any direction
forwards or if you would like to talk to someone about tew
you feel, contact the Merseyside Help Line, a variety of
professional help and guidance is available. We will do all
we can to help.

     Help Line No, 225 3413 or
                   225 3414




SSDAAC
THE FUNERAL

     A Funeral Director of your choice can be contacted^
They will take responsibility for all practical details and
arrangements including the transport home of your friend or
relative.

     Do not make any payment to the Funeral Director unitl
you have checked your entitlement to financial help from the
disaster fund.  This can be checked by ringina the Help Line
on 051 225 3413 or 225 3414,




SSDAAC
