                                                                             W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                                                             City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                                             P.O. Box No. 88

LIVERPOOL                                                                    Municipal Buildings
                                                                             Dale Street
                                                                             L IV E R P O O L L 69 2DH
                                                                             Telephone: 0 5 1 - 225 2431
                                                                             Fax: 236 2047
                                                                             D X 14206 L IV E R P O O L

                                                                             V o u r ref

                                                                             Ourref        F fiS /C M /G S

                                                                             Date          2nd Tune, 1989

To:        All Members of the
           Hillsborough Working
           Party
                                                               06JUNI989




                              PLEASE NOTE THE VENUE OF THE MEETING

 Dear Sir/Madam,
           You are requested to attend a meeting of the HILLSBOROUGH

 WORKING PARTY of the Finance and Strategy Committee at 10.00 A.M.

 on WEDNESDAY, 7TH JUNE, 1989 in Committee Room 'C' in the

 EDUCATION OFFICES, 14 SIR THOMAS STREET, LIVERPOOL.

            The agenda for the meeting is attached.

                                                     Yours faithfu l y   i



                                                           1

                                                       /u
                                                       f   J     y

                                              Clerk to tire Authority
                                                                      » w




                                                                                           NUCLEAR FREE
                                                                                           LOCAL AUTHORITY ■ w t k ld l

When calling or te le p h o n in g please ask fo r    Mr. Moneypenny.
            HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY

                  7TH JUNE, 1989

                      AGENDA



Reports of the City Solicitor and of the City Engineer on the
Party's visit to Hillsborough on 19th May, 1989.

Report of the Chair on the distribution of Working Party
leaflets at Wembley on 20th May 1989 and at Anfield on
23rd May 1989.

Report of the City Solicitor on the Public Meeting on the
Disaster held at St.George's Hall on 25th May 1989.

Report on the Conference on the Football Supporters Bill
held on 16th May 1989 at Hammersmith Town Hall, London.

Report of the Chair on Staffing and Administrative Support
for the Working Party.

Discussion on existing procedures for licensing of football
grounds.

Report of the City Solicitor on the feasibility of the
Working Party gaining access to the Taylor Inquiry.
STATEMENT TO THE PUBLIC MEETING ON THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

FROM CLLR. HARRY CHASE, CHAIR - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY


].   This meeting welcomes both the City Councils Hillsborough initiatives and
      the work of the F.S.A in their submissions to Lord Chief Justice Taylors
      Inquiry.

2.   We recognise the need to take-up those issues already identified with
     Hillsborough recognising that the events of April 15th were neither a
     tragedy parochial   to Liverpool nor a set of events which happened in
     isolation.  Therefore we need to look beyond the immediate tragedy to the
     issues of spectator safety and facilities; the threat to civil liberties
     inherent in the I.D. schemes; and the involvement of supporters in effecting
     change within the football industry.

3.   We condemn the media coverage of Hillsborough and its aftermath which
     portrayed the city of Liverpool and its football supporters as the
     perpetrators of the tragedy which took place.   We call on the Hillsborough
^    Disaster Working Party to investigate and contest such smears and vindicate
*    the heroic role of fans in the life-saving evacuation of Hillsborough.

4.   We are determined  to effectively involve football supporters in resolving
     the problems they   have long-highlighted. For too long we have, as
     supporters tolerated the entrenchec. dictates of clubs and administrators,
     and the blind prejudices of Governments.

5.   The inertia of the F.A in the wake of both Hillsborough and the Government's
     proposed l.D. scheme bears testament to a body which neither recognises
     nor understands the concern and protestations of fans.

6.   We call for a full independent investigation into the administration and
     financing of football to expose the greed and mismanagement that permeates
     the professional game.

7.   We urge all football fans to co-operate with the work of the City Council
     and the F.b.A in their efforts to ensure that those responsible for
     Hillsborough are exposed and brought to justice and that football'.j future
      is secured through meaningful representation of supporters within the
      football industry.




     25.5.89.
                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY

To the Chairman, Councillor Harry Chase.


     As requested, I am sending you some brief notes relative to the visit
to Hillsborough by the Working Party on Friday, 19th May, 1989. These notes
are purely my own personal observations and in no way represent the official
view of the City Engineer's Department since the Department's only input
with respect to Football Ground Areas is in the making of Traffic Regulation
Orders to assist residents in their parking problems and ensure reasonably
free traffic flow. The Police deal with all aspects of crowd control and
traffic control on the public highway during match times.

     My observations are those of a person who does not attend football matches
and, therefore, will view the situation from a different angle. Since the
majority of the time, during the visit, was spent at the ground, my observations
are restricted to this area which, of course, is the City Building Surveyor's
domain, but I am sure Mr. Bush will not take exception to me making my coranents
more or less from a layman's point of view.

     My comments are as follows:-

1.   During discussions on the coach, you quoted figures for the numbers of
     tickets issued, capacity allocated to Liverpool fans, number of turnstiles
     available, and Mr. Bush advised on turnstile capacities. It would appear
     that theoretically it would take some 3£ hours to get the Liverpool fans
     into the ground. If the figures and calculations are correct, then clearly
     3£ hours is an unacceptable length of time and it would, therefore, appear
     that there were very serious problems that would have been apparent at
     the planning stage. I would have thought that l£ hours would be a more
     realistic figure to work to and that if this was not achievable, then the
     question should be asked was Hillsborough the correct choice of ground
     for such an event?


                                           / continued
Moving into the ground I first examined the "anti-surge" barriers and
found that their height measurement to the top of the rails varied
between 36|" to 48|", The 34 steps in the terrace were approximately 3"
high and in at least one location, the barriers were so close to the
next step that their effective height was reduced by 3". My height
is 5'8" and the location of the' barriers on my body varied between the
lowest part of the trunk and the mid-chest position. The effect of these
barriers under pressure I thought may cause one to topple over or slip
under. I would have thought that their height should have been more
consistent, probably at the higher level with a second rail at the
mid-position. Most i'f the rails were of 1\" diameter tube which would
exert a greater pressure on the body than the rearmost rails which were
of . flat cross section and would consequently be less harmful.

I nevt examined the gates leading from the terraces to the pitch. These
gate* all opened outwards towards the pitch and were controlled by a heavily
cons.. ucted latch mechanism containing a powerful spring. This mechanism
coui‘ only be operate" from the pitch side. Additionally, they were
further secured by a substantial chain and padlock.     Their width varied
between 29" to 37" (bear in mind the standard width of a door in a house is
30") and there was so <c variation in their "effective" height. More
importantly was the difficulty of using some of the gates caused by the
fact that the pitch p.rimeter wall had only been partly cut away for the
gates and in some car. 25 had not been cut away at all.
Starting with the gate on the northwest terrace to the Leppings Lane side
enclosure and working round to the gate next to the Police control box,
the situation is as follows:-
The concrete perimeter wall had not been cut away which meant you had to
negotiate its full length of 39" from the terrace with a drop of 31" to
the pitch side. Although the height of the gate was 84", the effective
opening was only 70" due to the gate overlapping the wall. Above the
gate opening was a 12" section of mesh angled at 45° towards the terrace
and spiked which tranversed the full length of the pens.

                                      / continued
  The next gate which was only 29" wide required a threshold height
  of 18!" to be cleared.
  The third gate was for Police use and was situated between fences 74!"
   apart, spanning between the perimeter fence and the rear of the pens
; (-there were gates at the rear allowing Police access, to. .the. adjacent
  pens). The width of the gate was 33" but in this case, wooden steps
  were provided reducing the threshold height to 13".
  The fourth gate was 33" wide with a 6!" concrete step upto a
  threshold height of 9".
  The fifth gate was 37" wide but in addition to the concrete perimeter
  wall, which was 44!" high, an additional mesh panel was fixed giving
  a total threshold height of 48f".
  The sixth gate next to the Police box was 30" wide with a threshold
  height of 12".
  There does not appear to be any logical reason for the variation in
  threshold heights, but quite obviously this would have a dramatic effect
  in their usefulness in emergency.    These gates contrast sharply with
  those at the Kop end which had relatively easy access with one step up.
  (Widths varied between 29!" - 43").
  I am not clear as to the purpose of these gates. Were they ever intended
  to be used in an emergency to allow fans onto the pitch?        If not, then
  there was clearly no escape from the pens. If they were for emergency
  use, then why seriously reduce their capacity.with threshold obstructions
  and practically render them useless in two locations. Additionally, why
  chain and padlock them which only causes further delay in their use in
  an emergency. The only reason I can see for locking them is in the event
  of a pitch invasion, fans may attempt to open these gates from the pitch
  side, thus causing more trouble.
  I suspect that they were never intended for emergency use, but only to
  be used for Police purposes or to remove someone taken ill. In any
  case, their design would hamper these activities.

                                            / continued
    It would appear to me that in all buildings where the public are
    admitted such as theatres, Public Houses, hospitals, offices, multi­
    storey car parks, etc., etc., adequate emergency exits must be
    provided and properly signed, but none of this, it seems, applies
'.‘•>to-football grounds. I can'only assume that to' provider’Stfefr1
    facilities would weaken the "defences" and make it easier to get in
    without paying and reduce the effectiveness of the segregation of rival
    fans. There appears to be double standards, safety facilities are
    provided when it is relatively easy to do so, but not when they affect
    law and order and the "nuisance" value of matches being disrupted.

 I next moved outside the ground to view the arrangements for gaining access
 at the Leppings Lane end.
 There were no physical means such as barriers to segregate queues to
 the turnstiles so this would depend entirely on Police control. It is
 understandable that as kick off time approached and many fans were
 still outside, order would eventually break down and increased pressure
 would be put on the perimeter wall by fans desperate to get in. I
 understand that at this point, the Police were concerned that fans would
 be crushed against this wall. It is apparent now that the wall has
 become unstable (as evidenced by the fact that it is now shored
 up on the inside) and the wall, itself, may have come down on fans. I
 would, therefore, suggest that such walls adjacent to turnstiles should
 be constructed as retaining walls to reduce any possibility of their
 collapse.
 When fans had passed through the turnstiles, there did not appear to
 be any method whereby they could be evenly distributed to the groups of
 pens situated either side of the Police access "corridor".    Maybe
 this was intended to work by means of ticket numbers but clearly it
 failed.

                                     / continued
                                    - 5 -


    I finally moved to the turnstiles at the Kop end which are situated
    adjacent to a very busy and fast dual carriageway and separated from
    it by a footway in the region of 4m wide (I did not measure it).
    There were no pedestrian guardrails and I would consider this is a very
    hazardous situation with a large concentration of fans so close to
    fast moving traffic. ■*Pre®BtffaMy:this- is why only some of the
    turnstiles were in use on the day.
!
!   To provide more space in front of the turnstiles would require the
    temporary closure of one carriageway of the dual carriageway. In
    my opinion it would not be feasible to operate a contra-flow system
    due to the number of traffic signals and pelican crossings, apart from
    the inherent potential accident problems associated with these schemes.
    It would be safer to divert the traffic to another route, but given
    the volumes concerned, it is most unlikely that any other route would
    be suitable. If the carriageway adjacent to the ground was reduced
    to one lane, this would provide some additional space but for safety,
    timber baulks would need to be used to protect pedestrians. This would
    not be practical for the relatively short duration of time required
    for the restriction. If any reduction in capacity was made to the dual
    carriageway, I think it would create traffic jams. Normally when such
    closures are made for say sewer works, they last for days or weeks not
    hours and traffic has a chance to redistribute itself. It is unlikely
    that the general public would accept the traffic chaos caused by such
    closures for reasons of entertainment and not essential road works.




                                            Mike Giles,
                                            Chief Assistant, Traffic Engineer
                                            City Engineer's Department

                                            23rd May, 1989
REPORT ON THE PUBLIC MEETING HELD AT ST. GEORGES HALL ON 25TH MAY, _19r>2
                                                                        _




(Officer contact:       Hflft 225 2334)
CS/123/89

The meeting, attended by approximately 150 people, was held in order to give
football supporters the opportunity to discuss the Hillborough Disaster and
the way forward for football.


Invitations to speak were sent to the following
Dr. John Aston       Liverpool University
Rogan Taylor         Football Supporters Association (FSA)
Gordon Taylor        Professional Footballers Association (PFA)
Jack Dunnett         Football League (FL)
Graham Kelly         Football Association (FA)

Unfortunately the PFA hao. no representative available who could attend the
FA declined the invitation and the FL were advised that as they were giving
evidence to the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry it would be wrong for them to
express views beforehand, particularly at a public meeting.


At the invitation of the Chair, Councillor Harry Chase, the M.P. for Liverpool
Broadgreen, Terry Fields, reported to the meeting the efforts of the
Liverpool M.P's in the House of Commons with regard to the disaster.


Most speakers expressed the view that the tragedy was preventc ole and that
legislation together with money for ground improvements were required to
ensure that football grounds are made safe.


Several supporters took the opportunity to make statements about the Hillsborough
Disaster, which will be submitted to the Taylor Inquiry via the FSA.


The enclosed statement presented to the meeting by the Chair was unanimously
approved.




 Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
"^$vJune, 1989.
