                                          W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                          City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                          P.O. Box No. 88

LIVERPOOL                                 Municipal Buildings
                                          Dale Street
                                          LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                          Telephone: 0 5 1 - 227 3911 Ext: 225 243<
                                          Fax: 236 2047
                                          DX 14206 LIVERPOOL


 TO:   The Chief Executives -             Your ref

       St. Helens M.B.C.                  Our ref    SS/GPD/KH
       Knowsley M.B.C.                               16th August, 1989
                                          Date
       Wirral M.B.C.
       Sefton M.B.C.
       Sheffield M.B.C.
       Cheshire C.C.
       Lancashire C.C.
       Nottinghamshire C.C.
       Nottingham City Council.




 Dear Sir,
                        Hillsborough Disaster

      I have been requested by the Leader of the City Council
 (Councillor Keva Coombes) to invite your Au t h o r i t y to e
 represented at a meeting of leading Members of A uthorities
 concerned with the Hillsborough disaster, to be heid at
 2.00 P.M. on WKHMKSnAY. 6TH SEPTEMBER, 1989 in the Town Hall,
 Castle Street, Liverpool, 2.
       The purpose of the meeting is to review progress made
  since the last meeting of representatives (on 29th
  when various agreements were reached, in principle,
  need for continued co-ordination of services.  A report
  should be available in time for the meeting on progress in
  attracting financial support.
       I am attaching a copy of the reply of the Secretary of
  State for Social Services to the joint letter from our
  Authorities seeking financial support.  The approach
  suggested in the response of using the Bellwin Scheme has
  been examined and would not appear to be feasible,
  attempts by Officers to obtain financial assistance from the
  E.E.C. and other bodies have not been any more successful.

       There is, however, some commitment of resources and it
  may be that during the course of discussion, the meeting can
  consider alternative ways of maintaining the co-ordinated
  response to Hillsborough.
       I look forward to confirmation that Members of your
  Authority will be able to attend the meeting.

                           Yours faithfully,
                                                                                ,                                        ........
                                                                                                        PP.6E . 0 0 2
* 3   j UN .39 1 1 : 3 2          FROM S. S. I . Nld_ REGION
                                                                                T0 W0 P TH          i-i     •=»■F ft C-£ . t*0i
         9 ' ..1LIH ’ 3 3 1 1 : I S   rHOi'l ' i b 1 HO

         BM/89260
                                         DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH A N D SOCIAL SECURITY
                                              Richmond House, 79 Whitehall, London SW1A 2 NS
              /T“
              r >.;
                                                               Telephone 01-210 3000

                                                 From tfte Secretory of State for Social Services




         POH(1)1659/153

         K Coombs Esq
         Leader Liverpool City Council
         PO Box 88
         Muncipal Buildings
         LIVERPOOL
         L69 2BH                                                                    ~1       U N E 1989




         T ha n k you for your letter of 6 May about additional financial
         support for direct service provision and for the Regional Unit you
         propose to establish to provide and co-ordinate continuing care in -
         the aftermath of the Hillsborough tragedy*     You also wrote to_
         John Moore, Secretary of .State for Social Security and to
         Nicholas Ridley Secretary of State for the-. Environment. Please .
         accept this as a reply to all three letters.

         Th e Department’s Social Services Inspectorate have kept me informed
         of the action taken by the local social services departments
         together in the wak£ of the tragedy and I Know that the Chief
         Inspector has written personally to all the Social Services
         Directors in appreciation of the remarkable efforts made by them and
         their staff.

         The precise'response to a tra^e^y of this sort needs to be decided
         on the spot, on the basis of a careful examination of needs.  Ky
         Department has no power to make additional resources available to
         local authorities for this purpose*  However/ I understand from
         Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Environment/ that under a
         model scheme designed to deal with extra-ordinary costs arising from
         emergencies (the Bellwin Scheme), the Government has provided
         special financial assistance to local authorities in certain
         circumstances.

         The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local
         Authority Associations and provide for assistance towards the
         inunediate and additional costs of dealing wi t h an emergency once
         expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond which local authorities wouxd
         normally be expected to budget for.              in the case of the last use of
         the Scheme, following the Great Storm of 1987, that threshold was
               Counties and M e t r o p o l i t a n Districts) set at the exclusive
         product of a l.Op rate.
If y o u c ons ide r that you h a v e a case for a ssi stance of this kind,
N i c h o l a s JRidley is prepared to consider a d e t a i l e d and fully costed
                    t                cinhh i h looks as if the level of


of events if you do decide to pursue this possibility.

The Government has, of course# as you mention, already made a
contribution of £500,000 to the Disaster Fund to help those raost
closely affected by the Disaster

Copies of this letter go to. John Moore and Nicholas Ridley




                                                               KENNETH CLARKE
