        *

#   »




            PBB/MQ

            29th Septenber 1997

            Mr. Trevor Hlcka.



            Sklpton,
            SorthJtortes.
            BD23

            Dear frevor,              ___

            I am enclosing herewith, as promised, a copy of the written statement
            concerning the Hillsborough Disaster which I submitted to the Hillsborough
            Inquiry Team in'June,

            I trust you wthr-l^ffine knew if you consider I may be able to assist you in
            any nay further.

            With kindest regards.

            Tours sincerely,




            Peter Robinaon
            Chief Executive
                West Midlands Police


          Chief Superintendent
              D J BAKER         LL.B

Divisional Headquarters
Walsall Police Station
Green Lane                              Telephone:
Walsall                                (0922) 38111
WS2                                         Ext. 210
r-
r \ > A w. uj


       /fHif Frtuk.
                  1**K
PBR/MG


Chief Superintendent D.J. Baker, L.L.B.,
Hillsborough Inquiry Team,
Furnival House,
Furnival Gate,
Sheffield,
SI 4QN.                                    12th June 1989


Dear Chief Superintendent Baker,

        Enclosed herewith is my signed statement on the
Hillsborough Disaster.

        I understand that our Director, Mr. Tony Ensor,
has also today forwarded his statement to you.

        In the event that you require any further
information from me, I am contactable most days at the
AnfieId Ground.

                         Yours sincerely.




                  Chief Executive/General Secretary
PETER BECKETT ROBINSON states:-

I am Chief Executive and Company Secretary of Liverpool Football Club &

Athletic Grounds PLC.

I took up my appointment as Secretary to the Club in June, 1965 having

previously served as Office Junior/Assistant Secretary at Stockport

County between 195^/58 and Secretary at Crewe Alexandra between

1958/60, Scunthorpe United 1960/64 and Brighton & Hove Albion Football

Club 1964/65.

I therefore have experience of the administration of football in all

Four Divisions over a period of 35 years.

On Monday, 20th March, 1 9 8 9 , I observed on the Breakfast Television that

we had drawn Nottingham Forest in the Semi-Final of the F.A. Cup.

We had also drawn them as Semi-Finalists in the previous year.

Upon arrival at the Club, I telephoned Steve Clark, the Competitions

Secretary of the Football Association, to enquire as to whether a choice

of ground had been made.    He told me that this would be considered later

in the morning and I asked him to take into account our experience in the

previous year.   I reminded him that there had been much criticism that

Nottingham Forest had been given a larger allocation of tickets than us

although their average gate and support was much smaller.      I informed

him that my Club felt very strongly that Hillsborough should not be

chosen as the venue if a different ticket allocation could not be arranged

to give Liverpool a more equitable share.

We had no complaint about the general facilities at the ground, but

firmly believed another venue must be chosen if last year's ticket

allocation could not be altered.

He promised that he would advise the Committee of my Club's views when

the decision was being made.

Later that morning he telephoned me to say that the Committee had

selected Hillsborough.     He said the Police would not agree to the

allocation being altered and that was the end of the matter.

I informed him that I would therefore have to go public with my

criticism of the Football Association.
                                _   2   -


There were press present at the club at the time and I invited them in

and made a statement, which was widely reported.

I criticised the F.A. over their Cup Semi-Final ticket plans, saying

"They appear to be living in an ivory tower showing complete disregard

for the fans who are the life blood of the game.       Their decision is

unjust and it means that many of our loyal supporters are going to miss

out."     I pointed out that our average attendance at Anfield was almost

38,000.   This was more than 17,000 higher than Nottingham Forest.

For the second consecutive year the allocation provided for Nottingham

to receive approximately 4,500 more tickets than Liverpool.

I also checked that the Manchester United Ground was available and

stated that, in the circumstances, it would have been fairer to use that

ground for the Semi-Final.

The press contacted Steve Clark about my comments and he claimed that

Manchester United was the wrong location geographically.        This is

ludicrous, particularly as that ground was selected as tte re-play

ground at the same time as Hillsborough was chosen.

In 1988, the Sheffield Wednesday Secretary, Graham Mackre 11, had called

a planning meeting prior to the game.       I attended with a: 'representative

from Nottingham Forest and the Football Association.       The intention was

to meet the Police and discuss arrangements.         On that occasion I

pointed out the risks as to safety that could occur from the allocation.

Nottingham Forest might have surplus tickets which could end up on the

"black market" and thereby into the hands of Liverpool supporters.

This would affect the segregation arrangements at the other end and I

 stated that Liverpool was not prepared to accept responsibility if these

 arrangements broke down.

 No planning meeting was summoned by Sheffield Wednesday in 1989-

 I produce a copy of a notice inserted in the Daily Post and Liverpool
 Echo showing the manner in which tickets were initially allocated to

 Season Ticket Holders.     Not all Season Ticket Holders took up their

 allocation and a small balance was eventually sold to the general public.
I attended the Semi-Final Tie on Saturday,,15th April^ ha y i n g ^ s e a t i?1

the Directors' Box.

After the game had started I noticed '
                                     ;s p e e t a t c t t * l “the- running

track at the Leppings Lane end.      I could see that it appeared that the

central area was over-populated although there seemed to be room on both

sides.

It was also clear to me that the problem was not one of misbehaviour as

the spectators were careful not to encroach orito the pitch although

there was little room for them between the barriers and the pitch.

After the game had been stopped for some minutes I decided to go down

onto the pitch to investigate.

I was accompanied by one of our Directors, Tony Ensor, who..'is a

Solicitor, and had been involved with me in the investigations of the

Heysel Stadium.     We came out of the Players' Tunnel onto the pitch and

as we walked towards the goal mouth, I was accosted by a number of
Liverpool spectators complaining angrily that the Police had opened an

exit gate and allowed a large number of people to get through into the

ground.     They showed me their tickets which had not been torn.

I proceeded towards the goal area where it became apparent that many

spectators were injured.      Some were lying motionless on the ground

while others were being attended to.        Some appeared unconscious

and as one young boy was being carried away on a make-shift stretcher,

a coat was placed over his head.       This confirmed to me that he was dead

and I was told that other dead bodies were evident.

Although there were numerous Police Officers      ar ound,,   there appeared to

be no one in charge.     I could not see any Ranking Officers.

The impression I got was that the Police       were mainly concerned about a

pitch invasion and problems of law and order.

I believe I was on the pitch for no more       than 10 minutes.

I then returned to the Players' Dressing       Room to inform, the Trainers and

Players that deaths had occurred and that the match could obviously not

proceed.
I was then called to a meeting by Graham Kelly of the F.A. in the Board

Room.   This meeting was attended by one or two F.A. Council Members,

Mr. Smith and Mr. Ensor from Liverpool Football Club, Mr. Roworth, the

Chairman of Nottingham Forest and Mr. McGee and Mr. Mackrell, the

Chairman and Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday.     Mr. Kelly had asked

for the Chief Superintendent of Police to attend for a report upon the

situation.

We had to wait for some short time for the arrival of the Chief

Superintendent.     When he arrived his main concern appeared to be to

prevent an outbreak of disorder between the opposing supporters.
                    *L
He was not agreeable to a public address announcement being made at that

stage as he felt it would hinder the arrival of the emergency services.

He wished to keep the spectators in their place.

When asked what was the cause of the disaster, his response was that the

Liverpool supporters had failed to heed the Police warning to arrive

early and so had caused additional congestion and pressure on the

approach to the ground.    The Chief Superintendent remained at the

meeting for only a short period.

I continued to persuade the authorities to make a public address

announcement although Nottingham Forest supporters were for some

considerable time unaware of the nature of the tragedy and were taunting

Liverpool supporters.     I spent some of this time in the Club Room

Foyer and I also returned to the Directors' Box where I heard the

Manager, Kenny Dalglish, make a public accouncement requesting

co-operation from the fans in the difficulties which had arisen.

At this stage the impression I had from various sources was that

our fans had forced open a gate.

I was anxious to investigate this allegation and so, with Mr. Ensor, I

made a careful investigation of the Leppings Lane end.     By this

time, most of the spectators had left although there were still some

there1who were anxious to tell me that the Police had opened the gate.

They showed me the gate and I could see that it was of the concertina

type which would be difficult, if not impossible, for fans to force open

from the outside.
I also examined the tunnel leading to the central penned area behind the

goal, where the tragedy occurred.

I noted the broken crash barrier and the limited means of gaining access

from the ground onto the pitch.

At Anfield, before the fences were removed following the Hillsborough

Tragedy, there were no gates, but gaps at intervals to enable escape to

be made in emergencies.

Finally, I observed the location of the close circuit television cameras,

which should have enabled Police Officers to observe closely the state

of packing of that area and any discomfort which spectators might

experience.




Signed
