SS6ABB

                                                                    W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                                                    City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                                    P.O. Box No. 88

    LIVERPOOL                                                       Municipal Buildings '
                                                                    Dale Street
                                                                    LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
    Qity,Qw*4+Cl£                                                   Telephone: 2 2 5 - 2 4 3 7
                                                                    Fax: 236 2047
                                                                    DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                                    Y o u r ref

                                                                    Our ref       M C S /S K
     The Secretary                                                  Date          11th August, 1989
     Liverpool Football Club,
     Anfield Road,
     Liverpool.
     L4 OTH



     Dear Sir/Madam,

     Hillsborough Advisory Group

     Following the publication of the Interim Report of the Rt. Hon.
     Lord Justice Taylor concerning the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
     I am writing to invite you to the inaugral meeting of the
     Advisory Group which Lord Justice Taylor recommended should be
     constituted.

     The meeting will be held at Liverpool Town Hall on FRIDAY, 18TH
     AUGUST, 1989 at 10.30 A.M. in the Conference Room.        -- --

     At this inaugral meeting it is proposed that we consider the
     terms of reference of the Advisory Group and discuss progress in
     implementing the 43 recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.

     I do hope a representative(s) of your organisation will be able
     to attend. A buffet lunch will be available at the conclusion of
     the meeting.

     For your information I enclose a copy of a report approved by the
     City Council Hillsborough Working Party on the 11th August, 1989.
     Yours faithfully,




     City Solicitor.


     Enc.




     When calling or telephoning please ask fo r   Miss Kingswell
     Report of the City Solicitor - Officer Contact Andrew Pink 225 2500

         THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - INTERIM REPORT

                  IMPLEMENTING THE RECOMMENDATIONS

1.   Recommendations 16 and 17 of the Interim Report refer to
     the arrangements for reviewing Safety Certificates for
     football grounds:

      "16.  Each local authority should review its arrangements
       for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing, amending
       and renewing Safety Certificates.  Such review should
       require that there exists or is provided an accountable
       administrative structure whereby the functions of the
       local authority are regularly and effectively supervised
       by Senior Officers and elected members and decisions
       are properly taken in accordance with the local authority's
       rules.

       17.  To assist the local authority in exercising its
       functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
       of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives
       of the police, of the fire and ambulance services, of the
       building authority, of the club and of a recognised
       supporters' club.  The Advisory Group's terms of reference
       should encompass all matters concerned with crowd
       safety and should require regular visits to the ground
       and attendance at matches.  The Advisory Group should
       have a chairman from the local authority and an effective
       procedure.  Its resolutions should be recorded and it
       should be required to produce regular written reports
       for consideration by the local authority".

2.   At present authority to deal with all aspects of the Safety
     Certificates for Everton and Liverpool Football grounds
     are delegated to the City Building Surveyor by the Licensing
     Sub-Committee.

3.   In order to comply with the recommendation of Lord Justice
     Taylor an Advisory Group should be set up which would
     report to the Licensing Sub-Committee.  The composition
     of the Advisory Group could consist of:

     Chair, Licensing Sub-Committee
     Chair, Hillsborough Working Party
     Opposition Spokesperson
     City Building Surveyor
     Merseyside Police
     Merseyside Fire Service
     Merseyside Ambulance Service
     Everton Football Club
     Liverpool Football Club
     Everton Supporters' Club
     Liverpool Supporters' Club
     Football Supporters' Association
     Separate meetings of the Advisory Group can be held to discuss
     each football club.
4.   The new Football League season commences on Saturday, 19th
     August, 1989 when Liverpool play Manchester City at Anfield.

HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY
11TH AUGUST, 1989
_NAAV

                                                                  Vi/. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                                                  City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                                  P.O. Box No. 88

  LIVERPOOL                                                       Municipal Buildings
                                                                  Dale Street            '
                                                                  LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                                                  Telephone: 051—227 3911 Ext:
                                                                                                       2435
                                                                  Fax: 236 2047
                                                                  DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                                  Y o u r ref

                                                                  O u r ref
                                                                                 H&CS/JL
    The Secretary,                                                Date
    Liverpool Football Club,                                                     15th August,
    Anfield Hoad,
    LIVERPOOL.
    L4 OTH




    Dear Sir,

         Further to my letter dated 11th August inviting you to
    attend the inaugural meeting of the Hillsborough Advisory Group
    which was to be held at 10.30 a.m. on Friday, 18th August, 1989,
    I regret that due to unforseen circumstances it has now become
    necessary to cancel this meeting.

         It is hoped that a meeting of this Advisory Group will be
    held in the near future and I shall write to you again as soon as
    an alternative date has been arranged.

                                                      Yours faithfully




                                                       City SolicitorjL

                                                                                RECEIVED
                                                                                 16 AUS 1989




                                                  Mrs. Leonard
    When calling or telephoning please ask fo r
