PBR/MG

14th September 1998

Mr.Keva Coombs,
Legal Advisor,
Hillsborough Family Support Group,
1st Floor,
Central Buildings,
41 North John Street,
Liverpool, L2 6RR.

Dear Keva,

Thank you for your letter of 2nd September.

I will be quite willing to give you a statement for use in connection with the private prosecution
which the HFSG is currently pursuing in the Leeds’ Magistrate’s Court.

Unfortunately I will be away from Liverpool for most of this week and would suggest, therefore,
that you contact me at Anfield during the week commencing 21 st September to arrange a suitable
time for us to meet.

With kind regards.

Yours sincerely,



Peter Robinson
Executive Vice Chairman

(Signed for Peter Robinson in his absence)
                    Hillsborough Family Support Group

2 September 1998


Private & Confidential

Peter Robinson
Liverpool Football Club
Anfield Road
LIVERPOOL
M O TH



Dear Peter

I have been professionally instructed by the HFSG in connection with the private prosecution
presently before Leeds Magistrates Court. One of the allegations ts that of perverting the
course o f justice against Mr Duckenfield.

I am re-interviewing a number of people and wonder if you would be wiiiing to see me and let
me take a statement for use in these proceedings. If so, could you please let me have a time
and place convenient and I will come to you.

If you wish to discuss the matter, please do ring me here.

Yours sincerely




Keva Coombes
Legal Advisor




              Tel: 0151236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail jnfo@hfsg.org
          1st Floor Central Buildings, 41 North John Street, Liverpool L2 6RR
                       PERM A
                       SYSTEM w                         m
                          Perma System Lim ited
Second Avenue, The Pensnett Estate, Kingswinford, W est Midlands DY6 7PR
     Tel: 0 3 8 4 2 7 1 1 1 1 . Fax: 0 3 8 4 2 7 0 1 8 9 . Telex: 3 3 5 2 5 1 P E RM AG .
                            A member o f the Turnils Group




                           TREVOR HICKS
                           MANAGING DIRECTOR


             SUPPLIERS OF BLIND MATERIALS,
    COMPONENTS A N D ASSEMBLED PRODUCTS TO THE TRADE
HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP
             Central Buildings
           41 North John Street
             Liverpool L2 6RR
            Tel: 0151 236 1919
           Fax: 0151 236 1936



          With compliments
Fax sent by   : 0151 525 0744           ROCKCLIFF PRINTING     A4->A4   21/10/98     16:59   Pg:   1




       HRLS80R00GH HUMY SUPPORT BBOUP
      Liverpool Football Cfub have been contacted by Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the
      Hillsborough Family Support Group, who has asked us to reproduce the following
      open letter in today's programme.




               HILLSBOROUGH AND PRIVATE PROSECUTIONS
      Dear Fellow Supporters,
        You are probably aware that the Hillsborough Family Support Group CHFSG) have
      commenced prosecutions in Leeds Magistrates Court against two former members of
      South Yorkshire Police.
        You may also be aware of the formation of another group calling itself "The Hillsborough
      Survivors, Relatives and Supporters for Justice Campaign" (HSRSJC), who have set up
      an office in Oakfield Road, Anfield. Despite its name, this group is WOT connected with
      the HFSG and we wish to make It absolutely clear that any money raised by them is not
      for the benefit of tfie HFSG or our Justice Campaign.
        We have previously and politely requested the HSRSJC not to do anything or circulate
      any literature that could be prejudicial to the prosecutions. Sadly our requests have been
      ignored.
        To our horror, we are now aware that in a recent article in the Yorkshire Evening Post
      seeking new members, they intimated that they intend “to take a more pro-active
      approach", including organising a protest demonstration outside Leeds Court when the
      defendants next appear.
        The HFSG Is appalled by this suggestion and totally disassociates itself from such a
      demonstration - especially as reporting restrictions were imposed by the magistrate! We
      urge all supporters to assist us by not taking part.
        Our case is just and deserves to be argued in court, in front of a jury. We feel a
      demonstration wifi be counterproductive and could be exploited by the defence who will
      argue that such protests are an attempt to influence iegal proceedings. Please don't take
      that risk!
        Thanks for all your help, both past and present, it really is appreciated.
                                                                                 Yours sincerely
                                                                         Trevor Hicks, Chairman
           HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP
           Central Buildings, 41 North John Street, Liverpool, L2 6RR
                    Tel:- 0151-236-1919 Fax:- 0151-236-1936
                                  E Mail:- info@ hfsg.org


                       Open letter to all Fellow Supporters re:-
                   HILLSBOROUGH AND PRIVATE PROSECUTIONS


Dear Fellow Supporters,

You are probably aware that the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) have
commenced prosecutions In Leeds Magistrates Court against two former members of
South Yorkshire Police.

You may also be aware of the formation of another group calling itself “The
Hillsborough Survivors, Relatives and Supporters for Justice Campaign" (HSRSJC)
who have set up an office in.Oakfield Road, Anfield. Despite its name, this group is
NOT connected with the HFSG and we wish to make it absolutely clear that any
money raised by them is not for the benefit of the HFSG or our Justice Campaign.

We have previously and politely requested the HSRSJC not to do anything or circulate
any literature that could be prejudicial to the prosecutions. Sadly our requests have
been ignored.

To our horror, we are now aware that in a recent article in the “Yorkshire Evening Post”
seeking new members, they intimated that they intend “to take a more pro-active
approach" including organising a protest demonstration outside Leeds Court when the
defendants next appear.

The HFSG is appalled by this suggestion and totally disassociates itself from
such a demonstration -especially as reporting restrictions were imposed by the
magistrate! We urge all supporters to assist us by not taking part.

Our case is just and deserves to be argued in court, in front of a jury. We feel a
demonstration will be counterproductive and could be exploited by the defence who will
argue that such protests are an attempt to influence legal proceedings. Please don’t
take that risk!

Thanks for all your help, both past and present, it really is appreciated.

Yours sincerely,


Trevor Hicks,
Chairman.
PnvoK-   qjacL   CjQiA^djmkaJ




                                                                  J£
                                                            -5    r~
                                                                  r
                                                                  CA

                                                             t    C>
                                                                  d
                                                                  ja
                                                                  O
                                                             •i    C
                                                                  o
                                                                   T

                                UAre^feef1          CtuJo


                                1 v\r€\^W(   L-M- OTK




                                                                       v
