    *
X


                                   NOTES ON MEETING HELD AT ANFIELD ON
                                WEDNESDAY, 23RD AUGUST, 1989 AT 9-00 A.M.



        P R ES EN T:   Chief Superintendent      J . Lyons
                       Inspector                 R. Hughes
                       Solicitor for Police      Helen Mercer
                       Everton F.C.              Mr. P. Carter
                                                 Mr. K. Tamlin
                                                 Mr. J. Greenwood
                       L.F.C.                    Mr. J.T. Cross
                                                 Mr. P.B. Robinson
                                                 Mr. G.A. Ensor
                       City Council              Mr. N. Whibley




        A meeting was arranged to discuss recommendations specified in the
        Interim Report following the Inquiry by the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor on
        the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15th April 1989-

        The pertinent point of the discussion expressed by the Police was item No. 4
        in the recommendations (page 57) headed ’Filling and Monitoring T e r r a c e s ’ ,
        that there should be written agreement between the club and the police setting
        out their respective responsibilities for crowd safety and control and, in
        particular, for filling of each self-contained pen or other terraced area
        and the monitoring of spectators in each Such pen or area to avoid
        overcrowding.

        The police realise that both clubs have a responsibility to the Liverpool
        City Building Surveyor, the authority who issue the Safety Certificate to
        each club on the condition that the holder of the Certificate shall be the
        person responsible to ensure that all the specified conditions are complied
        with, otherwise the stadium could not be used.

        As regard to police manning at club fixtures, the Certificate states that the
        holders shall arrange for the attendance of an adequate number of police
        officers within the stadium to secure orderly and decent behaviour.  Such
        numbers for each certified use shall be agreed with the police.

        Both clubs are similar in police procedure at fixtures with geography of the
        stadiums dictating the difference for details.

        The police advised that over the years a healthy relationship had been
        maintained with the clubs over all matters and decisions on various incidents
        at the grounds on match days had jointly been agreed when necessary.
        Therefore, under normal conditions these arrangements were adequate.

        However, the question raised was at what stage does a normal
        match become a major disaster and who takes responsibility when it happens or
        why it happened?

        Everton ask what are the particular responsibiities of the Board or, indeed,
        club individuals.

        Liverpool relate to an incident when police closed gates to visiting
        West Ham supporters who were in possession of a match ticket causing
        disturbance outside stadiums.
                                   2


Reference was also made to the responsibility of the referee for postponing,
delaying or calling off matches and the subsequent crowd problems.

Local Authority advise that the Certificate issued applies only when the home
team is involved and a review of the certificiate would be required if teams
other than the home are involved at the club.

After discussion on related safety matters, it was decided that to progress
on the question of a written agreement between the club and police, setting
out their respective responsibilities as recommended in the interim
report, the police would detail on paper their responsibility and submit this
to the respective clubs in an endeavour to reach an early agreement.

It was hoped by all to resolve this matter before the local Derby fixture at
Goodison on 23-9*1989.
