                                                                             2


            MINUTES OF A DIRECTORS MEETING HELD IN THE
            CLUB BOARD ROOM ON TUESDAY 18™ APRIL 1989


F.A. Cud Competition

The General Secretary reported that the Football Association had been in
contact by telephone to ask if the club wished to continue to play the FA
Challenge Cup Competition this season. Their suggestion is that the semi­
final game against Nottingham Forest should be played at Old Trafford,
Manchester on Sunday 7 " May 1989, with the final tie being played at
Wembley Stadium on 20th May 1989. All proceeds from the matches, after
the payment of legitimate expenses, will be donated to the Disaster Appeal
Fund. The FA cup final will be treated as a memorial match for the deceased
and the arrangements for this game will be quite different from those normally
made for the FA Cup Final. It was agreed that the club is quite incapable of
making this decision at a time of such grief and the FA to be asked to allow
the club at least another week to make a decision.

Fences

The General Secretary reported on a preliminary discussion which he had
yesterday held with representatives of the City Ground Licensing Authority
and the Police concerning the fences in front of the Spion Kop Enclosure and
the Anfield Road Enclosures from a public safety viewpoint. A further meeting
is planned with both parties, together also with Everton FC representatives,
who have similar views, at Goodison Park, before the final decision is taken
as to whether the fences should remain, in some modified form, or be
removed. It was agreed that Mr Cross and the General Secretary represent
the club at this meeting, with full authority to make whatever decision they
consider to be necessary from a public safety viewpoint.

Assistance

The General Secretary reported on offers of assistance reviewed from other
clubs following the Hillsborough tragedy. He also reported on donations
already promised by other clubs to the Appeal Fund.

Cathedral

The General Secretary reported that he had been advised by the Bishop of
Liverpool that he is proposing to hold a memorial service in the Anglican
Cathedral on the 29th April 1989. A meeting to plan the service will be held
later this day. It was confirmed that the Vice Chairman and General Secretary
should represent the club at this meeting.

Future Matches

It was agreed that the first competitive match which the club should play
following the Hillsborough tragedy should be against Everton at Goodison
Park on 3rd May 1989. This will allow a suitable period of mourning.

                                       2
