                                                                                                     C O^H         -ro       Loc           CCiVi




                                                                     °^ JV D E D '& **




                                   THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
L ytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 l|G . T e le p h o n e 0253 729421. T e le x 67675. Fax 0253 724786                                  Secretary |. D. D e n t



5/5918                                                                                                   10th July, 1989


TO ALL CLUBS


Dear Secretary,

                                               First Aid Facilities at Grounds

      Following the tragic events at Hillsborough, consideration has been given
to the subject of first aid facilities at grounds.

      It is recognised that clubs would need a fully-equipped casualty ward to
cope with a major disaster. This is clearly not feasible, so what has been looked
at is what can reasonably be provided.
      The Management Committee consider that clubs should follow the
recommended guidelines given below. It should be stressed, however, that these
should be seen as minimum requirements.

a)     First Aid Room
      Each club should have a designated First Aid Room, in addition to the club's
medical room. The First Aid Room should contain at least two beds, a sink, a
work-top and a curtain to give the necessary privacy. The room should be
supplied with power, light, water and a direct line telephone. There must be
ready access for emergency vehicles.

b)     Medical Equipment
     The First Aid Room should have a well-stocked cabinet containing antiseptics,
analgesic, bandages etc. Management should designate one person as being
responsible for stocking the cabinet and for the general up-keep of the First
Aid Room.

        Stretchers, a carrying chair, blankets and oxygen should be available.

c)      Medical Staff
      It is recognised that the club doctor's attendance at matches is primarily
for attention to players. It is felt, therefore, that there should be at least one
extra qualified person in attendance at matches.



                                                                                                             Continued/2



                 All co rre sp o n d en c e to b e a d d re s s e d to The Secretary. R eg istered Office as above. R egistered in Engiand 80612
                                         -   2   -




10th July, 1989


TO ALL CLUBS




d)   Ambulance

      At least one fully-equipped ambulance should be in attendance at all matches
with an expected attendance of 5,000+. The ambulance should be equipped with
defibrillators and resuscitative equipment and be manned by personnel trained
in their use.

     Clubs should be able to hire such an ambulance with two paramedics for
around £90 per match.

e)   First Aid Personnel

      All first-aiders serving at grounds should be fully trained and experienced. £
At the start of each season, clubs should be furnished with a complete list of
trained first-aiders by the organisation providing their first aid service; such list
to be regularly updated.

      There should be a minimum of three first-aiders for up to 1,000 spectators,
with one additional first-aider for every 1,000 spectators above the first 1,000,
up to a total of 10,000 spectators. Thereafter an additional first-aider for every
additional 2,000 spectators.

      Clubs will be asked to detail their first aid facilities and their emergency
procedures in a revised local plan; separate instructions on this will follow shortly.
If you have any queries, please speak to Chris Whalley or Jack Crawford.

                                  Yours sincerely,




                                     J.D. Dent,
                                    SECRETARY
                                                                      ° ^ n ded


                                   THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 IIG . T e le p h o n e 0253 729421. T e le x 67675. Fax 0253 724786                                   Secretary |. D. D e n t

5/6172                                                                                              17th August, 1989


TO ALL CLUBS


Dear Secretary,
                                                First Aid Facilities at Grounds

      In the light of the Interim Taylor Report, it is necessary to revise certain
of the recommended guidelines issued in my letter of 10th July, to bring them
into line with the Taylor recommendations.

c)      Medical Staff
      You will have noted that the Interim Taylor Report specifies that a medical
practitioner should be available to deal with any medical emergency at the ground
and he should be trained and competent in advanced first aid.

      It is the view of The Football League that the club doctor's attendance
at matches is primarily for attention to players and we would prefer an
additional doctor to be on hand to look after spectators. We are, however,
currently looking at the best way to achieve this and will report further as
soon as possible.
      In the meantime, clubs should ensure that at least the club doctor is
available in line with the Taylor recommendation.

d)      Ambulance
       The ambulance referred to in my letter of 10th July must be provided by
 the local ambulance authority (although we understand there is a possibility of
 a work-to-rule by ambulance drivers in the near future). The level of equipment
 and personnel to be determined in liaison with the ambulance authority.

 e)      First Aid Personnel
      There should be a minimum of three first-aiders for up to 1,000 spectators
 with one additional first-aider for every additional 1,000 spectators.

                                                                 Yours sincerely,




                                                                     J.D. Dent,
                                                                    SECRETARY.



                 All c o rre sp o n d en c e to b e a d d re s s e d to The Secretary. R egistered Office as above. R egistered in England 80612
