         SAFETY AT SPORTS GROPNDS ACT 1975                              ITEM NO, 32
         EFFECT OF HILLSBOROPGH INQPIRY FINAL REPORT                     DELEGATED
         ON ANFIELD AND GOODISON PARK. FOOTBALL GROUNDS


         (CBS/134/90)

         RECOMMENDATION




         That the Committee


         1.   so far as the City Council has jurisdiction and duties under the
              provisions of the ^Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, in relation to
              the designated fodtball grounds of Anfield and Goodison Park, aa they
              are affected by the recommendations of the Hillsborough Stadium
              Disaster Final Report, approve the steps taken and proposed to be
              taken by the City Building Surveyor, as described in his report
              CBS/134/90; and


         2.   in the light of paragraphs 152 and 153 of the afore-mentioned
              Report, decide whether the Football Grounds Safety-Advisory Group,
              formed following the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor, should
              continue to meet.




                                 (See attached report)



                                                           RECEIVED
                                                            3'   m   isso




NBAAEF
         SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975                  Appendix to Item No. 32
         EFFECT OF HILLSBOROPGH INQUIRY FINAL REPORT
         ON ANFIELP AND GOODISON PARK FOOTBALL GROPNDS

         (CBS/134/90)

         REPORT OF THE CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR
         (Contact Officer L.N.Bush - TelV 225 3395)

         INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL

         1.   In his second and final report on the Hillsborough disaster, Lord
              Justice Taylor leaves the specific events and causes of that tragedy,
              and also the culpability for it, to be dealt with by due legal
              processes. He turns now to the broader task referred to him, of
              making recommendations for the future needs of crowd control and
              safety at sports events. To support his views and final
              recommendations, he uses not only the lessons of Hillsborough, but
              those illustrated by eight previous inquiry reports on failures of
              crowd safety and/or control, at football grounds, which have occurred
              over the past 65 years. Visits to sports grounds, old and new, here
              and in parts of Europe, have been made by him, to gather personal
              knowledge.  In addition, he has had the technical advice provided by
              a specially convened working party and the written and verbal
              evidence submitted by many organisations and individuals, who felt
              they had something to contribute to the problems he was commissioned
              to solve.

         2.   The Judge does not confine himself to matters in which the current
              Safety at Sports Grounds Act provides jurisdiction to the City
              Council through this Committee.   He covers a very wide variety of
              influences on crowd control as well as on safety.   His conclusions
              and recommendations range from the indisputable to the debatable for
              acceptability, and for enforceability, from those clearly provided
              for in the current legislation, to those which probably need a
              statutory order to remove some doubt about their reasonableness
              within the current legislation, to those which call for fresh
              legislation and finally, to those which it is not possible to make
              the subject of enforcement.   This width of cover results from his
              search for "a better future for football", which examines traditions
              and the philosophy of all parties to the game, both as a competition
              and as a form of entertainment.   He considers the financing of the
              sport, especially in relation to taxation. Greater spectator comfort
              and convenience, to enhance the status of the game's entertainment
              appeal, is seen as a real, though passive contribution to safety, to
              combat the adverse effect of misbehaviour and hooliganism.

         3.   One of the tasks Lord Justice Taylor was set, was to consider how the
              enabling provisions of the Footall Spectators Act 1989 might be
               implemented, to improve the depressingly bleak picture of the current
              state of football, which, he avers, has been exacerbated by the
              apparent complacency in a majority of the games management and by
              some of the authorities responsible for safety. The importance and
              sensitivity of this part of his brief is obvious from the time and
              space he has devoted to it in his Final Report. His resulting




NBAAEE
                                            - 2 ~


               confirmation of previously well-aired expert opinions, on the
               uselessness and impracticality of a National Membership Scheme, has
               received extensive publicity. One consequence of the clear
              obligation to abandon that statutory scheme, is the need to find a
              substitute measure to demonstrate the determination of Government to
               tackle the nuisances and tragedies of the spectator element of the
              game, which currently exist (albeit in a minority) in and are also
              exported (though not exclusively) by this country. Substitute
              measures appear in two fundamental recommendations of the report.
              The first is the debatable intention, although well precedented in
              many modern stadia throughout Europe and the world, to eliminate
              standing spectator accommodation.   The second is the less
              controversial and well supported, by the last three football
              tragedies of Bradford, Heysel and Hillsborough, need to provide a
              National Inspectorate to review the discharge of the safety functions
              entrusted to local authorities in the Act of 1975.   "Quis custodiet
              ipsos custodes?" (Who inspects the inspectors?) is a question often
              asked in relation to many controls, with justification. Those like
              this authority, who have set high standards in this matter in the
              past, should not feel censured by this intention.   It may well prove
              to be a means by which they may influence the poor performers to
              improve.   A levelling down seems very improbable, provided the good
              authorities stick to their successful formulas and do not revert to
              the poor methods and bad habits which promoted the three disasters
              just mentioned, which resulted in 189 avoidable deaths within a
              period of less than 4 years.

         4.    Considering the question of whether local authorities could be left
               to perform the enforcement of the provision of reasonable safety at
               sports grounds, caused the Judge to clarify, in this context, but in
               accordance with the generally accepted sensible practice, the proper
               use of overlapping legislation.  Such overlapping is quite common in
              mandatory legislation relating to buildings and structures. That is
              because standards of construction, or safety provision, are often
              related to the public, or all users, in some enactments and to more
              restricted specific groups of users, in others. Where overlap
              occurs, which may involve different authorities or different
              professional experts, there is sometimes a tendency to compete for
              control.   Zeal for power can often result in situations where the
              tail is wagging the dog. Central and local authority officers,
              responsible for the safety of persons employed on premises, have a
              tenuous duty to take care of visitors to those premises in the
              process. However, where there is other legislation to take specific
              care of the public or visitors in premises where the latter outnumber
              those employed manyfold, it is patently essential that the specific
              legislative control should not only predominate, but wherever the
              same interests are covered, to avoid uneconomic duplication, the
              authority or officer with the less specific control ought to stand
              down, or at most ought to stand by to be consulted if the need is
              felt. That principle is particularly relevant to this Committee,
              which deals with many entertainment premises, where patrons or
              spectators can number from 40 to 200 times the number employed.

         5.   In the course of the Popp1ewe11 Inquiry into the Bradford football
              disaster the slightly involved role of the Health and Safety

NBAAEE
                                          - 3 -


              Executive, under the Health and Safety at Work, Etc. Act 1974 was
              considered. The actual duplication and confusion which arose in that
              disaster was not then resolved. Officers operating under that 1974
              Act were left vaguely in the safety frame. Lord Justice Taylor now
              removes that doubt by quoting the policy, agreed between the Health
              and Safety Executive and the Home Office, that requirements of the
              1974 (H.S.W.) Act should not generally be imposed where they overlap
              with those of the 1975 (S.S.G.) Act.

         6.   That does not eliminate all problems of legislative control overlap
              at modern, well developed football grounds, especially where
              improvement of structures and provisions are frequently ongoing.
              Building Regulations and their linked legislative provisions,
              covering the safety of the public and buildings users, are
              fundamental in all new work or alterations.  Stadium buildings do
              include other uses, such as offices, workshops, restaurants, licensed
              clubs and other assembly activity (drinking and entertainment,
              including sometimes, indoor spectator sports) which are controlled by
              other legislation for the majority of the time. These other uses
              share ingress and egress and many other facilities influencing
              safety, with the once or twice a week use of the whole complex, on
              football match days. Clearly, this can be co-ordinated in
              Metropolitan districts like Liverpool, where mosl; of those matters
              are functions of one Chief Officer, who will have consultative
              arrangements with any other officers or authorities having different
              expertise to contribute. Whilst not of immediate concern to the
              Committee, members will understand that in non-Metropolitan
              districts, the County Councils, who have none of the other
              overlapping functions and appropriate expertise just mentioned, are
              presently responsible for the safety control provided under the
              Safety of Sports Grounds Act. That will remain an additional problem
              and complication in those areas, but not in Liverpool.

         7.   This report is to consider the recommendations, which conclude Lord
              Justice Taylor's Inquiry final report, in detail.  Before doing so
              and bearing in mind the longer term nature of some of those
              recommendations, it is relevant to mention briefly the current
              proposals to provide a new sports stadium, to replace the two
              designated grounds in Liverpool which are the Council's present
              safety responsibility. This joint initiative by the City Council and
              Stadium City Limited, awaits the consideration of and a positive
              response from both the football clubs.  If that process results in a
              decision to abandon the use of the present two grounds, prospectively
              for the 1993/94 season, the fact will need to be taken into account
              in enforcing, reasonably, any further improvement work called for
              directly in, or as a result of, the Judge's final report.

         8.   In moving to consider the relevance of the final recommendations in
              relation to Anfield and Goodison Park, it needs to be emphasised
              firstly that none of these are at present obligatory. As mentioned
              earlier, it will be necessary towait and see whether some of them
              will become enforceable, with or without discretion. Neither is
              there in these, the same immediate need for impact in the interests
              of safety, which was a feature of the interim recommendations
              published in August last. Those 43 earlier recommendations included

NBAAEE
                                    - 4 -


       27 which were starred for prompt attention, and that was given to
       them by the City Building Surveyor under his delegated powers. The
       action taken was reported upon by him in his report CBS/323/89
       last September. Those earlier recommendations are repeated, albeit
       with some amendments in the light of further consideration, in the
       now final list. We are therefore seeing less than half of the 76
       final list for the first time.

9.    The remainder of this report considers the 76 Final Recommendations
      made by Lord Justice Taylor, copies of which have been furnished to
      members. Where a number of them have a common subject, they are
      considered collectively under the sub-headings used by the Judge. To
      reduce the length of the report and avoid repetition, omission to
      mention any particular recommendation either by number or subject
      matter, means that it is not applicable to either of the two local
      grounds with which the Committee is concerned,

      ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION

10.   Judge Taylor's apocalyptic view, of all stadia designated under the
      1975 Act, being seated within nine years, will not be welcomed by
      many present day spectators, especially those who enjoy both the
      standing and the price of admission to terraces. However, the
      writing is on the wall. UEFA looks likely to fol'low FIFA towards
      that objective. The current joint enterprise of the City Council and
      Stadium City Limited, for a new super stadium for Liverpool and
      Everton, embraces the principle. The Technical Working Party report
      says ” ... whilst standing accommodation is not intrinsically unsafe,
      the benefits to spectator comfort and crowd control brought about by
      all-seater stadia are likely to accelerate the move towards such
      venues." There are many who see all-seated stadia increasing the
      popularity of football and the financial income to the clubs, and/or
      stadium owners, subject to modern upgraded marketing of the
      entertainment.

11.   The first 4 recommendations of the Judge's report are directed at the
      Home Secretary and urge him to provide the legislation to enforce the
      elimination of standing spectators, according to a timetable. That
      timetable would require an arbitrary annual reduction of standing
      spectator capacity of 20% of that currently existing (see
      recommendation 8 later) at the two grounds controlled, so as.to
      eliminate it completely by the 1994/95 season.  In addition, for
      Anfield, no standing would be permitted at matches in the 1993/4
      season, if visitors were to take the whole of the Anfield Road stand
      seated accommodation, which is customary at present, for some
      matches.

12.   If the Secretary of State acts on this recommendation, as seems
      likely from the public response of the Government, he may not follow
      exactly the rate of reduction suggested. At those grounds presently
      with little seating and a number of separate standing enclosures,
      each of modest capacity, the formula is perhaps not unreasonable.
      For the Anfield ground, which has only one very large standing area
      remaining, it is not reasonable.   It is not practical to replace the
      Kop 16,480 istanding capacity, with possibly 10,000 seats, in a 20%
                                             - 5 -


               per annum piecemeal programme. The change would need to be carried
               out in one step. Detail design work and contract preparations could
               not be done in time for the work to be carried out this year,
               assuming the finance was available. Therefore the only method of
               compliance would be to reduce the capacity to 13,200 for next season,
               which is only 61% of the safe capacity of the enclosure, as proven by
               many full capacity gates over a period of some 14 years.

         13.   The problem will be less for the Goodison Park ground, where it has
               been decided previously to seat the Paddock in this year’s closed
               season. That provides more than the required first 20% reduction in
               standing.  For the 1991/92 season, it would -be possible to eliminate
               standing for visitors on th^ Park End terrace, providing a total
               reduction of over 41%, as suggested. All visitors would then be
               accommodated in the 2,365 seats of the upper level, until such time
               as this stand is wholly redeveloped. Everton would then be left to
               reduce the remaining 59% of its present standing accommodation, which
               is wholly situated at the Gwladys Street end, in one seating contract
               in 1992, which allows adequate time for planning and preparation.

               ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL

         14.   Recommendation 5, which suggests action by the F.A. and F.L., to
               provide an expert advisory design body to assist clubs on the
               upgrading of stadia generally, is not a matter for local authorities.

               NATIONAL INSPECTORATE AND REVIEW BODY

         15.   Implementing Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act 1989, to give
               the Football Licensing Authority power to oversee the efficacy of
               local authorities in the discharge of their safety certificating and
               enforcement functions, was mentioned in paragraph 4 above. Again
               this is not a matter, in itself, controllable by local authorities.

               MAXIMUM CAPACITIES FOR TERRACES

         16.   Controlling the numbers admitted, through exclusive turnstiles, to
               each self-contained standing enclosures, which was the fundamental
               element of control which failed, to cause the Hillsborough tragedy, is
               the subject of recommendations 7 to 10. With minor amendments, they
               are a repeat of starred items in the Interim Report and have been
               complied with at our two local clubs for many years. Despite the
               advice of his Technical Working Party, the Judge holds to the view
               that the density of standing spectators should not exceed a figure
               some 13% below the "Green Guide" safe figure. His updated
               recommendation of 4.7 persons per square metre, is over 18% less than
               the safe density figure, proven over 13 years, used for the Anfield
               and Goodison Park terraces.  It is some 28% less than the permitted
               density on those terraces in the years 1971 to 1976 and 34% less than
               the relevant density permitted prior to 1971.

         17.   The decision to recommend holding this low figure, is clearly one
               which considers more than the 'reasonable safety* required by the
               Safety at Sports Grounds Act.  It compliments the radical change to
               all seated stadia. There is more encouragement to accept a change to

NBAAEE
                                             - 6 -


               10,000 seats (saleable at £6.50 each » £65,000), from 16,500 standing
               spaces at £4.00 each » £66,000), than there would be if the standing
               capacity was 21,000 (at £4.00 each = £84,000), especially if the
               reduced capacity resulted in all seats being bought for pre-season
               cash, in the form of season tickets. This recommendation is clearly
               part of an overall package for achieving a new ethos for football and
               its supporters.  It remains to be seen if the Secretary of State will
               include it in new mandatory provisions. Meanwhile, as mentioned
               above, the two local clubs, accept the new limits imposed, in
               deference to the Final Report, but not necessarily in agreement with
                it.

               FILLING AND MONITORING TERRACES

         18.   Recommendation 11 repeats one of the starred items in the interim
               report which was not taken up finally by many Police Authorities.
               The original words 'agreement1 and 'responsibilities' have been
               substituted by the words 'statement of intent' and ’functions'.   It
               is expected that this will enable legal advisors to the Police, to
               proceed with the clarification of the dividing line, between the
               authority of the club's safety certificate holder and that of the
               match commander. That division is never likely to be unarguably
               defined, but the safety certificate issued by the City Council will
               continue to hold the certificate holder (the club's officer)
               responsible for all matters which it controls. The Police will only
               take responsibility where their authority is exercised when law and
               order, as covered in other legislation, has, or is clearly about to
               break down. This fine situation will undoubtedly sit more easily in
               Liverpool, than it may do elsewhere. The expertise and good practice
               of the Police here is very well acknowledged, by the clubs and
               football crowds, at Anfield and Goodison Park.

         19.   The following recommendation, No. 12, has been implemented, so far as
               it is applicable to both grounds.

               GANGWAYS

         20.   Radial gangways have never been provided for on the Kop, or the lower
               part of Gwladys Street terraces.   Nor has the physical provision for
                them, at Goodison Park Paddock, or the rear of Gwladys Street
               terrace, been the subject of enforcement. A conscious decision was
               taken not to require them, by all parties to the initial
               certification of both grounds in 1976. The reasons for that decision
               have the same validity now as they did then, while any arguments to
               provide them today, after 14 years of closely observed satisfactory
               experience, must be diluted by the 20% reduction in the density of
               the spectators now permitted in those areas. The Kop terrace has
               great depth (front to back) and if long radial gangways were provided
               and not kept clear, throughout the excitement of a match, people in
               them would be at risk. It would not be practicable to keep them
               clear unless they were sunk lower than the terrace, and a very
               considerable number of stewards and police patrolled them constantly.
               That need is well evidenced at other grounds. There are structural
               difficulties in lowering the surface level in radial gangways, at the
               front of the Gwladys Street Terrace at Goodison Park because the

NBAAEE
                                            - 7 -


               surface is strengthened by reinforced concrete beams standing down
               below the ground. At the Kop, similar structural problems exist,
               because the crush barrier posts are bolted to the tops of reinforced
               concrete piles going deep into the filled ground beneath.  The police
               remain opposed, as they were in 1976, to the constant friction and
               bad feeling which would be created, by the need to force people off
               level gangways, into which many of them would be innocently forced by
               the movements of excited crowds. There is no need for, and the City
               Building Surveyor advises against, this recommendation.

               FENCES AND GATES

         21.   Recommendations 14 to 21 deal principally with the risks of pitch
               perimeter fences. They repeat 4 of the interim recommendations on
               the subject, which were implemented, so far as they were applicable
               to the two grounds in Liverpool, before and immediately following
               that earlier report. Members will be aware that Anfield and Goodison
               Park now have no pitch perimeter fences as such. Here, the
               alternative discouragement to pitch invasion, from behind the goals,
               is a safety corridor, each with five stairs leading up to the pitch
               level. This provision has been the subject of extensive examination,
               by many safety groups and by Judge Taylor. Minor criticisms made
               have not met with a concensus of agreement. The Judge, whi1st
               endorsing the arrangement to be good, and describing the resulting
               access to the pitch as readily gainable, has suggested that radial
               gangways leading to gaps in the front (crowd limit) crush barrier
               "would give even readier access".  His Technical Working Party
               considers that such a high level of ready access is not essential
               "where adequate, safe alternative arrangements exist". That is the
               case at both the local grounds, and the good reasons for not
               providing radial gangways have been explained earlier.

         22.   There is a closed season intention to improve the ease with which
               first aiders can enter and leave the Kop terrace from the safety
               corridor.  The Liverpool club may also further improve the already
               sufficient egress from that terrace, as an advance step to the
               seating of it, although that will clearly depend now on the decisions
               reached about the viability of the alternative single new stadium.

         23.   Whilst not included in his final recommendations, it is relevant to
               note, whilst talking of ease of access to the pitch, that the
               existence of a concrete pitch retaining wall, with spectators
               standing well below pitch level is, on its own, an impediment equal
               to a pitch perimeter fence. This hazard has been eliminated where
               safety corridors have been introduced, at Anfield and Goodison Park.
               It remains in the case of the Paddock at the latter ground, but this
               is a shallow (front to back depth) terrace, with very adequate
               alternative escape, along its full undivided length, to Bullens Road.
               It is to be seated this year in the closed season, and is currently
               regularly used with a low packing density.

         24.   Both the City Building Surveyor and the Police, are satisfied with
               the present arrangements at both grounds, in relation to the
               recommendations 15 to 21. Recommendation 14 can be applied to a
               small piece of radial fence separating two enclosures at Goodison

NBAAEE
 Park. The club has noted this and has advised that spikes on the top
 of this fence are being removed.

 The crush barriers at both local clubs are all relatively new
 structures, inspected thoroughly by the club's structural engineer
 and the City Building Surveyor, every six months. Their layout and
 condition is better than satisfactory.

 SAFETY CERTIFICATES

 The next eight recommendations, under this sub-heading (Nos. 24 to
 31), deal with the formal end product, for which the Council is
 responsible, under the legislation. Some are a repeat of the urgent
 calls to dilatory local authorities, which appeared in the interim
 report, which were not applicable tothisauthority.    Ground safety
 certificates are under constant review in Liverpool, a formal annual
 certificate renewal was the practice pre-Hillsborough, but since that
 date and in   the light ofpromises of further legislation and a
 revised code   of practice from central government (Green Guide) both
 documents exist as they were re-issued for the last season, with a
 series of amendments attached to them as the need has arisen. When
 the government completes its work and the situation stabilises, and
 in any case before the 1990/91 season, both of these will be totally
 revised, including^some 47 drawings which form part of them, provided
 the vacancy situation in the City Building Surveyor's Department does
 not deteriorate still further.

 It is to be noted that once again, as in the Final Report of
 Mr. Justice Popplewell, following the Bradford and Heysel Stadia
 disasters, Lord Taylor calls for the past Liverpool practice of an
 annual renewal of ground safety certificates. That is to put this
 safety need on a similar basis to other forms of licensing of
 entertainment premises. The thing neither Judges have apparently
 felt briefed to comment upon, is the payment made to local
authorities,   for the work involved, in carefully and diligently
carrying out    the functions assigned to them under the Safety at
Sports Grounds Act 1975. Presently payments can be claimed only for
the work of issuing new or amended certificates.     The Home Office
previously have spelt out that that does not include the cost of
reviewing certificates, monitoring compliance with their terms, or
any enforcement. That is in contrast to the charges permitted for
other public entertainment licensing, where the total cost of the
function is recoverable.    It is also relevant to note that, although
the fees fixed by central government only cover about 60% of the cost
of the service of performing the Building Regulation function, only i
of the fee chargeable is provided to cover the comparative activity
of formally approving plans, whilst the monitoring and enforcement
activity is accepted to account for I of the total prescribed fee.
It is therefore hoped that in the new legislation proposed, to
improve and define the standard of safety to be enforced by local
authorities, there will be included, a facility to charge an economic
fee for the whole of this vital service.

Most local authorities have, unlike the arrangement which was found
wanting at Sheffield, delegated their functions under the 1975 Act to
                                             - 9


               a responsible officer, who acts in consultation with other officers,
                including those of the Police, Fire Authority, First Aid organisation
               and now the Ambulance Authority, who have particular expertise to
               contribute, without repetition, to the problems which arise. Some
               authorities call for an annual report from the chief officer of that
               group, some ask for member involvement in any major matter, such as
               the building or rebuilding of a complete stand, or possibly the
               seating of an existing standing enclosure. This provision is the
               subject of recommendation 30 which is satisfied in Liverpool.   The
               next following recommendation requires that working group to consult
               in future, with representatives of the club and a recognised
               supporters organisation on a regular basis. This can be arranged by
               the City Building Surveyor, who is responsible for the officers
               activities.   In fact the respective clubs have always been involved
               in the discussion of the technical problems of the 1975 Act, before
               final decisions have been reached. They have a right of appeal
               against any conditions imposed and it would be unwise not to seek
               their views before formalising these conditions.   Those discussions
               with the clubs can now include spectator's representation at regular
               intervals, or whenever the safety subject involved at any time might
               usefully gain from that inclusion.

         29.   The City Building Surveyor is responsible for a number of statutory
               functions which call for, or advise, or which he ponsiders require,
               consultation with other officers, inside and outside local
               government.  These consultation activities involve cost, both to his
               own department and to those of the other officers involved, most of
               which has to be met from the public purse. Many years experience of
               this has led to the exercise of judgement on the realistic need for
               consultation, in the context of the technical knowledge appropriate
               to problems arising.  Clearly that has to be done with care, since
               the final responsibility for decisions reached, with or without
               consultation, rests with him. However, he maintains a policy, in the
               interest of economising on time and cost, all round, of not simply
               organising gatherings for refreshing acquaintances,or which amount to
               'talking shops'. For example, in relation to football grounds, if a
               problem arose in relation to the strength or design of crush
               barriers, none of the other officers mentioned in paragraph 28 could
               contribute to a meeting of structural engineers on site, and would
               not be invited. Alternatively, if a problem of assessing the fire
               risk involved, or particularly the facilities for fighting a fire in
               any part of a stadium arose, the Fire Authority would be consulted,
               but not the Police, First Aid organisation, Ambulance Authority,
               spectator organisation, or even the Club (unless it elected to
               provide a suitable expert to make a pertinent contribution) before a
               decision was made.

         30.    Recommendation 31 and the reasons for it, given in paragraph 152 of
                the repdrt, calls for the abolition of a second working group, which
               jtas set up by this Committee, to advise on safety matters, in
                response to recommendation 17 of the interim report of the Judge in
               August last year. The Committee will no doubt wish to consider
                recommendation 31 in detail, before deciding on what course to follow
                now.


NBAAEE
                                              - 10-


               DOTXES OF EACH FOOTBALL GLOB

         31.   Although the Final Report, in the recommendations (numbered 32 to 43)
               under this sub-heading, allocates responsibility to the clubs, for
               the matters they include, many of them are of direct interest to the
               reasonable safety of spectators and do concern the Council's duties
               under the legislation.  The rate of flow through turnstiles, its
               effect on the maximum capacities permitted and the closing of
               turnstiles to prevent these being exceeded, are long controlled and
               monitored at the two local clubs.  Signposting was comprehensively
               reviewed after the interim report.  Information on the retained
               portion of tickets, bearing in mind its size, shows the division of
               the stadium into enclosures and therefore the location of turnstile
               entries.  Once inside the ground, crowd control stewards and
               signposting is best able to deal with those who are not familiar with
               the routes to their seats. These have been updated and are presently
               under regular review in relation to the visitors' enclosure, where
               the change to all seating has promoted that need. The agreed policy
               on times for spectators to be in their position, is to avoid stating
               this on tickets, but to give instead the time when turnstiles open
               for admittance, because this is considered the best way to avoid all
               the spectators arriving together, too late to get in before the match
               starts.

         32.   Both Liverpool clubs are well organised and controlled by the
               conditions of their Safety Certificates in the provision of adequate,
               trained and competent stewards. They have both now appointed
               specialist safety officers, in addition to a structure of head,
               deputy and senior stewards. Whilst there is broad agreement with the
               Judge's age limits for these, the clubs contend, quite correctly,
               that ability is the ultimate criteria. They prefer stewards to be
               over the age of 25 and find many are very satisfactory up to 65 years
               of age. The problem of training and maintaining the efficiency of
               such occasional, but most important, part-time employees, is to be
               further improved, following discussions between the clubs and the
               Council's officers.  It is intended next season to retain a single
               force of stewards, to be used at both grounds, and thereby provide
               greater expertise, and incentive to their competent performance.

         33.   There is complete agreement, by both clubs, that all-ticket matches
               will be organised when demand is expected to reach or exceed the
               ground capacities, and that on those occasions, tickets will not be
               sold at the ground, on the day of the match.

         34.   Each club has a police control room which complies with
               recommendation 43, although the prospect of more equipment being
               provided for even better match control, has caused the Everton Club
               to start planning a larger new control room, which will compare with
               the excellent new one provided by Liverpool last year. The provision
               of closed circuit television monitoring, inside and outside the
               ground, is being reviewed again, as a result of its proven crowd
               control success, and because there is further money being made
               available by the Football Grounds Improvement Trust for that
               particular facility. Both local clubs and the Police will take full
               advantage of this provision.

NBAAEE
                                              - 11-


                 POLICE PLANNING

          35.    The recommendations numbered 44 to 53 are all matters for the Police.
                 They have strengthened their command organisation of match crowd
                 control and are making arrangements for more training to be provided
                 for officers at all levels, in the skills of observing, interpreting
                 and deploying prompt attention to signs of any risk to crowd safety
                 or control. Members will appreciate that the years of experience of
                 the Police division which has both well-supported clubs in its area,
                 have provided a well tested capability better than most.
                 Nevertheless there is no complacency in this respect.

                COMMUNICATIONS

         36.    There are only two matters raised by the recommendations 54 to 58
                under this sub-heading, which need further attention at the local
                grounds. These are, the provision of land lines with telephone links
                to the Police control room, from points outside the stadia, and the
                provision of individual public address facilities to areas outside
                the ground and to some circulation areas inside the stadia. This
                subject is being examined by experts for both clubs. A complete
                system is to be agreed with the City Building Surveyor and the
                Police, to enable its completion during the current year's closed
                season.

                CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES

         37.    The Police have the duty of calling up and co-ordinating emergency
                and specialist services to handle all accidents and disasters in both
                public and private places.    To this end, football matches, in
                common with many other events, are the subject of specific plans
                drawn up by the Police, in liaison with the other services which
                possibly might be needed. These plans ought to include the features
                identified in the recommendations (numbered 59 to 63) made under this
                sub—heading.  In fact, all these provisions were reviewed and
                clarified by the Police, for the Anfield and Goodison Park locations,
                following the same recommendations of Judge Taylor's Interim Report.
                The maintenance of liaison and lines of communication are an
                essential part of these co-ordination plans, which the Council must
                expect to be checked and rehearsed by those responsible.

                FIRST AID. MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES

         38.    There are 6 recommendations under this sub-heading, which repeat,
                with some qualification (which is not in any case relevant at the two
                stadia in Liverpool), the 5 contained in the Interim Report on the
                same matters.   Responsible action was taken to comply with those
                recommendations last August, and the measures remain in place by
                mutual consent.   It is hoped that the Home Office will, in its
                necessary amendments to the legislation, remove the doubt about the
                authority of the 1975 Act to require a number of ambulances to stand
                by at a designated stadia. As jurisdiction stands at present, none
                of the provisions advocated in this group of recommendations is
                unarguably enforceable by the local authority.


NBAAEE
                                               - 12-


          39.    An additional recommendation is found at that numbered 69, in the
                  Final Report.  This is apparently directed at Ambulance Authorities
                  and is clearly a problem which will have to be examined by that
                  branch of the National Health Service as soon as possible. Major
                  incident equipment vehicles are in existence in a small number of
                 authorities.   Their purpose is not confined to attending football
                 matches, or any other specific location where there might be an
                 accident resulting in a large number of casualties. They have been
                 created to attend such accidents when they, occur and appear to be a
                 very desirable addition to that emergency service, to be called to
                 anywhere there are numbers of people gathered or travelling together.
                 They are clearly not a provision to be dictated only by the presence
                 of large football stadia, or to be held in reserve exclusively for
                 when such stadia are in use. Here again, without some jurisdiction
                 is provided in the amendments to the relevant legislation, this
                 suggested provision is of academic interest only to this Committee.

                 OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

         40.     Four recommendations under this sub-heading are matters for
                 Parliament to debate, and do not involve local authority control of
                 sports grounds.

                 GREEN GOIDE

         41.     These final three recommendations (numbered 74 to 76) give effect to
                 the extensive and detailed advice given to the Judge, by the
                 technical working party which he invited to review the technical
                 aspects of the guide to Safety at Sports Grounds. Further work on
                 the Green Guide, is now a matter for the Home Office. When the new
                revised code is published, it will be necessary for local
                authorities, to take account of its provisions when reviewing
                existing safety certificates.   Some of its provisions probably will
                be made mandatory, by the amendments to the primary legislation, or
                the statutory orders, which are now to be expected from the
                Government. They, most probably, will follow the recommendations of
                principle made by Lord Taylor, relevant to the physical provision of
                safety at the grounds and possibly will include some of the
                management provisions which play an important part in spectator
                safety.

         42.      The mass of detail advice on design and construction contained in the
                 Green Guide, will continue to be discretionary guidelines, subject to
                 the mandatory fundamental performance need of an acceptable standard
                of reasonable safety. This follows a pattern, which is common to
                most other legislation controlling the acceptability of buildings and
                structures, for their use for defined purposes, in the interests of
                the safety (or.health, or convenience) of their occupants and the
                public. The Building Regulations are the premier example of this
                technical discretion in detail, to secure one or more mandatory
                functions. Stadia, like all buildings or structures, are rarely
                identical.   It is unreasonable and unnecessary to restrict the
                freedom of designers, or to condemn existing structures by
                mandatory rigid standardisation of detail.


NBAAEE
                                            - 13-


         43.   The essential element in the control enabled by this pattern, is the
               provision of adequate resources with professional competence and
               experience of the subject, endowed with unhindered objective
               enforcement powers.  This authority has done that in the past, some
               authorities, where disasters have occurred have failed to do so.
               Whilst the value of an updated Green Guide is important, the need to
               apply it responsibly and diligently is more important.  in this
               respect, the proposal for the F.L.A. to supervise that activity
               (recommendation No. 6) has to be linked with this subject of this
               sub-heading.  The City Building Surveyor does not expect either of
               these two events, for which one awaits Government action, will make
               any difference to the present provisions at the Anfield or Goodison
               Park stadia, or to the satisfactory manner in which the Council’s
               duties under the 1975 Act have been discharged by him in the past.
               In saying that he assumes that the workload experienced for the past
               year, in the wake of the Hillsborough disaster, will subside to the
               previous normal level.




         Licensing Sub-Committee
         9th March 1990
         and for information to ;
         Ta) Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
         (b) Football Grounds Safety Advisory Group



NBAAEE
p j%                            iverpool
  Local Authority
BUILDING            _
CONTROL             tr>iC   (        tc>-f
