                                                     QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT



David Moores Esq                                                   36 JUN 1997
Chairman
Liverpool Football Club
Anfield Road
Liverpool
L4 0TH




As you^know, Ihavelfeen considering whether there is a case for a further public inquiry
into me Hillsborough disaster in the light of the many representations which have been
receiM[ed. Concerns tk ^ a number of issues relating to the disaster remain unresolved
receive             attention following the Granada television documentary drama
“Hillsborough” last December.

I have had the opportunity to consider fully the material which has been put forward,
calling for a new public inquiry. I have decided, in all the circumstances, that there should
be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked before a
final decision is taken. I have, therefore, announced in the House today that there will be
an independent scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of
Appeal. I enclose for your information a copy of my statement to the House, which
includes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference. You will see that I have
undertaken to make public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith gives me.

I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively whether or not
material evidence about the causes of that terrible afternoon at Hillsborough has been
overlooked, and to take action if it has.

                          V
                          /**'*-«        sV -^X s-JLy




                                      JACK STRAW
      HILLSBOROUGH : ORAL STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY

                                 MONDAY 30 JUNE 1997




With permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the

Hillsborough Stadium disaster.



2.     Ninety six people lost their lives as a result of the Hillsborough disaster, which

happened on 15 April 1989. That was more than eight years ago but no one who saw the

news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have forgotten those terrible events. For those

who lost loved members of their family, the pain is ever-present. Following Hillsborough,

members of this House were united in their determination to do all in their power to

prevent anything like that ever happening again.



(i)    Public Inquiry



3.     Madam Speaker, after the Hillsboroughdisaster, anumber             ofinquiries   and

investigations took place, looking at aspects of the tragedy. Perhaps the most thorough

and wide-ranging was the Public Inquiry led by Lord Taylor. The terms of reference of

that Inquiry encompassed not only inquiring into the disaster itself but also making

recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events.



4.     Lord Taylor’s inquiry took oral evidencefrom over           170witnesses   atpublic

hearings during May and June 1989 and considered many hours of video evidence from
different sources. In his interim report in August 1989, Lord Taylor found that the

disaster had a number of causes. He did not attribute all the blame to a single cause or

person, but in paragraph 278 he made clear that:



       “The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”



5.     In that interim report Lord Taylor made 43 immediate recommendations. His final

report in January 1990 made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which

have taken place since then in safety at football grounds and in the policing of football

matches have been based largely on those recommendations. Football in this country has

been transformed since the Taylor Report. To a large extent that is due to his wide-

ranging and soundly based conclusions.



(ii)   Coroner’s Inquest



6.     The deaths which occurred on 15 April 1989 were also the subject of inquests

conducted by the Coroner of the western district of South Yorkshire.



7.     Madam Speaker, as Hon Members will know, an inquest is a fact-finding inquiry,

conducted by a Coroner in front of a jury, and aimed at establishing the answers to four

important questions, namely:



        The identity of the deceased




                                              2
        The place of death



        The time and the date of death and



        How the deceased came by his or her death.



8.      The Coroner’s rules require proceedings and evidence to be directed solely at

finding answers to those questions.



9.      The jury at the Coroner’s inquest, after examining the evidence, found in March

1991 that the cause of death of those who died at Hillsborough was accidental death.



(iii)   West Midlands Police Investigation



10.      A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands Police, supervised by

the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for

criminal proceedings, and to consider whether any police officer should be subject to

disciplinary proceedings.



 11.     That investigation involved the taking of over 5000 statements and the scrutiny of

 all the material which had previously been examined by the Taylor Inquiry. After that

 investigation the evidence was sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions, who concluded

 that no person should be subject to criminal proceedings.




                                              3
12.    The Police Complaints Authority decided that the chief superintendent and

superintendent in charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty. In

the event, the chief superintendent retired due to ill health in advance of a ruling by a

disciplinary tribunal under the police discipline rules.    A disciplinary hearing cannot

proceed when a police officer retires before the hearing takes place.           The Police

Complaints Authority       later decided that       disciplinary proceedings   against the

superintendent should be withdrawn because the retirement of the chief superintendent

meant that what, in effect, was a joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly

heard in the absence of the more senior officer.



(iv)   Continued calls for further investigations



13.    Madam Speaker, Hon Members will be familiar with the unhappiness of the

families of those who died, about the inquest. They later applied for judicial review of the

coroner’s proceedings. During the judicial review proceedings, the conduct of the inquest

was subjected to close and detailed examination. In November 1993 the Divisional Court

ruled that none of the matters raised in the judicial review proceedings justified

intervention by that court in the verdict of the inquest jury. The court also expressed

 strong doubts as to whether another inquest, if ordered, would result in anything further

 being learned and observed that the process would be very harrowing.



 14.    The events surrounding the disaster have therefore been subject to investigation on

 several occasions. But concerns have remained about whether the full facts have yet




                                               4
emerged. I have met relatives of the Hillsborough victims whose suffering is exacerbated

by their belief that there are unresolved issues which should be investigated further.



15.    Representations were made to my predecessor and have been made to me, to the

Attorney General and to the Director of Public Prosecutions.           A Granada television

programme in December last year dramatised the disaster and raised a number of issues

which, in the view of the programme makers, represented new evidence.              Since then

further material has been submitted on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

Those representations have related in particular to video evidence of the disaster and

medical evidence about the time of death of the victims.



16.     Madam Speaker, my Department, the office of the Attorney General and the

Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully all the evidence which has been

put forward in recent months.



 17.     The Director of Public Prosecutions has taken the view that the material so far

presented to her would not justify fresh criminal investigations.        The then Attorney

 General also took the view, again on the material presented to him, that any application to

 the High Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding.



 18.    Nonetheless, I am acutely conscious that the families of those who died at

 Hillsborough and many others including Hon Members of this House are very concerned

 that unresolved issues remain. I am determined to go as far as I can to ensure that no




                                               5
matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a final conclusion without a

full and independent examination of the evidence.



19.    I can therefore tell the House today that the Attorney General, the Director of

Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that it is in the public interest that there should be

an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any new evidence relating to

the disaster which was not previously available. We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-

Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that purpose. His full terms of

reference are:



       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough

        Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:



                      To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or



        (b)           To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for

                      the purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities;

                       or



                       To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to

                       police disciplinary matters;



         And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of

         such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home



                                               6
       Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to

       their attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be

       relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action

       which should be taken in the public interest.



I am today placing a copy of these terms of reference in the Library.



20.    We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other

evidence which has been submitted. He will also consider any further material which

interested parties wish to submit.



21.    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s task will be twofold. First to advise me whether any

evidence not previously available is of such significance as to justify a further full public

inquiry. His advice to me will be available to the House and the public. Secondly, he will

identify for the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Chief

Constable of South Yorkshire Police any evidence which might be relevant to their

decisions which has not previously been considered.



 22.    I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively whether or not

 material evidence about the causes of the Hillsborough disaster has been overlooked. If it

 has I can assure the House that I will take whatever action is needed. We owe it to

 everyone touched by the tragedy, but above all to the families of those who died, to get to

 the bottom of this matter once and for all.




                                               7
                                                  LIVERPOOL
                                                 I FOOTBALL CLlfBi




                                                (orfsbcrt,

                                 INFORMATION

          LIVERPOOL FC WELCOME NEW ACTION O NI i ILLSBOROUGH

Liverpool Football Club today welcomed the announcement by tWHome Secretarj^Mt he has ordered new
independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any n6\y eviderice-feTating to the Hillsborough
disaster which was not previously available.

Although the tragedy occurred eight years ago, the human suffering of the families involved is still as real today.

Many questions remain unanswered regarding the events of that April afternoon, with new evidence suggesting
strongly that the full picture is yet to emerge. Our passionate hope is that the new enquiry will determine the
true facts surrounding the tragedy and enable the families to believe that the cause of justice has been properly
championed for those loved ones who never returned home from Sheffield.




                                                     - ENDS -


30th June 1997
