PBR/MO

3rd July 1996



Bushey Heath,
Herts.
HD2

Dear Mr.

Thank you for your letter of recent date regarding Sir Bernard Ingham’s
latest outburst.   Unfortunately it seems as though no one will ever be
able to get someone as unreasonable as he is either to accept that his
views are totally wrong or to stop him expressing them.

We nevertheless will continue, as we have in the past, to support anyone
in their attempts to make known the true facts of what actually happened
on the 15th April, 1989, as were contained in the Taylor Report.

With best wishes.

Yours sincerely,




P.B. Robinson
Chief Executive/General Secretary
                                                        09/06/96   ii:41




                                                                                                        f




                          BUSHEY HEAT/1
                              HERTS
                            WD2-

June 10, 1996

P. Robinson Esq.
Company Secretary
Liverpool Football Club
Anfield Road
Liverpool
L4-OTH

Dear Mr Robinson,

Re: BBC Q uestio n Tim e Ju n e 6 th 199 6
                                                                                             -i-
1 write in respect to the above prog1amine which was shown oh                                  -
Thursday of last week.

'Fhe program m e featured a debate about w hether o r not the
Police should receive com pensation paym ents in respect of
th eir sufferings at the Hillsbo >ush disaster.

The debate included the comedian Jo Brand, Glenda Jackson MP,
an d Sir Bernard Ingham MP. Everyone obviously has separate
views on this point, b u 1.1 sat at hom e confused and
dum bfounded bv Sir Bernard Ingham's comments. He was in
favour of compensation, r.-e feit that the Police had suffered and
deserved to be com pensat: I. He is of course entitled to his
opinion although it is one w a'i      :an not share.

What absolutely disgusted me 1as the justification of his point
by saying that: ” If thousands c ,\ ticketless fans h ad not turn ed
up an d pushed their way into the ground then the whole
scenario would not have occurred.1 There were furth er
com m ents m ade about this by him b u t I was not able make a
m ental note of them. It m aybe that i,r this letter his view?' do
not come across very strongly, but I m st assure ; ■ -> that the
m an h ad a hate in his voice, that I have r.ever heai d h e n
hearing people in power speaking about m is subject.
                                                                       J;S

                                                                             / .   \ - - S    1    'L   -
FAX rtiO H    :                                                   0 9 /0 6 /9 6     11^41        PG:   2
                                                              Jjj 10/6/96         0 3 : 4 9 pm     0 2 /2




             I was at the m atch that d a y an d like everyone else who was
             unharm ed I have been trying to put the whole tragedy behind
             me for a num ber of years. It is not ea sy , and hearing comments
             such as these leave me with very little faith in society.

             I would urge you in m emory of all of those who lost their lives,
             as well as those of us who were luck}’ enough to survive and
             are still able to follow o u r team, to use your very best
             endeavours to extract an apology.

             I am not saying th at people are not allowed a freedom ot
             speech, but to those who were there th a t day an d who were
             involved in any way, com m ents such as these are extremely
             disrespectful and serve no purpose other than to tarnish the
             good nam e that us Liverpool supporters have built up over the
             years.

             I look forw ard to hearing from you.

             Yours sincerely,
