THEfOOTBfllL SUPPORTfRSflSSOCIflTIOd
                                            In this Instance reply to:


                                            Mr Nigel Grant,
                                            Secretary,
                                            FSA (Merseyside branch),
                                            17 Bodmin Way,
Councillor S Ledwich, Esq.,                 Halewood,
Chairman,                                   Liverpool
Football Ground Safety Advisory             L26 7YT
                            Group,
Municipal Buildings,                        5th October 1989
uaie Street,
Liverpool
L69 2DH

Dear Sir,

We have now received the report of our representative at the meeting
of the Liverpool and Everton Football Ground Safety Advisory Committee
at Anfield on Monday, 25th September.  We understand that following
on from that meeting there will be further discussions between the
Council Building Surveyor, Liverpool Football Club and the emergency
services as to the adequacy of the newly erected fence and moat in
front of the Kop end of Anfield.  As we are unlikely to be a direct
party to these discussions, we wish to take the opportunity to set
out our views for consideration, if thought appropriate.

Our essential concern is that, rather than enhance the safety aspects
of the Kop, the new fence adds further safety problems and is no
improvement on the system existing prior to the change. We say this
for several reasons
1. There are no breaks and no gates whatsoever in the fence.   In a
panic situation we feel that the absence of any openings will cause
problems.
2. The fence is, we understand, 1.1 metres high. Given that the
fence is traditionally inhabited by children, we can see that if it
was necessary to evacuate the Kop in an emergency there is a sub­
stantial likelihood that these children would be crushed at the bottom
of the fence and unable to surmount what is an immovable barrier.
3. There is no permanent access through or over the fence for the
emergency services.
4. The moat which has been created is, as far as we understand it,
being occupied by press photographers and TV cameramen.  To our mind
this makes a mockery of the reasoning for the moat, which is supposed
to act as a sterile area for the purposes of an emergency situation.
In such a situation the presence of cameramen and media personnel
would only serve to add to the confusion.

 Continued Overleaf....


                  P.O. Box 11 Liverpool L26 1XP
fflt FOOTBALLSUPPORTfRSUSSOCIflTIOn
                                               In this Instance reply to:
Continued/....
5.    We understand that the purpose of the fence is to prevent
      a crowd invasion at the Kop end. We have to say that if that
      is the correct reason then the fence would appear to be redun­
      dant, given the physical topography of the Kop itself, and from
      which we find it hard to believe that any crowd invasion could
      not be stopped from the pitch itself and without the fence.

We would be grateful if our views could be passed on to the Building
Surveyor for consideration when this matter is discussed further.

Yours faithfully,




                 ;retary, for and on behalf of the Merseyside FSA


ccs    Mr P Robinson, Liverpool F.C




                     P.O. Box 11 Liverpool L26 1XP
