                                                            °t/iV D E D V&4®



                              TH E FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lycham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 I |G. Telephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                          Secretary |. D. Dent




2/7513                                                                                                 8th January,                1990




TO ALL CLUBS




Dear Secretary,

   REPORTS OF MEETINGS WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF THE METROPOLITAN
        POLICE AND THE ASSOCIATION OF CHIEF POLICE OFFICERS

     Forwarded herewith, for your information, are copies of the
reports on the above meetings held on the 13th and 14th
December, 1989.

                                                  You




                                                          Secretary.




Enclosure




                All correspondence to b e addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above Registered in England 80612
                       THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED

REPORT ON A MEETING WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF THE METROPOLITAN
POLICE HELD AT NEW SCOTLAND YARD, L O N D O N , ON W E D N E S D A Y , 13TH
DECEMBER, 1989.                                                    ”


Present:     Commander A.J. Speed,TO 20 Branch
             Superintendent P. Bean, TO 20 Branch
             Chief Inspector B. Evans, TO 20 Branch
             Sergeant T. Dawson, TO 20 Branch
             Superintendent B. King, British Transport Police
             Mr. R .I . Burr, Management Committee
             Mr. J.D. Dent, Secretary, Football League
             Mr. C.J. Whalley, Football League
             Mr. J.A. Crawford, Football League
             Mr. A. Titcombe, Football Association
             Sir James Starritt, Football Association
             Mr. L. Walker, Football Association

The meeting having been called by the Metropolitan Police was
chaired by Commander Speed with Sergeant Dawson acting as
Secretary.

Commander Speed opened the meeting by welcoming those present
and introduced the members of the TO 20 Branch, he indicated the
circulation of the Agenda and said if all were agreeable we
would follow it in the order printed.

He said that in accordance with Recommendation 26 of Lord
Justice Taylor's Interim Report liaison with London clubs would
now be on a District level and this was the reason why the clubs
had not been invited to this meeting.  He felt there was a need
for us to meet at this level to discuss general policy and
strategy.

Mr. Crawford said that the London clubs had expressed concern
that they would not be allowed to meet centrally as they had
done in the past, they felt that this was a retrogade step and
asked if the matter could be re-considered.

Commander Speed re-iterated that liaison was now with the
Commander on the District and he felt it would be bad policy to
cut across that liaison by meeting centrally, however he agreed
to take the request back for further consideration later in the
season.

MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

Accepted as a true record.

MATTERS ARISING

Mr. Whalley informed the meeting that the League now had a
regulation governing pricing policy for away Supporters.

 Commander Speed mentioned the setting up of the National
 Football Intelligence Unit at Tintagel House, London, the Unit


                                                                  Cont/2
Cont/2


MATTERS ARISING   (Cont.)

was expected to be fully operational early in 1990.

Mr. Crawford asked if the London clubs would be allowed to stage
home matches on August Bank Holiday 1990, Commander Speed
replied that the Notting Hill Carnival was still being held and,
as such, no home matches could be held on this day.

PLAYER MISBEHAVIOUR ON FIELD OF PLAY

Commander Speed said that, despite the comments of the Minister
for Sport following the Arsenal v. Norwich City match, their
policy remained the same, they would be following the guidelines
laid down by A.C.P.O. following discussions with the F.A. and
the League earlier in the year.

All present agreed that the guidelines were the best solution
for all concerned, there was good co-operation between the match
officials and the match commander and there was no need to
change this.

POLICE CHARGES

This item had been placed on the agenda at our request and the
question was put to Commander Speed as to the reasons for
escalation of charges in the Met area.  All the London clubs
were concerned, but Chelsea and Millwall appeared to be
suffering the most.

Commander Speed said he was sympathetic but, following a review
of charges during the close season and the publication of the
Interim Report it was necessary for the charges to be increased.

He pointed out that all clubs had signed the new Special Service
Agreements which outlined the costs to be charged for differing
categories of matches.     Clubs were now being charged for 4 hours
per officer as against the 3 hours they had been charged last
season.     When asked to justify the increase, Mr. Speed said it
was to bring the Force into line with other Forces, the 3 hours
charged last year was unrealistic as officers were paid a
min i mu m of 4 hours plus travelling time.  He went on to say that
in some areas, and at high profile matches, this min im um of 4
could rise to 4j or 5 hours.

Mr. Crawford said that there appeared to be considerable
discrepancy in the costs between the First Division clubs in    the
area and asked if this might be looked at.

Commander Speed said that his Branch were conducting an overview
of costs and manning levels at the various grounds to ensure
that there is some standard of uniformity, however, each ground
was different and each had its own problems.  Commander Speed
said that a number of letters had been received from Clubs on
this subject and these had been replied to.


                                                      Cont/3
Cont/3



Sir James Starritt asked if there was any central policy on this
and Mr. Speed replied that it was a matter for each District
Commander and his Chief Superintendent to decide on levels of
policing at grounds.

The question of the charge for the reserve officers mentioned in
the Taylor Interim Report was raised and it would appear that,
within the Metropolitan Police area, there are varying views,
some Chief Superintendents are still using the officers employed
outside the ground as the reserve whilst others are using a
dedicated reserve inside the ground.

Where there is a reserve inside the ground the club is required
to pay for the officers involved, Commander Speed said that this
will need to be rationalised after final report of the Inquiry
was published.  His view was that the reserve force would be
required to be inside the ground at all times.

This was discussed at some length and it was evident from the
response from the police side that clubs were facing a further
increase in policing costs next season, Commander Speed said
that A.C.P.O. were at present considering the results of a
survey on charges made at each ground with a v iew to achieving
some sort of standard.

It was suggested that they may be looking to recover the full
costs of officers on private employment at matches, which in
some cases can be as high as 8 hours duty.

POLICE LEVELS FOR FOOTBALL MATCHES

We raised the variations in the level of policing throughout the
Met area and the question of consultation with clubs.

Commander Speed said local discussions took place between clubs
and police when levels were agreed for the various categories of
matches.

Sir James Starritt raised the question of use of
stewards/private security firms at grounds  to     relieve police
officers from mundane tasks.

Long and involved discussion on this, it was generally accepted
that if stewards were more professional then the police  task
would be made easier.

Concern was expressed by Mr. Burr regarding the use of uniformed
personnel from Security organisations on the basis that they
were not vetted properly and all present agreed that if we were
to enter this area careful selection would be required.

Mr. Dent pointed out that many clubs were already moving down
this line but this did not appear to have had any effect on
policing levels.



                                                     Cont/4
Cont/4




Commander Speed said that   policing levels at some grounds in the
London area had gone down   from last season due to clubs taking
over responsibilities for   searching, etc., but, overall,
following recommendations   in the Taylor Report, levels were
unlikely to be reduced in   the near future.

Mr. Speed said he would take the whole question of costs and
levels of policing back to the District Commanders for further
discussion.

NOTIFICATION OF MATCHES

Commander Speed opened the discussion on this item by r e ­
iterating Police Regulations governing the cancellation of
police officers' Rest Days and warning them for overtime.

The crux of the matter is that if they can give an officer more
than 29 days notice of a change of Rest Day they do not have to
pay him anything; anything less than 29 days but more than 8
clear days notice incurs payment of overtime at time and a half,
anything less than 8 clear days notice incurs overtime at time
and half and a day off in lieu.

Once an officer has been warned he has the right to work the
overtime - whether or not he is required.

Revenue from clubs does not go back to the Division, therefore
all overtime comes out of the Chief Superintendent's budget for
the y e a r .

Mr. Dent suggested that from what Mr. Speed had said it was not
just a question of clubs footing an extra bill for short notice
matches, the police just did not have the overtime money
required.

Commander Speed said that if the police received less than 10
days notice of matches, policing was very expensive.

After considerable discussion when it was pointed out to the
police that if we were to be required to give more than 10 days
notice of matches, then the whole concept of how we ran the
industry would need to be looked at.

Commander Speed said that this was the case and stated the
following:-

     a) League Fixtures
         Asked that they be given at least 10 days notice of
         re-arranged fixtures.
     b ) Cup Competitions
         Long discussion on this, Mr. Speed said that in
         principle they required at least 10 days notice of
         replays, he suggested that League/F.A. should   look at
         format of competitions for next season.




                                                     Cont/5
Cont/5


     c ) Play-Offs
         There was a long discussion on this ranging from why
     ' they were introduced to the need for them at the present
         day.  It is clear that police do not like these matches
         and they were adamant that at least 10 days notice would
         be required of matches in the London area.

         It was suggested by Chief Inspector Evans that semi­
         final matches could be played on a neutral ground with
         the date fixed before the end of the season.

         The various difficulties associated with this suggestion
         were discussed.

         Commander Speed said he was aware that pressure had been
         eased by taking the Finals to Wembley and he said this
         would present no problem to the police.

         At the end of the discussion, Commander Speed indicated
         that he would raise the subject of Play-Offs at the next
         meeting of the A.C.P.O. Sub-Committee.

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

Due to time constraints this was discussed only briefly with
nothing significant arising.

ANY OTHER BUSINESS

Sir James Starritt mentioned the delayed kick-off situation and
the fact that from his visits to grounds in the London area he
had observed an increase in the numbers of itinerant traders
outside grounds selling ’T 1 Shirts carrying inflammatory
slogans, etc.
Both were noted by the police.


Meeting closed at 4.30p.m.


                                                   J.A. C r a w f o r d .
                   THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED

Report on a meeting with representatives of the Association of
Chief Police Officers held at New Scotland Yard, London, on
Thursday, 14th December, 1989 at 2.30p.m.


Present:   J.A. Dellow - President, A.C.P.O.
           C.J. Anderton - Chief Constable, Greater Manchester
                            Police
           F .A. Millichip - Chairman, Football Association
           R.H.G. Kelly - Chief Executive, Football Association
           A. Titcombe - Football Association
           L. Walker - Football Association

           W. Fox - President
           I.H. Stott - Management Committee
           J.D. Dent - Secretary
           J.A. Crawford - Football League

Mr. Dellow opened the meeting by introducing himself and Mr.
Anderton.  He apologised for the absence, due to illness, of Mr.
B. Johnson, Chief Constable of Lancashire.

Mr. Millichip then introduced the members of the League and the
Football Association and expressed his appreciation to the
President for arranging the meeting at our request.

It was agreed that there being no formal agenda for the meeting
that we raise the matters we wished to discuss.

Mr. Anderton asked why we had considered it necessary to have a
meeting at this level in v i e w of the local liaison between
organisations.

We explained that whilst there was excellent liaison between
forces and clubs it was felt that a m eeting of this nature was
required to clarify policy and determine strategy for the future
in the light of the changes brought about by the Lord Justice
Taylor Report, etc.

NOTIFICATION OF MATCHES

Discussion centered round the question of cup replays and play
off matches.

Mr. Anderton said that Force Budgets were now being more tightly
controlled particularly in the light of the Lord Justice Taylor
Report.

Chief Constables now had very little to play with in terms of
manpower and overtime and, whilst they were sympathetic towards
football, there was little they could do to ease the situation
regarding the notification required.

He stressed the restrictions placed on Senior Officers by Police
Regulations and the pressures being imposed by Local Authorities
to justify expenditure.



                                                    Cont/2
Cont/2


He listened to our arguments regarding the Cup competitions and
Play-off matches and was genuinely concerned that we were being
forced into impossible positions.

However, it was made fairly clear that they were working towards
at least 10 days notice of all matches but he hoped that local
liaison and co-operation might prevail for the present season.

The League/Football Association need to look to the future when
planning fixtures, etc. was the theme coming back from Mr.
Dellow and Mr. Anderton.

Mr. Anderton said he would take the question of cup re-plays and
play-off matches back to his Sub Committee for further
discussion to see what could be done.

POLICE CHARGES/POLICING LEVELS

We put forward the variations in policing costs throughout the
Country and the marked differences in policing levels at
matches.

It was appreciated that increases were inevitable following the
Taylor Report but what we were seeking was some element of
standardisation, if this was possible.

Mr. Anderton said he appreciated the discrepancies, this had
been identified by his Sub Committee who had recently completed
a national review on this subject.

This was now being studied in an attempt to find some reasonable
formula for determining levels of policing and costs.

In response to a question from Mr. Fox, Mr. Anderton said that
guidelines and advice were circulated to Chief Constables from
A.C.P.O. but it was for Chief Officers to determine the policy
in their own a re a s .

Mr. Anderton was anxious that the co-operation that currently
existed between clubs and police should not be demeaned but, at
the end of the day, someone had to pick up the bill and this
could not rest solely with the ratepayers.

On the question of the 'Reserve For ce 1 of officers at grounds,
Mr. Anderton said that the police had a Common Law
responsibility to protect life and property.    At their meeting
with Lord Justice Taylor they had emphasised the fact that
hitherto the police had used the officers outside the ground as
the 'Reserve Force' and that this worked well, but Lord Justice
Taylor was adamant that it was not sufficient to count on the
officers outside, there needed to be a Reserve of officers
inside the ground to respond immediately to incidents involving
the safety of spectators.
                                                     Cont/3
Cont/3


As such, the burden for the cost of these officers must fall on
the club.

A.C.P.O. would look at the levels of reserves deployed to see if
there was some room for manoeuvre, particularly in those areas
where very small crowds were expected.

FUTURE POLICING POLICY

In view of the rising police costs and policing levels, we
raised the question as to the prospect of Clubs using
professional Stewards or security firms at grounds to relieve
the police of the more mundane duties.

Both Mr. Dellow and Mr. Anderton were guarded in their response
to this, they were agreed that there should be in depth
discussion on this subject but re-iterated the police role
within the Community.  Mr. Anderton pointed out that it was a
police responsibility to deal with disorder and the safety of
members of the public in times of emergency and that, if police
numbers were reduced inside grounds, they would still need to
have sufficient officers available to deal with situations as
they might arise.

We pressed the point that if we were to look at this as an
option we needed some indication as to the likely response from
the police.

Mr. Anderton said that this needed very careful consideration as
it affected the whole licensing procedure, he would take this
back also for discussion.

There was some discussion on the way that visiting supp&rters
were treated, many complaints were received from genuine
supporters who felt they had been treated badly by the police.

Again Mr. Anderton was sympathetic - he too received letters of
complaint; it was difficult to separate the good from the bad
when they all arrived together.  Once we had embarked on the
policy of segregation it was always going to be difficult to
deal with visiting supporters, however he agreed there was a
need for officers to approach this matter with a high degree of
professionalism.

Mr. Walker, Football Association, suggested that the time might
be right to experiment with certain clubs regarding the
segregation of fans, he felt sure that in some areas this might
be successful but appreciated that it would need to be right
before we tried it. We mentioned our Family Initiatives and our
hope that there would be an increase in reciprocal visits
between families and junior supporters, we needed the assistance
of the police in this regard particularly outside the stadium to
ensure that families, etc, were not caught up with other groups
of away supporters.


                                                    Cont/4
Cont/4


Mr. Anderton agreed with all we had said, regarding the
possibility of experimenting with m i xing of fans he said this
indeed was a step forward but it would need long and careful
consideration before we chanced it.

These suggestions would be discussed at the next m eeting of the
A.C.P.O. Sub Committee.

ALL TICKET MATCHES
               0


We raised the question of ' all-ticket1 matches and the need to
ensure that they were strictly adhered to, i e ., no tickets sold
on the day and no persons without tickets to be allowed entry
into the ground.  We felt the same rule should apply to matches
where entry to the v i s i t o r s ' section was by ticket only - there
had been instances where supporters arriving without tickets had
been allowed into the ground following a request from police.

It was generally agreed that 'all-ticket' should be just that,
with no one other than ticket holders being allowed in, although
Mr. Anderton said that this was a difficult decision for a match
commander to make when faced with 300/400 outside without
tickets.

There was a brief discussion on the transfer of supporters
inside the ground where visitors had deliberately gone into the
home e n d .

Mr. Anderton agreed that it was wrong to mix these with
responsible away supporters and also there was a real danger of
exceeding capacities on terraces, they should be ejected but
again, hard and fast rules could not be laid down in v iew of
changing circumstances at g r o u n d s .

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY REPORT

The only item discussed at any length was the question of the
police/club agreement.

Mr. Anderton said A.C.P.O. were most concerned at the wording of
this recommendation and they had taken the matter up with Lord
Justice Taylor.  Their advice to Chief Constables was to hold
back from entering into hard and fast agreements that laid down
areas of responsibility; it was hoped that Lord Justice Taylor
would amend his thinking in his final report.

It was clear that all clubs were working to an agreement, either
written or verbal, regarding the rules of police/stewards etc,
in grounds and that safety was not being compromised by the lack
of a firm written agreement as suggested.

Mr. Dellow and Mr. Anderton accepted that there was a need for
flexibility in dealing with recommendations in vie w of the wide
variations in grounds and attendances.  It was hoped that this
would be taken on board by Lord Justice Taylor when he produced
his final report.


                                                          Cont/5
Cont/5


FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT

Mr. Stott thanked Mr. Anderton for the attendance of Mr. Adams,
Assistant Chief Constable, Merseyside Police, at the meetings of
the F.M.A. Sub Committee; his contributions were invaluable and
most helpful in our deliberations.

There was still the vexed question as to how to deal with the
person who arrived at the turnstile with an invalid card.   The
police vie w that a mere red light on a machine did not indicate
that an offence had been committed was respected but that left
us with the question as to what to do with that person.

Mr. Anderton said that a letter had been sent to the Home office
in February this year posing the very same question but as yet
no satisfactory reply had been received.

It appeared that all we could do was wait until the tests had
been completed to see how m uch of a problem this was. He was of
the opinion that the equipment should be such as to minimise the
chances of error occurring and as such, a system should not be
introduced until testing proved the reliability of the
equipment.

POLICE INVOLVEMENT - FIELD OF PLAY

The A.C.P.O. guidelines issued in February, 1989, were r e ­
confirmed, Mr. Anderton dissociated A.C.P.O. from the remarks of
the Chairman of the Police Federation.

EXCLUSION ORDERS

It was agreed that we should continue to press for Courts to be
more realistic in the issue of Exclusion Orders, particularly in
the light of the introduction of the National Membership Scheme.

FUTURE LIAISON

It was agreed that meetings of this nature were worthwhile and
that liaison between our respective organisations should be
maintained at officer level.

CONCLUSION

The meeting was cordial, with a genuine feeling that A.C.P.O.
were sympathetic to our problems.

Mr. Anderton, particularly, expressed a willingness to see what
could be done to ease the situation within the restrictions
being placed upon the police service at the present time.


                                                   J.A. Crawford.
