PBR/MG

2nd Marcti 1998




M T tr p g p t i
mil
Bear Mr.

I as In receipt of your letter of 24th February concerning        Hillsborough
Disaster.

I have taken the liberty of forwarding It to Mr* Trevor 81        _____
collating any new evidence, and tea will no doubt ba in contact with you If
ha believes your evidence c m be of assistance to the Family Support Group.

Thank you for taking the trouble to writ® to   m   about this matter.

Yours sincerely,




Pater Robinson
Oilef Executlve<
mt/m
fad March 1998
Mr. Trevor Hicks,



Skipton,



Dear frevor.

I an enclosing herewith a letter which I have received from a Mr.
concerning the Hillsborough Disaster.

I have acknowledged receipt of this and advised hist that no doubt you will
be in contact with hia if yea consider his evidence nay be of assistance to
the Hillsborough Fanily Support Group.

filth kind regards.

lours sincerely.




Peter Robinson
Chief Executive
                                                                                   Liverpool
                                                                                   L14

                                                                         24th February 1998



Dear Mr Robinson,

1 am writing to you concerning what I consider VITAL evidence regarding the Hillsborough
Disaster which I think as been overlooked.

It is now well documented that the ultimate cause of the disaster was the overcrowding in the
2 pens behind the Leppings Lane goal.

My concern lies in the match tickets themselves.

I attended the Liverpool v Arsenal F.A. Cup semi final on the date 12.04.80 and on the tick­
ets it was clearly stated to enter via turnstile entrance C and then once inside the perimeter
to then enter a specific gangway. Thus distributing the volume of supporters evenly behind
the goal. Yet on the Tickets for Forest Semi Final the only information on the ticket was
through which turnstile you were to enter.

This is fundamental to what happened on the day of the disaster as you may be aware that as
soon as you enter through the turnstile at the Leppings Lane, the first Gangway you see is
the tunnel behind the goal. If you hadn’t been to Hillsborough before you will automatical­
ly enter the terraces via this entrance hence the overcrowding in those pens.

Also Liverpool supporters have ben constantly accused of arriving late at the game, yet if
look at the Forest ticket it states to take up your position in the Stadium JUST 15 minutes
before the game. The massive queues started to build up outside Leppings Lane at about
2.15pm. On the Liverpool v Arsenal F.A. Cup semi final the ticket stated that spectators are
advised to take their places at 2.15pm. Surely these are matters of concern.

I submitted this evidence to the West Midland Police (ie Ticket stubs for both the above
games) at the initial enquiry and at the time the officer concerned was astounded at these
findings. It still worries me to this day why this evidence hasn’t been brought to light.
(P.s they still haven’t returned my stubs).


Yours faithfully
