In the Leeds District Magistrates Court
5th July 1999.

                        Adlinuton v. Duckcnfield: Adlinuton v. Murray



            Revised Skeleton Arizumcnt o f the Prosecution on Abuse o f Process



                        Prelim inary issue; the Timing o f the Argument

1      The issue in respect o f every charge is whether the defendant concerned should be
       committed to stand trial. He should be committed if (a) the prosecution show that a
       reasonable jury, properly directed, could convict.-unless (b) the defence show that in
       all the circumstances o f the case it would be an abuse o f process to commit him.

2      It is submitted that this composite question should be examined after the evidence has
        been heard or read: after the issues have been identified: and after such evidence has
        been presented as the parties want to adduce on the issues o f sufficiency and fairness.
        The defendants, by contrast, want to have the abuse o f process issue resolved first.

            The legal principles to be applied to determine the prelim inary issue

The importance o f all the circumstances

3      The question o f abuse o f process is to be determined "in the round", and involves "a
       single appreciation o f what is or is not unfair": per Lord Mustill in Tan v. Cameron
        [1992] A.C. 205, 225E. The European eases on Article 6 (1 ) o f the European
       Convention on Human Rights also recognise, in the words o f the paragraph 5.3 o f the
       skeleton for Mr Duckenfield. that the question o f delay "must be examined against
       the background and circumstances o f the case." Mr Justice Buckley ruled in the
       second Maxwell trial that "Fairness is a view the court comes to after an objective
       assessment o f all the circumstances." (Defence papers, tab 3, page 5) He cited the
       ground set out by Lord Lowry in R v. Horse ferry Road Magistrates Court, ex parte
       Bennett [1994] 1 A.C. 42. 74/5:

               " [whether] it offends the court's sense o f justice and propriety to be asked to
               try the accused in the circumstances o f a particular case."

4      A balancing exercise has to be undertaken, so that the court can determine,
       exceptionally, whether the proceedings amount to "an affront to the public
       conscience", and whether it would be "contrary to the public interest in the integrity ot
       the judicial system that a trial should take place".

               per Lord Steyn in R v. Lot i f \ l c) % | 2 Cr. App. R. 92. 101A-D
        The legal principles to he applied on the general abuse o f process issue

5   There is no doctrine o f issue estoppel in English criminal law. R v. Humphreys [1977]
    A.C. 1. The doctrine o f autrefois acquit and autrefois convict provide the only
    circumstances in which fresh criminal proceedings are barred by earlier proceedings.
    A verdict o f a coroner’s jury cannot prevent the institution o f a criminal case.

6   Examining justices, as well as courts o f trial, have an inherent power to stay
    proceedings on the ground o f abuse o f process; R v. Telford Justices, ex parte Badhan
    [1991] 2 Q.B. 78. The rationale is. however, that

            "We think that a plea o f abuse should be open to an accused subject at the
            earliest opportunity." (90A) (an opportunity that was not taken in the present
            case.)

7   In Attorney-G eneral's Reference (No 1 o f 1990) (1992) 95 Cr. App. R. 296, it was
     said by the Court o f Appeal that:

            (i)     a stay for delay or any other reason was to be imposed only in
                     exceptional circumstances:

            (ii)    even where delay could be said to be unjustifiable, a stay was to be
                     regarded as the exception rather than the rule:

            (iii)   even more rarely could a stay be imposed in the absence o f fault on the
                    part o f the complainant or prosecutor: and

            (iv)    never w hen the delay was due to mere complexity or contributed to by
                    the defendant's actions.

8   The Divisional Court has held that it is not sufficient for explanations to be given by
    advocates o f facts relevant to abuse o f process. Evidence should be called:

            R v. Clerkenwell Stipendiary Magistrate, ex parte Bell (1991) 55 J.P. 669.

9   The case o f R v. Bow Street M agistrates Court, ex parte Director o f Public
    Prosecutions (1992) 95 Cr. App. R. 9 establishes two propositions:

           (i) the magistrates' court, where it examines the matter, has a primary role as a
           court o f first instance, and has therefore a discretion to find facts and to rule
           upon them which will be challengeable only if the magistrate has exercised his
           discretion in a W ednesbury irrational way (page 17) : and

           (ii) the court will look at the issue arising in the case in order to determine
           whether delay has caused prejudice (in that case, the question whether notes
           were made contemporaneously or not; page 20-1).
10    In R v. D erby Crown Court, ex parte Brooks (1985) 80 Cr. App. R. 164, the
       Divisional Court examined the facts in order to determine whether there had been
       unconscionable delay in bringing proceedings where they were part o f the same
       course o f criminal conduct as had been determined at an earlier trial. The Divisional
       Court held that there had been no unconscionable delay, causing prejudice, because it
       was clear that the defendant had admitted the charge. (It is the case for the
       prosecution here that a jury is entitled to treat the defendants as having admitted guilt:
       and that probably the only issue left outstanding is whether in the view o f the jury, the
       negligence which caused death was bad enough, in each case, to be characterised as
       "gross" .)

Publicity

11    Reliance will be placed on the principles set out in cases reviewed in both Maxwell
       cases, namely, by Phillips J in the first unsuccessful abuse o f process application in
       the M axwell case in March 1995. and by Buckley J in September 1996. It is
       unnecessary to repeat the principles here.

12     The authorities show that the courts recognise a "fade factor". The effect o f publicity
       is best left to be determined on the brink o f a trial. There is no authority which
       suggests that a magistrates court may stay a case on the ground of unfair publicity.

                 The relevance o f previous defence attempts to stop the case

13     The defence argument o f William Clegg QC headed "Regina v. Duckenfield. Skeleton
       Submissions", dated 7th June 1999. suggests that the argument to be presented is
       effectively a repetition p f the arguments put before the Crown Prosecution Service
       between July and December 1998. when application was made that the CPS should
       take over and discontinue the prosecution in the exercise o f its powers under sections
       6 (2) and 23 (3) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985. No separate skeleton
       argument has been received from solicitors or counsel for Mr Murray.

14     The defence application, after the most thorough review lasting nearly six months,
       was determined against them in the exercise o f a wide statutory discretion in the light
       o f the CPS Code o f Practice, established policy, and the facts and background to the
       case.

15     An argument that the CPS had acted unlawfully and irrationally in determining not to
       take over and discontinue failed in judicial review proceedings in the Divisional Court
       before three judges in March 1999. (See Annex P, paragraph 57 o f the statement o f
       Ann Adlington)
           The function o f an abuse o f process application in the present case

16   The examining magistrate must not be asked to act as a court o f review of, or appeal
     against, the decisions o f the Crown Prosecution Service and Divisional Court. He
     must exercise his own distinctive jurisdiction if the abuse o f process application is to
     have any value independently o f the reviews that have already taken place. It is
     notable that he was not asked at the earliest opportunity, that is. after the issue o f
     summonses, to stop the case as an abuse o f process. (See ex parte Badhan, at
     paragraph 6. above.)

17   The distinctive function o f the magistrate is the ability to hear and receive oral
     evidence on the issue. The power to stop a case that is otherwise properly brought is
     an exceptional one. and should not be exercised on the basis o f bare assertions that the
     prosecution is oppressive, and that there has been unfairness and delay producing
     prejudice.

18   The defence skeleton argument produced so far makes no serious attempt to analyse
     the issues arising in the previous inquiries, and scarcely identifies findings in them. It
     appears that copies o f those inquiries and reports have not even been produced to the
     magistrates' court. The docum ent fails to set out the issues arising in the current
      prosecution, and does not disclose the defence. The court is therefore unable to test
     whether prejudice will be caused by the passage o f years.

19   The prosecution has set out the evidence it can give on this issue in a witness
     statement. The prosecutor will give evidence, if her statement is not accepted, and
     will face cross-examination about the prosecution's motives, past conduct, and the
     question whether it was feasible to mount a prosecution earlier than 1998. These
      issues have been raised by the defence during the last year. The defendants should
     also be prepared to give evidence on these issues, and identify the oppression they
     have suffered (as was done in. for example, the Maxwell applications), and set out the
     ways in which they will be prejudiced by the passage o f time.

20   The evidence presented so far by the defence consists o f press cuttings, supplied on 1st
     July, in spite o f an order o f the court on 26th April 1999 that they should be supplied
     to the court on 28th June, and 2 1st June to the prosecution. It appears that not even an
     effort has been made to produce a balanced selection o f press coverage against which
     to test the extraordinary assertion as to:

             "The intemperate and wholly inaccurate media coverage o f the police role in
             the disaster." (Skeleton page 11)

                       The Issues as they appear to th'e Prosecution

21   What is in dispute? Paragraph 6:3 o f the defence skeleton refers to the "unfair" media
     coverage and "prejudice". However, it is not said how. or in what respects, the
     coverage is "unfair", nor why it is said to be "wholly inaccurate", nor in what respects


                                              4
       it has caused "prejudice". The complaint made implies that there is an established
       version o f the truth, which the coverage wrongly contradicts. To make good
       propositions that delay and publicity will cause prejudice, the defence must show
       what the true police role was.

The significance o f the Interim Report o f the Taylor Inquiry

22     It seems to be implicit in the defence argument at paragraphs 2.2 and 2.10 that the
       defence accepts the Taylor Inquiry as accurate. The court should therefore accept, in
       the absence o f evidence from the defence to the contrary, that the Taylor Inquiry
       represents the truth, against which to test the arguments that media publicity is
       "wholly inaccurate", and that delay is prejudicial to the presentation o f the defence.

23     It is wrongly asserted by the defence that the prosecution "refuses" to accept the
       decision (paragraphs 2.2 and 2.10). The elementary falsity o f the defence proposition
       that the prosecution repudiates the findings is easily demonstrated. The important
       background findings in the Interim Taylor Report relevant to the allegation o f
       manslaughter demonstrate this:

               paragraph 166 : the police had accepted de facto responsibility for monitoring
               the pens at Leppings Lane; only M r Duckenfield denied this;

               paragraph 184 : "By 2.52 pm when Gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were
               overfull even by this test. Many were uncomfortable. To allow any more into
               those pens was likely to cause injuries: to allow a large stream in was courting
               disaster.":

               paragraph 196: drunkenness was not a major factor in the build-up at the
               turnstiles;

               paragraph 200-2: the press at the turnstiles was not caused by a large body o f
               tieketless fans :

               paragraphs 205-8: contrary to the argument o f the South Yorkshire police,
               there was no conspiracy by the Liverpool supporters to arrive late.

24     The central findings o f the Inquiry are at Chapter 11. headed "The blunder on opening
       the gates".

               Paragraph 231: "Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the
               control room where there was a view o f the pens and the crowd at the
               turnstiles that the tunnel had to be closed. If orders had been given to that
               effect when Gate C was opened, the fans could have been directed to the
               empty areas o f the wings and this disaster could still have been avoided.
               Failure to give that order was a blunder o f the first magnitude."
              Paragraph 265: "The immediate cause o f the gross overcrowding and hence
              the disaster was the failure, when Gate C was opened, to cut o ff access to the
              central pens which were already overfull."

25    The prosecution does not challenge or "refuse to accept" any other aspects o f the
       Taylor Inquiry dealing with other, and less direct, causes o f the disaster, nor does it
       challenge the criticisms o f other bodies, firms, or individuals involved.

The general acceptance o f the Taylor findings as to the "police role"

26    The Taylor findings have been accepted by :

               (i) the prosecution:

               (ii) Lord Justice Stuart-Smith;

               (iii) the Crown Prosecution Service:

               (iv) the South Yorkshire Police force.

27    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith cited (evidently with approval) paragraph 23 1 o f the Taylor
       Report, set out above. He stated at paragraph 23 o f his report;

               "Neither Counsel appearing on their behalf or any o f the families who I have
               seen in interview had any criticism o f Lord Taylor's Inquiry o f the conclusions
               that he reached."

28     At paragraph 66 he said:

               "I have heard the suggestion that the verdict o f accidental death at the inquests
               in some way undermined or reversed the findings o f Lord Taylor. But it did no
               such thing."

29     The Crown Prosecution Service accepted the Taylor findings See Chapter 1,
       paragraph 52 o f the Stuart-Smith Report in which on extract from the advice o f
       leading counsel is cited:

               "In our judgm ent therefore the Taylor analysis is as from a basis as any from
               w hich to approach the question o f Criminal Liability."

30     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith plainly did not accept Mr Duckenfield's assertion that he
       had misled people innocently, for good reasons, about the circumstances in which
       Gate C became open. At paragraph 100 he referred to

               "M r Duckenfield's disgraceful lie about Gate C being forced open by tans".


                                                 6
31   The C h ief Constable o f the South Yorkshire said in August 1989 (Stuarrt-Smith
     report, paragraph 45): f       3 ■

             "I aeeept the findings and conclusions o f the Inquiry in so far as they relate to
             South Yorkshire police."

32   His successor, Mr Richard Wells, said in a letter to the Yorkshire police on 25th
     January 1992 (Stuart-Smith report, paragraph 50) : A ' 3 ,

             "The truth is that Lord Justice Taylor described the failure o f the police to
             close o f f the tunnel leading to the terracing as a "blunder o f the first
             magnitude". South Yorkshire police has consistently and unequivocally
             accepted the truth o f this finding. "

33   The South Yorkshire police have accepted in court that the "blunder o f the first
     magnitude" negligently caused death. In Alcock v ( ' hie f ( 'onstable o f the South
      Yorkshire Police [1992] 1 A.C’. 310 Lord Keith o f Kinkel observed;

             "The South Yorkshire police force, which was responsible for crowd control at
             the match, allowed an excessively large number o f intending spectators to
             enter the ground at the l.cppings Lane end. an area reserved for Liverpool
             supporters. They crammed into pens 3 and 4. below the West Stand, and in
             the resulting crush 95 people were killed and over 400 physically injured......
             The C hief Constable o f South Yorkshire has admitted liability in negligence in
             respect o f the deaths and physical injuries."

34   In Frost r. C h ie f Constable o f the South Yorkshire Police |1997| 1 All.E.R. 540.
      544b-c, in the High Court action brought by police officers at the ground, it was said
      by Rose I.J:

             "The immediate cause o f the disaster was a senior officer's decision to open
             the outer gale without cutting o ff access to the pens. Liability for the deaths
             and injuries o f those spectators has been admitted by the three defendants, the
             first o f whom is the Plaintiffs Chief Constable."

     and per Lord Steyn in the 1louse o f l ords appeal in the same ease White v. C h ie f
     Constable o f the South Yorkshire Police 11998| 3 W.1..R. 1509:

             "It is admitted by the C hief Constable that the ev ents were caused by the
             negligence o f the police in allowing the overcrowding o f two spectator pens."

35   This acceptance o f liability, in the lay lor Inquiry and subsequently, has plainly
     referred to the failure in the control room, and to the failures in command. Mr
     Duckenfield was suspended by the C hief Constable after the Taylor Inquiry. The
     Police Com plaints Authority charged both these defendants (in vain) with neglect.


                                              7
36      Neither defendant has disputed the Taylor findings in any documents the prosecution
        has seen, nor have their lawyers denied negligence on their behalf in any documents,
        seen by the prosecution, presented to the CPS in 1998, the South Yorkshire Police
        Authority, or the Divisional Court in 1999.

The relevance o f the defence acceptance o f support and fu n din g fr o m the South Yorkshire
police fu n d

37     Furthermore, the defendants have asked for the financial support, and obtained it,
        from the South Yorkshire Police Authority, and have procured the active support o f
       the Chief Constable and Assistant Chief Constable to defend these proceedings and
        pay all their expenses. It is submitted that no defendant intent on disputing that his
       actions were negligent and had caused 96 deaths would accept funding from a body
        which has persistently accepted that the negligence o f which he is accused was the
        direct and immediate cause o f the catastrophe.

38     The only reason offered by the defence for the assertion that the prosecution fails to
        "accept" the "conclusions o f the [Taylor] Inquiry" (paragraph 2.10) appears at
        paragraph 2:3 :

                "Lord Taylor did not recommend the criminal prosecution o f Duckenfield for
                any offence."

39     This is sophistry. The terms o f reference o f the Taylor Inquiry were clear, and had no
        reference to the question o f prosecution. They were (paragraph 2):

                "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15th
                April 1989 and to make recommendations about the need o f crowd control and
                safety at sports evenis."

40     Judges, whether o f the Court o f Appeal or not. do not. as a matter o f basic
        constitutional propriety, recommend that an individual be prosecuted. In a
        controversial public inquiry, it would have been an abuse o f power to have done so.
        The terms o f reference o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith included the question o f drawing
        the attention o f the DPP to any new evidence. Even such limited terms o f reference
        were absent from the Taylor Inquiry.

41     The decision whether to prosecute was one for the Crown Prosecution Service, who
       would obviously study the report upon publication. In cases o f which otherwise the
       CPS might be ignorant, judges from time to time ask that they study matters that have
       come to light in court. Judges criticise people in their reports o f inquiries, but they do
       not recommend prosecution. The defence is invited to offer an example o f a
       "recommendation" by a judge in a public inquiry that a specific individual be
       prosecuted.



                                                 8
The material significance o f the Stuart-Smith Inquiry

42     It is right to say that the prosecution does not accept many o f the findings o f this
        report. However, its findings that the approach o f the Taylor Inquiry is sound and has
        survived intact for 10 years is accepted in full. The Report dispels wholly and
        expressly the impression created by the decision o f the DPP not to prosecute (taken a
        year after the Taylor Inquiry), and by the verdict o f the Coroner’s jury), that fresh
        evidence had come to light undermining it. (See paragraphs 52, 53 and 66). It was not
        the purpose o f the "Scrutiny" to decide whether there was eyitlence o f negligence or
        manslaughter or not. (The terms o f reference are set outj *t page v, paragraph 3.)

Other possible issues in the case

43     Even if the defendants do not, accept that the truth o f the police role is as set out in the
       Taylor Report, it is the prosecution's case that probably the only substantial issue
       before the jury is likely to be whether the negligence o f the defendants, causing death,
       is in the opinion o f the jury sufficiently bad to be characterised as gross within the
       Adom ako definition.

D iscretionary or technical issues

44     It is possible that one defendant may say he relied or was entitled to rely on the
        conduct o f the other, or argue that the negligence was the other's alone. Such a
        defence is not prejudiced by the passage o f time. The primary events are recorded on
        videotape and in transcripts o f the defendants' evidence. A body o f evidence has now
        emerged showing a dishonest concealment by the South Yorkshire police, supported
       prim a fa c ie in some respects by the defendants, o f the previous practice o f closing the
        tunnel at cup games. None o f the evidence relating to these questions can seriously be
        affected by the passage o f time.

45     The only other realistic possibility is that the defence will seek to exclude evidence of
       admissions made by them, or the videotape evidence, on some discretionary or
       technical ground, so that the prosecution cannot prove the necessary primary facts
       before the question o f evaluating the defendants' conduct can arise. It is suspected that
       such a defence may be presented, because neither defendant has indicated a
       willingness to make admissions o f primary facts going beyond the committal. If such
       a defence is to be taken, the delay is not o f course damaging to the defendants in any
       way; it may positively assist them.

46     In this connection, it should be noted that the position o f the C hief Constable o f the
        South Yorkshire police, who supports the defendants and has procured the payment o f
       their legal fees and expenses from public funds."has refused to hand over any primary
       document or exhibit, unless in response to a witness summons or clear guidance from
       the CPS or court.



                                                 9
47     In the absence o f defence evidence, the prosecution will invite the court to approach
       the question w hether publicity has been unfair, and whether the offence will be
       prejudiced by delay, on the basis that the Taylor approach to the Inquiry is correct.



                     Replies to specific assertions in the defence skeleton



The inquest proceedings a n d the C PS decision not to prosecute

48     The prosecution argues that both the CPS and the Coroner were misled, because
       highly selective material was provided to them by the West Midlands police. To that
       extent, for present purposes, it is right to say that the decisions o f those bodies are not
       "accepted". Those two authorities were given over 100 fraudulently edited
       statements o f South Yorkshire police officers by West Midlands police and 11% o f
       the evidence as a whole. The Stuart-Smith report was misled over the edited
       statements. West Midlands police regarded themselves as the agents o f the South
       Yorkshire police in the matter o f disclosure to outside investigating bodies. These
       matters are comprehensively dealt with in the Representations. Annexes A-D adopted
       in the witness statement o f Ann Adlington o f 30th June 1999. on which reliance is
       placed.

49     In particular, the evidence o f 1988 practice as to closure o f the tunnel was regarded, it
        appears, as critical in the decision whether to prosecute.

50     Since last autumn, fresh material has come to light. The defence has failed to
       associate itself with the prosecution's requests to achieve disclosure o f the material in
       the Hillsborough archive, held by the South Yorkshire police. The briefing notes o f
        16th 17th and 19th April 1989, disclosed by the Assistant Chief Constable in response to
       an application for a witness summons which he opposed, reveal prim a fa c ie. that the
       South Yorkshire police misled the inquiries about the previous practice o f closing the
       gate, in addition to editing out o f officers' statements references to 1988. They also
       disclose a fundamentally irregular and partisan approach to the investigation into the
       truth o f the disaster.

51     The most recent correspondence, produced as Annex O in the witness statement o f
       Ann Adlington. suggests that the Coroner knew o f a statement o f Inspector White in
       which he says he drew the attention o f the defendant Murray before the 1989 game to
       the closure o f the tunnel in 1988. I f it is true that he informed M r Manning, solicitor
       to the defendant Murray, o f this in a private conversation, no respect can be
       maintained for the integrity o f the coronal process in this case. Dr Popper does not
       suggest that he told other lawyers; and as Mr Croston rightly concedes, the matter
       goes to the core o f the issue o f manslaughter. The audi alteram pa rte principle
       apparently does not apply in the Sheffield coroner's court; and the decision not to call
       White was made apparently on the basis o f anecdote, not medical evidence.


                                                10
52    It is not yet known whether Mr Manning disputes that he was party to a private
      conversation with the Coroner about the question o f W hite’s missing statement. N or is
       it known how many other informal conversations about the central issues in the
       inquest took place in secret between the Coroner and lawyers for the South Yorkshire
       police.

Defence Skeleton; "Oppression"

53    It is said that the proceedings are "oppressive", but not how the defendants have been,
       and are being, oppressed. Such a contention cannot be accepted without evidence.
       Both defendants retired from the police force on "health grounds". Duckenfield went
       sick in July 1991, two years after suspension on. it is assumed, full pay, and just after
       the Police Complaints Authority directed that he face a disciplinary charge o f neglect
       o f duty. Three months later, he was retired by his Chief Constable, and the charge
       against him was dropped.

54    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith dealt with this at paragraph 58. His opening chronology at
      paragraph 5 is wrong, however. The dates o f 1990 in paragraphs 4 and 5 should read
       1991. See statement o f Ann Adlington. paragraph 28 and Annex F.

55    The charge against M r Murray was then dropped, and he too left because he said he
      was sick. There are two logical possibilities. One is that Mr Duekenfield was not
      really too ill to serve, and his alleged sickness was a deception. (Neither defendant,
      eight years later, claims to be ill.) Alternatively, he. or both o f them, were genuinely
      too ill to serve, though each has now recovered.

56    If the first o f these possibilities is true, no court would entertain a submission that a
       later trial o f the issues, evaded earlier by deception, was unjust. If the second is true,
       no trial could have taken place during the illness o f either defendant, and that period
       should be ignored. The defence is invited to deal with this matter by evidence,
       subject to cross-examination, and specifically to prove the date by which the
       defendants became well enough to be tried.

57    The defendants should also give evidence o f other respects in which the present trial is
      oppressive. Such evidence was presented in both applications by the defence in both
      Maxwell trials. In the second o f these, to which the defence points in the present case,
      the judge attached great weight to the evidence he heard from a defendant's wife.

Defence Skeleton: Exposure to legal process

58    The suggestion is made in the defence skeleton:

              "The position o f Duckenfield is. it is submitted, unique, no other defendant
              will have been subjected to such a level o f public and judicial scrutiny and at
              the same time analysis by the media prior to the com mencement o f legal
               proceedings."

59     If this argument is intended to do more than make the trite statement that every
       defendant’s case is unique, it is manifestly false. It purports to establish, without any
       evidence, that Duckenfield’s treatment by inquiries and courts has been more onerous
       than any other defendant.

60     Duckenfield has given evidence for a few days to the Taylor Inquiry and Inquest. He
       has not had to face or give evidence in any disciplinary or criminal proceedings. He
       has had free legal advice and representation. He has been able to retire to the South
       Coast on health grounds, presumably with his pension, and thus to avoid trial by
       tribunal for neglect o f duty.

61     In serious fraud cases, defendants have commonly to undergo many days o f
        interrogation by the Serious Fraud Office. DTI inspectors, insolvency examiners, and.
        in terrorist cases, up to seven days interrogation in custody-

62     In the Zeebrugge case, defendants were accused o f manslaughter and gave evidence in
        two sets o f highly publicised inquiries, namely, before an Admiralty judge and a
        coroner’s inquest which were publicised, thus providing an almost identical precedent
        to this case. (Transcript attached). The abuse o f process application was dismissed.

63     By com parison with other defendants in notorious cases, it is not accepted that
       Duckenfield’s was simultaneously subjected to a unique "analysis" by the media. It is
       not accepted that his name is known to the public. The "analysis" o f the media o f his
       conduct must surely have fallen far below that o f the Maxwell brothers, the Guinness
       defendants, Rosemary West, and the Bulger defendants. It was obviously eclipsed by
       the publicity in the Lockerbie ease.

64     The ratio o f the second Maxwell abuse o f process application does not appear from
       the extract cited in the defence skeleton at page 6. It is that, where (a) counts were
       properly joined in an indictment as forming a single course o f conduct, but (b) were
       severed in the interests o f manageability, and (c) the first trial had resulted in
       acquittals, it would be wrong in all the circumstances o f the case to ask for a second
       verdict o f the jury on essentially the sam e course o f conduct.



Defence Skeleton; Hostile Publicity

65     Even a cursory reading o f the ruling in the first Maxwell case will be sufficient to
       reject the broad and unsupported assertion at paragraph 6 :3 o f the current defence
       skeleton that;

               "The media cov erage in this case has been unprecedented."
66    In spite o f publicity far worse than appears in the present case, which pre-judged
      identified issues in the case, the Maxwell trial resulted in acquittals.

67    It is submitted that, as a matter o f ordinary personal observation, the press coverage in
      this case cannot be said to have exceeded in intensity or volume that arising in other
      notorious cases, such as the Zcebrugge, Maxwell, Rosemary West, James Bulger,
       Kray brothers. Savundra. Guinness. Tracey Andrews and Lockerbie cases.

Defence Skeleton; D elay

68    The facts are alleged in the defence skeleton at page 9. Evidence is given by Ann
      Adlington about the question o f an earlier prosecution It is submitted that the
      decision not to institute a prosecution is obviously explained though lack o f access to
      statements, information and money, and a willingness, in the early stages, to trust in
      the institutions o f the legal system.

69    The expression "elected to seek to persuade the coroners jury to return a verdict o f
      unlawful killing" is met by evidence from Ann Adlington as to the reason for
      submitting to the full inquest in the autumn o f 1990 in paragraph 18. The dominant
      desire was to find facts.

              "Once again it should not be forgotten that an inquest is a fact-finding exercise
              and not a method o f apportioning guilt. The procedure and rules o f evidence
              which are suitable for one are unsuitable for the other. In an inquest it should
              never be forgotten that there are no parties, there is no indictment, there is nor
              prosecution, there is no trial, simply an attempt to establish facts, a process of
              investigation quite unlike a criminal trial where the prosecutor accuses and the
              accused defends, the judge holding the balance or ring."

              per Lord Lane CJ in R r. South .London Coroner, ex parte Thompson
              (Unreported. 1982). cited in R r. West London Coroner, ex parte Gray [1988]
              Q .B .4 6 7 . 473D.

70    The process is. o f course, even less like a judicial process if a coroner regards him self
      as free to hold secret talks about a central issue with the solicitor to one interested
      party, and if that solicitor agrees to such a beneficial ex parte arrangement.

71    It is observed, without ev idence, at page 9. para 4:3. that:

              "..the prosecutor has had the advantage o f professional adv ice throughout."

72    This is a recklessly misleading misstatement, unsupported by evidence. The true
      position appears in A nnex B to the statement o f Ann Adlington. the Representations
      o f 24lh Septem ber 1998 at paragraph 2. a copy o f which was served on the defence by
      the CPS last year, and in the present statement.
73    Present leading counsel was involved in the Judicial Review from September 1993 to
      N ovember 1993, and from December 1996. He was not asked to advise on criminal
      law until 1998. Otherwise lawyers have from time to time advised the HFSG on
      specific aspects o f the case, often without fee, ad hoc, usually on questions o f
      compensation, coronal or specific public law matters. The Group has not have the
      advantage o f public funds to allow it the luxury o f professional legal advice
      "throughout", let alone the resources to allow for detailed advice on a private
      prosecution. The false assertion betrays a complete and insensitive
      misunderstanding o f the difficulties o f persons who seek to conduct major public law
      disaster litigation without access to public money.

Eleven years on death row

74    The comparison o f this case with that o f Charles. Carter, and Carter (Defence
      Skeleton, page 9-10) cannot withstand examination. The defendants had been in
      custody from July 1987 on a capital charge, had been convicted but succeeded on
      appeal; had then been tried again, but the jury disagreed: and had then faced a trial in
      September 1996 and been convicted and sentenced to death.

75    The defence suggest in the instant case, by reference to the Charles case, that

              "The effect o f having been tried three times can be compared with having to
              undergo the strain o f the Inquest. Inquiry and Scrutiny".

76    This passage fails to point out that neither defendant, each o f whom lives in freedom
      and comfortable retirement, gave evidence to the "Scrutiny". Otherwise, the
      comparison with conditions in Trinidad is too ridiculous to call for a reply.

77    Paragraphs 4.6 and 4.7 cite the judgm ent o f the Divisional Court and a comment on
      the "Scrutiny" about the recollection o f witnesses. The first o f these is a reference to a
      passage at page 4 1 E o f the judgment: the reference to the second is apparently a
      composite reference to parts o f paragraphs Chapter 7. paragraphs 16 and 18 o f the
      Stuart-Smith report. Both passages relied on by the defence refer to specific facts
      relating to the individual circumstances o f particular cases. Those passages have no
      application to the large central issue in this case, that is. the failure to close the tunnel
      when the central pens were full. This is a matter recorded on video, and the
      defendants have had their minds directed to the issue from the mom ent o f Mr
      D uckenfield's "disgraceful lie."

78    In any event, unless the defence indicate what the defence is. it is impossible to test
      the proposition that the defence w ill be prejudiced bv the passage o f time.




                                                14
Selection o f Witnesses

79     Under the general heading "Delay" in section 4. there appears at paragraph 4:10 a
       gratuitous attack on the integrity o f the prosecution, which is not linked to any o f the
       propositions on which the court is asked to stay the case. It is said;

                "Furthermore it is submitted that the prosecution has conspicuously failed to
                act in accordance with the principles that underlie the criminal justice system
                in this country "

                "It is submitted that the choice o f witnesses relied on by the Crown [s/c] is
                highly selective and designed not to assist the court but to present the worse
                [s/c] possible case against the accused."

80     It is not clear whether the second passage is the justification for the first, or only one
        example o f the "conspicuous failure". Since this document is dated the 7Ih June, it is
        presumed that it refers to the statements supplied last August, and supplemented
        earlier this year. The informations presented with the summons showed that the case
        was brought to reflect the Taylor Inquiry's findings, which have, as set out above,
        been generally accepted. Evidence is given to this effect by Ann Adlington. Since
        no evidence or material is given in support o f the accusation it cannot be answered.

The prosecution evidence on abuse o f process

81     The prosecution relies on the material contained in the statement o f Ann Adlington o f
        30th June 1999. including the material put before the CPS in the 1998 review, in order
        to demonstrate various matters o f which the following may be the most significant:



        (a)     that the CPS and (probably to a lesser extent) the Coroner were misled about a
                number o f matters, including the apparently critical evidence o f previous
                practice in relation to the closure o f the tu n n e l:

        (b) that p rim a fa c ie the defendants took part in that process o f concealment at the
                 early stages o f the investigation in 1989;

        (c)     that South Yorkshire police controlled and limited, in its own and the
                defendants' interests, the process o f disclosure o f evidential matters to the
                CPS. and Coroner;

       (d)      that the alleged and much vaunted independence o f the West Midlands police
                over the years has been a sham:

       (e)      that it is overwhelmingly probable that the South Yorkshire police continues to
                hold, on no lawful basis, documents which will powerfully support the


                                                  15
               prosecution’s case;

       (f)     that the prosecution is not to blame for the delay;

       (g)     that the defendants continue to accept funding and support procured by a
               police body which has been responsible for the concealment o f important
               evidence.

Abuse o f Process; the balance

82     It is clear the court exercises a weighing function in abuse o f process applications.
       See L a tif cited above at paragraph 4. and R v. M ullen. in which there were serious
       material breaches o f the com mon law duty o f disclosure. The gravity o f the offence
       must be taken into account. There were ninety-six fatalities at Hillsborough. Apart
       from the unsupported attack at paragraph 4.10, the Defence Skeleton argument does
       not suggest the prosecutor has acted in bad faith. It is not suggested that the
       prosecution has withheld material, or procured the issue o f the summonses by
       incomplete information.

83     It is intended to submit further crystallised written submissions in the light o f the
        evidence called at the hearing.

84     Separate submissions will be made as to the effect o f European law on Monday 5,h
        July.




3 Raymond Buildings
Gray’s Inn
London WC1



2 July 1999                                                    Alun Jones QC




                                                               Hugh Davies




                                                16
                               Witness; Ann Marie Adlington
                                        Age; Over 21
                                   Occupation; Solicitor
                       Address; 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR

This statement, consisting o f 13 pages, each signed by me, is true to the best o f my knowledge
and belief, and I make it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to be
prosecuted if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to
be true.

Signed;   -/j. ff\ .

Dated 30 June 1999

1     I am a Solicitor employed by Liverpool City Council, working at the above address. I
       have been seconded to work as solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group by
       the Council under section 137 o f the Local Government Act 1972.

2     I laid the informations which instituted these criminal proceedings before the Leeds
       District Magistrates Court in July 1998 pursuant to a decision o f the Group as a whole
       to bring a prosecution.

3     I make this statement to respond to factual assertions advanced in the written
       argument dated 7th June presented on behalf o f David Duckenfield. This statement is
       intended to supplement the submissions made on behalf o f the prosecution in the
       course o f the review by the Crown Prosecution Service in 1998, when the defendants
       asked the CPS to take over and discontinue the prosecution. I attach as annexes the
       following documents, and adopt their contents;

                 Annex A ;   Representations o f 24th August 1998 and attachments ;
                 Annex B;    Representations o f 24th September 1998 and attachments ;
                 Annex C;    Representations o f 2nd October 1998;
                 Annex D;    R epresentations o f 9th October 1998.

4     I have waited until now to make this statement because I was expecting a skeleton
       argument and evidential material on behalf o f Bernard Murray, and evidential material
       by way o f press statements, which Mr Clegg QC told the court on 26th April would be
       supplied to me in advance o f committal, and a w eek before the material went to the
       magistrate.

5     I have been told on 29 June 1999 that Mr C legg’s argument is to be adopted on behalf
       o f Bernard Murray. I have still not received the press material, but consider that I
       should lodge this statement in advance o f committal nonetheless.

Signed;   //.   f'A ■ $cLl<Vky                                Witnessed;




                                                 1
t




    The previous inquiries

           It is alleged, among other things, that the prosecution refuses to accept the conclusions
           o f the Taylor Inquiry, the “Scrutiny” o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, the verdict o f the
           coroner’s court, the judgement o f the Divisional Court and the decision o f the DPP;
           and that a prosecution could have been brought a long time ago.

    7      In order to deal with these arguments, it is necessary to consider the history o f the
           investigations into this case. The prosecution has always accepted the central findings
           o f the Taylor Inquiry, which were endorsed in full by the Stuart-Smith “Scrutiny” o f
           1997-8. I can speak about much o f the history with detailed personal knowledge.

    8      I have worked for public authorities in Liverpool since 1974, except for five years
           when I studied to obtain a law degree, and then to qualify as a solicitor, between 1979
           and 1984. When the disaster occurred in 1989 I was employed as senior solicitor for
           Merseyside Residuary Body, but on 19th November 1 9 8 9 1 began work for Liverpool
           City Council as a special projects assistant. I had no involvement in the Taylor Inquiry
           at all.

    9      I was aware that in the immediate aftermath o f the disaster Liverpool City Council had
           set up the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party. Part o f its terms o f reference was to
           establish the truth o f the circumstances surrounding the disaster. Initially, I had no
           involvement with the Working Party.

    10     In May 1990 I m oved offices within the City Council. Shortly afterwards I became
           aware that some Hillsborough families made regular visits to a research officer in the
           next office. I was introduced to one o f the families, who were having problems with
           their lawyer.

    11     I was struck by the families’ anguish because I had the impression that the Inquiry
           conducted by Lord Justice Taylor had got to the truth and had delivered findings which
           had satisfied the families. During the following months I was introduced to more
           families, who were deeply troubled at the progress o f the investigations into their
           relatives’ deaths. The commonest complaint concerned the lack o f disclosure by the
           various authorities o f information relating to the deaths.

           The “mini-inquests” had been held in April and May 1 9 9 0 .1 learned that information
           supplied at the mini-inquest had been restricted to who the deceased were, when and
           where they died and the medical cause o f death. The impression I got was that, rather
           than putting families’ minds at rest, these inquests had raised more questions than
           answers. Pathological evidence had been adduced in each case. The remaining
           “evidence” had consisted o f a written summary o f the evidence specific to each case
           which had been compiled by the West Midlands Police. The summaries had been read
           out by a W est Midlands Police officer. The families had had no access to the witness
           statements supporting the summary. Thus, cross-examination had not been possible.
    Signed                                                        Witnessed;



                                                   2
13     The Coroner had ruled that he would not allow any controversial questions to be asked
       for fear o f prejudicing the criminal investigation then being conducted by West
       Midlands Police on behalf o f the DPP, Furthermore, I knew that some families were
       expressing doubts about the accuracy o f the summaries by reason o f the limited
       information they had obtained themselves from various sources, including survivors o f
       the disaster.

14     Another concern was that the pathological evidence that had indicated in every case
       that death had been sudden and pain-free had been used by South Yorkshire Police in
       the High Court before Mr Justice Hidden, sitting in Liverpool in June and July 1990, to
       defeat claims for pre-death suffering.

15     The families were represented by various solicitors acting as the “ Steering Group o f
       Solicitors”, who formed the “Hillsborough Steering Committee”. The most prominent
       o f these were D ouglas Fraser and Elizabeth Steele, who have had no involvement in
       the case since the Inquest. The solicitors do indeed seem to have agreed to the mini­
       inquest procedure, but I have subsequently learned that a number o f families did not
       know that such agreement to the procedure had been given.

16     My initial role in relation to the Hillsborough disaster was an informal one. I gave
       advice where I could and drafted letters for families who were in completely unknown
       territory. Apart from trying to obtain information as to the circumstances in which
       their relatives died, they were also having to tackle the complexities o f the law relating
       to compensation. They were very clearly still grief-stricken, and many were unable to
       articulate their concerns and priorities.

17     The Director o f Public Prosecutions announced his decision not to prosecute on 30th
       August 1 9 9 0 .1 know that there was discussion with outside lawyers in the autumn o f
        1990, which I heard about from families at the time, o f the possibility o f private
       prosecutions. I believe that there had also been discussion between some a number o f
       families and lawyers at the end o f the Taylor Inquiry about the question o f private
       prosecutions. Many people could not understand, in the light o f the very clear findings
       in the Interim Report o f Lord Taylor, how the Director could have com e to a decision
       not to prosecute. There were suspicions o f a cover-up.

18      The prevailing view , however, in both years was that the authorities should proceed
        with their statutory investigations; the DPP in 1989; and the Coroner in 1990. This
        feeling was particularly strong in the autumn o f 1990. Nearly a year and a half after the
        disaster, people wanted with deep yearning to discover more about the circumstances
        o f the deaths, a desire which was stronger than a wish to see those identified as
        responsible by Lord Taylor punished. Nevertheless, it was considered by many o f those
        desperate for the inquest to take place that fresh evidence might emerge in the course
        o f the inquest which would justify a prosecution, as had happened in the Zeebrugge
        tragedy. In that case, after a coroner’s jury had returned verdicts o f unlawful killing,
        the DPP had instituted a prosecution. The trial w as heard at the Central Criminal Court
        in September and October 1990, and was followed in Liverpool with close interest.
Signed;                                                        Witnessed;
        (j f     /   }     .   {    \    d      i    A         S        *'   ------------------------------
19        In the weeks preceding the resumed inquest in November 1990, it was proposed that
           the Steering Committee would instruct counsel to represent any bereaved families who
           were prepared to contribute towards the costs. It was initially suggested that families
           each make a contribution o f £3,000. Some families were concerned that such a large
           number o f divergent interests could not possibly be represented by a single legal
           representative at the resumed inquests.

20        Accordingly, I contacted a solicitor in private practice and arranged for him to meet
          some o f the families who had expressed concern. The purpose o f the meeting was to
          discuss the possibility that he might instruct junior counsel to act on behalf o f
          approximately half a dozen families. From memory the families o f the following
          deceased attended:- Ian Glover, Philip Hammond, Adam Spearritt, Peter Tootle and
          Gary Church.

21        It was apparent that the interests o f even this small number o f families were very
           different, and that, if they were represented together by one lawyer, a false impression
           might be created that they, as a group, had a single interest separate from the single
           interest o f the remaining families. In the end, most o f these families chose to stay with
           the Hillsborough Steering Committee. Certainly, as far as the family o f Philip
          Hammond was concerned, they were faced with the huge dilemma o f either remaining
           with the Steering Committee who had been involved through the Taylor Inquiry and
           the mini-inquests, or changing to somebody who did not have this background
           knowledge. O f course, if these families had withdrawn from the Steering Committee
           group, the costs to be borne by the other families would have increased.

22        In the end the Steering Committee was instructed by a group o f forty-three families
          who each eventually contributed £3,500, because the inquest went on longer than
           expected. I know that this cost was an enormous burden to many families.

23        The resumed inquests began on 19thNovember 1990 and closed on 28th March 1991.
          During this period I w as aware o f families’ increasing concerns at the way the inquests
          were being conducted. These concerns are still strongly held by the group as a whole.
          Some are as follows:-

          the imposition o f the 3.15 cut-off time;

          the disparity o f legal representation - the families’ sole representative was
          outnumbered by about eight lawyers representing the various South Yorkshire
          authorities;

          the hostile treatment o f supporter witnesses in comparison to the protective attitude o f
          the Coroner towards police officers giving evidence. Families felt that effective cross-
          examination o f police officers was very difficult on account o f the number o f
          interventions by the Coroner, purportedly under Rule 22;


Signed;     ( \ . ff[ _ (\ cL                                     Witnessed;


                                                      4
1




          the undue emphasis placed on blood-alcohol levels o f the deceased and repetitive cross
          examination o f the supporter witnesses by counsel and solicitors for various South
          Yorkshire police officers as to the amount o f alcohol they had consumed;
                                                           Pfi&CSh&it
          the inference from Mr Hale representing Supt Greenwood that some o f the victims
          possibly caused the deaths o f others by arriving at “the very last minute with a great
          deal o f alcohol inside him and had made his way right down to the front, pushing and
          crushing, and had caused some deaths       ”;

          the reading to the jury o f a long statement o f “recollections” compiled by Supt
          Marshall which consisted mainly o f Marshall’s personal opinion o f events on the day.
          His theory o f drunk, ticketless and hooligan supporters, deliberately conspiring to
          delay entry to the ground w as recounted in great detail to the Jury. His statement then
          went on to criticise the findings o f Lord Justice Taylor. Finally, his statement (read out
          by W est Midlands police), purported to respond to complaints made by families to the
          Police Complaints Authority which w ere still being formally investigated by the PC A;

          the lack o f disclosure to the bereaved o f witness statements relating to the deaths o f
          their loved ones. (Annex B, paragraphs 83-89; Letter o f 28th March to Sandra Stringer,
          and to Trevor Hicks o f November 1990);

          the Coroner’s summing-up which, as far as families were concerned, undermined the
          findings o f Lord Justice Taylor in many respects.

    24   The verdicts o f accidental death in 1991 were demoralising for the families in the light
          o f the above features and the findings o f the Taylor Inquiry. The Steering Committee
          considered that further action would not succeed. The view s o f a junior barrister
          contacted in June 1991 by Trevor Hicks, Chairman o f the HFSG, were sought upon
          the prospects o f a judicial review o f the verdicts, but nothing came o f it at that stage,
          having regard to the need for a new lawyer to study volume o f evidence given at the
          inquest, and the probable expense.

    25   The families were not, o f course, in possession o f the financial means to bring a
          prosecution, and had very few statements o f witnesses. Money w as short. Between
          eight and ten families had attended the inquest every day, travelling daily from
          Liverpool between Novem ber 1990 and the end o f March 1991, and many more had
          attended the inquest on numerous occasions. Unlike the South Yorkshire police
          officers, they did not have the benefit o f public funds to finance their legal
          representation, and o f course they had had to pay their own travelling costs.

    26   Furthermore, the principal complaints that I heard were still that families did not know
          the full circumstances o f the deaths, because o f the 3.15 cut-off. Som e families
          continued to search for information from the South Yorkshire police, and I drafted
          some o f the letters.

                                                                           Witnessed;



                                                    5
         A typical response is attached from Chief Superintendent M ole o f December 1991
         (attached as Annex E). Information w as withheld by reason o f the pending disciplinary
         proceedings!"           ^

The Police Complaints Authority charges

27       It had been publicly announced very soon after publication o f the Interim Taylor report
         in August 1989 that Mr Duckenfield had been suspended from duty. On 11th July
          1991 it w as announced that the Police Complaints Authority had directed the bringing
         o f charges against the tw o defendants for neglect o f duty. (Relevant documents are
         Annex F)                                                                              —

28       I believe that on 26th July, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield went on “sick leave”.
         On 29th October 1991 it w as announced that he was to be retired from the force by the
         Chief Constable on “health grounds” on 10th November. The discipline proceedings
         against him therefore lapsed. Thereafter, South Yorkshire police asked the PCA to
         withdraw the remaining charge against Mr Murray, and on 13 th January 1992 the PCA
         agreed. Murray then retired from the force, again on health grounds, in August 1992.
         Mr Duckenfield’s retirement on “health grounds”, after tw o years suspension, was
         regarded in the Group as a device to avoid his responsibility, and to leave the force
         with his pension intact.

29       However, this abandonment o f the disciplinary charges did not cause a significant
         change in the matter o f disclosure. Annex G is an example o f a letter written by Chief
         Superintendent M ole on 4th March t992~claiming that the authority o f the makers o f
         statements w as necessary before statements could be released. This policy resulted in
         the disclosure o f some statements, but the withholding o f others, because in a number
     ^   o f cases the witnesses cjifa concerned did not consent. In any event the policy only
         operated in the case o f statements o f witnesses whose identity was known to the
         families.

30       Subsequent requests to the Coroner have been met by responses such as those set out
         in the letters o f the Coroner, Mr Dorries, to Mr Hammond o f 8th and 20th May 1992, to
         Mr Spearitt o f 10th August 1992 and to Donna Carlile o f 28th February 1995 (Annex
         H ); only documents used or read out in the Inquest could, by virtue o f Rule 57 o f the
         Coroners Rules, be disclosed; and the statements sought by the families had not been
         read out at the mini-inquests, because a police summary only had been given in
         evidence, as described in paragraph 12, above.

The application to seek to quash the verdicts o f the Coroner’s Court

31       In spite o f the lack o f access to documents and statements, a number o f families did
         discover though their own research and persistent enquiries further information as to
         the deaths o f their relatives, and o f the treatment, or lack o f treatment, administered to
         them after 3.15 pm.

                                                                  Witnessed;


                                                   6
32    In October 1991, junior counsel, Mr Edward Fitzgerald, w as instructed by six families
       to advise on the question o f challenge to the inquest verdicts. Four o f these families
       had discovered material indicating that their relatives had been alive after 3.15 pm. In
       the other tw o cases, no or virtually no information had been given as to the
       circumstances o f death. In April 1992, a “Memorial” w as submitted to the Attorney-
       General, disclosing what w as known in April 1992.

33    On August 1992, the Attorney-General declined to grant leave under section 13 (1) (b)
      o f the Coroners’ Act 1988 to apply to the High Court for the verdicts to be quashed
      and fresh inquests held.

34    An application for leave to m ove for judicial review o f the coroner’s verdicts by these
       six families was prepared, also by Mr Fitzgerald, and w as granted in April 1993 by Mr
       Justice Macpherson. I w as actively concerned in these applications, but they were not
       lodged on behalf o f the HFSG. Mr Fitzgerald had worked very hard on the case pro
       bono publico for many months, but his work w as often delayed because o f the hope
       that fresh information might be obtained, and there was a complete embargo until the
        13th January 1992, when the disciplinary proceedings were dropped against Mr
       Murray.

35    A telephone call I had with Mrs________the coroner’s secretary, on 20th January 1992
      illustrates the problems. I telephoned her in order to obtain statements on behalf o f
      Anne Williams. She stated I would have to contact W est Midlands Police, as they had
      taken all the statements and had them all back in their possession. I pointed out that I
      had tried to obtain them from South Yorkshire Police. She insisted that West
      Midlands Police w as the correct agency. I asked her why the Coroner could not
      supply copies. She said he did not have them. I reminded her o f the fifteen year rule in
      Rule 56 o f the Coroners’ Rules, whereupon she asked me to write in and said she
      would pass the letter to Dr Popper. I asked why Dr Popper was the person to contact
      She replied that the statements belonged to him, and he would say whether the
      statements could be released.

36    Anne Williams’ solicitor w as told by South Yorkshire police at the same time that, on
      the advice o f their lawyers, they would not supply statements until discipline matters
      had been finalised. On 17th February 1992, however, Mr D om es, the new Coroner,
      wrote to Mrs Williams, allowing her, as a matter o f grace, to see statements (Annex_
      I). From this letter, it can be seen that Chief Superintendent M ole was asked to agree
      to the release o f statements which had been taken by West Midlands Police for the
      purposes o f the inquest. I believe that a Member o f Parliament, Malcolm Thornton,
      had asked the Coroner through the Attorney-General to release these statements. I
      know that statements sought by Mr Hammond w ere also obtained after the
      intervention o f his member o f Parliament. Mr Spearritt received some, but not all o f
      the statements, he w as seeking. Sandra Stringer w as denied some o f the statements
      she was seeking until; the body files were disclosed during the “Scrutiny” in 1997.

Signed;                                                      Witnessed;



                                               7
37    I produce as Annex J copies o f letters that were submitted to the Attorney-General in
       1992 from four o f the six families who applied to the High Court, Mrs Doreen Jones,
       Mr and Mrs Peter Tootle, Mrs Anne Williams (and her doctor), Sandra Stringer and
       her daughter Donna Carlile. (A separate letter w as sent, I am told, by the Glover
       family, but I have not seen a copy. The family o f Michael Kelly had suffered a
       bereavement in 1992, and I do not believe they sent a letter.) These letters reflect the
       frustrations o f the families and their anguished search for information, which I
       witnessed at first hand. Annex K is a copy o f an affidavit o f Sandra Stringer, prepared
       for those proceedings. N one o f the contents o f this has ever been disputed in court,
       on affidavit, nor, so far as I am aware, in the “ Scrutiny” o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

38    The Coroner produced an affidavit for the judicial review proceedings, which for the
       first time exhibited “Continuity Charts”, containing names o f witnesses, which had
       been referred to at the mini-inquests, but which had never been disclosed to the
       families. Similarly, he produced minutes o f “Business Meetings” attended by the
       Coroner and lawyers for various interested parties in 1990. The significance o f some
       o f these minutes is dealt with in Annex B.

39    I produce as Annex L a copy o f the skeleton argument submitted by counsel for the six
      families in November 1993, and a copy o f the judgement o f the Divisional Court as
      Annex M. In the course o f the judicial review, Alun Jones QC w as given an index o f
       statements said to be held by the South Yorkshire police, not the investigating West
      Midlands police. I recall that this index w as disclosed only because there was some
       doubt as to whether a second statement o f a witness relevant to the case o f Michael
      Kelly had been provided. This index consists o f 116 pages, and it lists 3,907
       statements.

Conclusion o f the Judicial Review

40    Although the outcom e o f the application for Judicial Review w as adverse to the six
      families, the evidence o f the Coroner, the copy o f the index, and the statements
      discovered or relied on by each o f the six families, had the effect o f persuading me and
      the families that there w as a large body o f evidence, undisclosed, o f direct relevance to
      the tragedy, which remained in the possession o f the South Yorkshire police, who had
      been blamed for negligence by Lord Taylor, and in the possession o f the Coroner.

1994 to 1996.

41     I do not believe that anyone considered a prosecution in the aftermath o f the judicial
        review hearing. The reality is that the HFSG appeared to have reached the end o f the
        legal road. The families w ere demoralised, and had no faith that the truth would
        emerge from further legal process. There w as no money available, nor any prospect o f
        raising it. The Group had access only to a fraction o f the evidence, a factor which
        would inevitably had weighed against it in any attempt to terminate a prosecution.
Signed;                                                        Witnessed;




                                                8
42   I m yself w as away from work for a few w eeks suffering from ill-health and the stress
      o f the judicial review proceedings, which, however, w as much more bearable for me
      than the families affected. When I returned to work, I w as working on ordinary legal
      business in the Liverpool City Council, but was still liason officer on the Hillsborough
      Working Party, which met infrequently.

43   Some o f the families started to put their hopes o f discovering the true facts o f the
     disaster in the hands o f the media, rather than the courts. An example was the Roger
      Cook programme on Central Television, “The Cook Report”, which concerned
     principally the case o f Kevin Williams, and which included material discovered during
      and after the Judicial Review proceedings.

44    In October 1994, some o f the families attended a preview o f a series o f fictional
      television programmes by the television writer Jimmy McGovern called “Cracker”,
      about the effects o f the disaster on a particular man. The families who saw it asked Mr
      McGovern to investigate and present the true story o f the disaster. I met with Katy
      Jones, the producer o f Granada Television’s World in Action in January 1995 and gave
      her information.

45     I believe that Granada decided to commission the programme in about June 1995. A
      series o f meetings took place between McGovern and some o f the families, and the
      HFSG formally approved co-operation with the making o f the programme, which
      became the drama-documentary “Hillsborough” in December 1996.

December 1996 to June 1997

46   The programme w as well received by the public. The matters raised were discussed in
     Parliament, and the Hom e Secretary, Mr Michael Howard, took a close and
      sympathetic interest, and met many o f the families. The matters that were o f concern to
     the Group are apparent from the report o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. The HFSG made
      submissions in 1997 to the Hom e Secretary and D PP asking for a criminal
     investigation into the allegations o f suppression o f evidence.

47   Annexes A-D, and the material submitted with the informations in July 1998, set out
      the reasons why this prosecution was instituted, and describe the relevant sequence o f
      events. I should add that the Master W itness List w as disclosed to me in April 1997 by
      Mr George Croston o f the CPS, in response to our allegations that the evidence o f
      Roger Houldsworth had been withheld.




                                                            Witnessed;
48        In May 1997 a concert w as held at Anfield which raised substantial funds for the
          Group. Annex B sets out the way in which statements o f witnesses became available in
           1997 to 1998. B y the Spring o f 1998, the Group had substantial witness statements,
          and also had the funds to conduct a prosecution. Furthermore, the Stuart-Smith report
          had unambiguously reaffirmed the findings o f the Taylor Inquiry, and confirmed that
          the W est Midlands police had not provided the CPS with any material that undermined
          those findings.

49        For these reasons, it is wrong to suggest, as the defence do, that the prosecution
           refuses to accept the Taylor Inquiry, and the Stuart-Smith acceptance o f that Inquiry.
           The Group has many and serious criticisms o f other aspects o f the Stuart-Smith report,
     i,   but does not by virtue o f these prosecutions offer a legal challenge to it. The
  iI      prosecution case has been prepared to present the findings o f the Taylor Inquiry as to
  n       the immediate cause o f death to a criminal court for the first time in ten years.

Oppression

50        Argument will be presented about the defendants’ submissions. However, I wish to
           present evidence on the issue o f oppression from my knowledge o f events in the last
           six months.

51        If appropriate I can give detailed evidence as to the funding by the South Yorkshire
           Police Authority o f the defence costs and the defendants’ other expenses incurred in
           these proceedings. Suffice it to say here that the defendants have accepted funding
           from that authority when the Chief Constable o f the South Yorkshire force has always
           accepted the findings o f the Taylor Inquiry, which found a “blunder o f the first
           magnitude” as the immediate and direct cause o f death; and when the Chief Constable
           has repeatedly accepted civil liability for the actions o f the defendants.

52        The defendants have nevertheless been able to retire, presumably on pensions
           appropriate to their high rank, in spite o f the negligence attributed to them by their
           own force, which presently supports them, and w hose support they have asked for and
           accepted.

53        It has became clear for the first time in March 1999 that the defendants’ costs o f
           representation at the five months’ Inquest had been met by the South Yorkshire Police
           Authority. They, like the families, were interested parties within the meaning o f Rule
           21 o f the Coroners’ Rules, entitled to be present and represented. Some interested
           parties, the families, had to pay the costs themselves: others, like the police officers
           and other public bodies, w ere buttressed by the public purse.




Signed;                         t& i                             Witnessed;



                                                  10
54      Also relevant to the question o f oppression is the defendants’ attitude to disclosure o f
        information. The court knows o f the difficulties the prosecution have experienced in
        obtaining access to documents held by the South Yorkshire police. The defence has
        failed for over nine months to offer any support to the prosecution in its request for
        that information to be handed over to a third party.

55      The revealing briefing notes o f meetings held within the South Yorkshire police force
        on 16th, 17th and 19th April 1989, on which reliance is placed under section 24 o f the
        Criminal Justice Act 1988, were obtained only by virtue o f a witness summons, the
        issue o f which was strenuously opposed by the Chief Constable. After receipt o f this
        material, the prosecution wrote again to Mr Croston o f the CPS, enclosing a copy to
        Dr Popper. I enclose a copy o f that file, as Annex N. Our arguments about that
        material has led to the disclosure by the CPS o f further evidence about the closure o f
        the gates in 1988, and the defendant Murray’s knowledge o f it. I attach as Annex O a
        copy o f correspondence from the CPS o f June 1999 relating to this matter, which will
        be developed in argument at the hearing.

56      The defence argument suggests that Mr Duckenfield has had to undergo the stress o f
        the “Scrutiny”. His solicitors have told us that Mr Duckenfield was not interviewed by
        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, and there is no indication that he was asked to contribute to
        the “Scrutiny” by letter.

57      I have seen no evidence that the defendants have been oppressed. By contrast, I have
         m yself seen, over the years, the deeply oppressive and destructive effect upon the
         families o f the concealment o f information; the suppression o f documents; and the
         failure o f even any one individual to be held accountable for any o f the events o f the
         worst disaster in English sporting history. The families’ members o f Parliament have
         made comments about this deprivation o f information in the House o f Commons in
         1998, and on occasions in earlier years Above all, I have witnessed the almost
         complete disintegration o f the families’ previous respect for the police, the legal
         profession, and the institutions o f English law.

Delay

58      Nearly a year has elapsed since the service o f the summonses. This delay has been
        occasioned by the defendants’ unsuccessful application to the CPS to take over and
        discontinue the proceedings, and by the attempt to review that decision in the High
        Court. I produce a copy o f the judgment o f the Divisional Court as Annex P.




Signed;   f i.W I .                                             Witnessed;



                                                 11
Selection o f M aterial

59       A serious allegation is made against the prosecution at the end o f paragraph 4.10, page
         12, o f Mr C legg’s submissions. I do not understand the complaint. Our representations
         to the CPS have presented a reasoned and still unanswered argument showing that
         improper selection was made o f documents submitted to the DPP and Coroner in
         1990. Mr Clegg does not explain the allegation, o f a similar kind, which he makes
     '/’ against us, but the prosecution has allowed the solicitors for both defendants to inspect
     j"l all the witness statements, and the edited and unedited statements o f the South
         Yorkshire police. That inspection took place on 23rd June. Mr C legg’s submissions are
         dated 7th June 1999, on which date the final committal bundle was delivered to his
         instructing solicitors. I presume Mr Clegg is referring to the selection o f witnesses
         supplied last year, upon which comment was made by the prosecution in the course o f
         our Representations o f September 1998 (Annex B)

60     I know that Mr Eastwood, o f Mr Duckenfield’s solicitors, visited the House o f
       Commons library in August 1998, and that his firm represented the South Yorkshire
       police during the “Scrutiny”. He has had a far better opportunity to become familiar
        with the edited and unedited South Yorkshire statements, and the evidence in the case
        as a whole, than the prosecution. Although the Home Secretary asked for all non­
        sensitive material considered in the “Scrutiny” by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be
       placed in the H ouse o f Commons library, the submissions made by Winkworth
        Sherwood on behalf o f South Yorkshire police have not been placed there. Perhaps it
        is on the basis o f Mr E astw ood’s knowledge o f the papers that this unexplained
        allegation against the prosecution is made.

61 jj The witnesses selected by the prosecution have been chosen because their evidence
   11 justifies and underlies the findings o f Lord Taylor. A limited number have now been
       chosen because their evidence tends to be repetitive. I used to prosecute for many
      years for the Liverpool City Council. I know that my obligation in presenting material
      to a court is to be fair. I invite the defence to withdraw the allegation.

Publicity

62        At the end o f the defence argument a comment appears that the prosecution have
          generated much o f the media coverage o f this case themselves. O f course it is correct
          that public comment has been made many times over the years by members o f the
          Group, but I dispute that this has “thereby contributed to the prejudice”. Had the
          Group not taken its case to the media after the failure o f the six families’ judicial
          review, for the reasons apparent from this statement and the 1998 Representations to
          the CPS, the Group would not be in possession o f the material which has encouraged
          it to bring this prosecution, and would not have had the funds to do so.

                              \   ,
Signed;      fj. f Y ) ,                                        Witnessed;




                                                  12
63       Further comment will be made when the prosecution has seen the defence material.

64       I am prepared to give evidence orally about the contents o f this statement.

Signed




Ann Marie Adlington                                     Witnessed.




                                                  13
