PBR/MQ

27th October 1994


Mr, Rogan Taylor.

Liv e r p o o l ,
lit r        i

Dear      Rogan,              ~   .

REi THE DAY O F T H E HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INTERVIEW


Thank you fofr your letter^f-'tfth October.

I am enclosing herewith a slightly amended version of ay
recollections of the Hillsborough Disaster.

tfith kind regards.

Tours sincerely,




P.B. Robinson
Chief Ixecutlve/Oeneral Secretary
Peter Robinson, Chief Executive of Liverpool Football Club, watching from
the Directors* Box:


It's a sad thing to say but as a result of my involvement with the Heysel
disaster I was initially better equipped to deal with this one.       As I
saw it happening, I knew that something was terribly wrong.     I think that
one or two people around me were thinking that it was possibly an
outbreak of hooliganism, but my immediate reaction was that it certainly
wasn't, because nobody was coming on to the pitch.      I was sat in the
Directors' Box, which is some 70/80 yards away, so I couldn't see
clearly,' but il^was evident to me that something was very wrong and I was
greatly concerned.      It quickly came through that there had been a
disaster.


With the experience I'd had at Heysel, I was determined to find out for
myself exactly what had happened.     Stories were circulating that
Liverpool supporters had charged down the gates.      I thought that it was
essential to remain calm and collected and find out for myself.         I went
to the Leppings Lane End with Mr. Ensor, our Club Solicitor, and spoke to
as many supporters as possible and gathered as much information as I
could.      One thing clearly apparent to me was that the gates were intact.
They had most certainly not been forced and what had initially been said
was untrue.      I then returned to the Directors' area and was able to
relate to a number of officials and press representatives what I had seen
and been told by supporters on my visit to the Leppings Lane End of the
Ground.
                                  Tel/FAX:



   6 October 1994



   Re: The Dav o f the Hillsboroueh Disaster interview


   Please find enclosed two copies of the extracts of my recorded interview with you about
   your recollections of the Hillsborough Disaster. These are the extracts which I want to
   use in the forthcoming book, The Day of the Hillsborough Disaster, to published next
   spring by Liverpool University Press, with all royalties going to the Hillsborough Trust.

   I know this may not be an easy task but it is essential that you have the opportunity to
   review your contribution. Could you read through these extracts over the next few weeks
   and let me know if there is anything you would like to add or alter. In addition, there
   may still be typographic errors, incorrect name spellings etc and I would be grateful if,
   on one copy you would mark/correct any you may discover, and retain the other copy
   for your own records. I would like the extracts to be returned by the end of October if
   possible.

   Please don’t hesitate to phone me if you need any further information.

   With many thanks for your help with this project.

   Yours sincerely




^ . Rogan Taylor
Peter Robinson, chief executive of Liverpool Football Club, watching from the directors’
box
It’s a sad thing to say but I was better equipped to deal with that disaster than I was the Heysel
one. As I saw it happening, I knew that something was wrong. I think one or two people around
me were thinking that it was possibly an outbreak of hooliganism, but my immediate reaction
was that it certainly wasn’t because nobody was coming on to the pitch. Obviously I was sat in
the directors’ box, which is some 70, 80 yards away so you couldn’t see clearly, but it was
evident, immediately, to me, that something was very wrong, and I was greatly concerned. It
quickly came through that there had been a disaster.
  With the experience I’d had after Heysel, I was intent to find out for myself just what had
happened. Stories were filtering through that Liverpool supporters had charged down the gates,
whatever, and I thought to myself, ’You must remain very level-headed here, you must go and
find out for yourself just what has happened.’ I went down into the area, I spoke to as many
supporters as I could, and I gathered as much evidence as I could. It was clearly apparent to me




that the gates had not been forced and what had initially been said was nonsense, so we went
back into the directors’ area, we saw officials from the Football Association, officials from
Sheffield Wednesday, one or two policemen and we said, ’Look, there is no question of these
gates having been forced. Those gates are intact.’
