In the Leeds District Magistrates’ Court
5th July 1999

                       Adlington v Duckenfield : Adlington v. Murray

                              Opening Note for the Prosecution

Introduction

1      Ninety-six spectators died from injuries caused by crushing at the Hillsborough
       stadium, Sheffield, on 15th April 1989, when a FA cup semi-final was due to be played
       between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest football clubs.

2      The prosecution case is simple. The primary and immediate cause of the deaths was
       traumatic asphyxiation, caused by the gross negligence of the two defendants in
       allowing severe overcrowding in pens three and four of the west terraces to develop
       between 2.30 and 3.06 pm. Two representative victims have been selected in the
       manslaughter charges.

Manslaughter

3      Manslaughter will be proved in the case of either defendant if it is shown :

               (a)    that he owed the deceased a duty of care;
               (b)    that he was negligent;
               (c)    that his negligent actions or omissions were a substantial cause of
                      death;
               (d)    that in the opinion of the jury his negligence was of such a gravity as to
                      amount to a crime within the principle in R v. Adomako [1995] 1 A.C.
                      181:

                       “The essence of the matter, which is supremely a jury question, is
                      whether having regard to the risk of death involved the conduct of the
                       defendant was so bad in all the circumstances as to amount in their
                      judgment to a criminal act or omission.” [1995] 1 AC. 187E.

4     It is submitted that, where the prosecution alleges negligence causing death, a court
       will almost invariably commit for trial ifprima facie evidence of elements (a), (b) and
       (c) is shown. It is the task of the jury to evaluate the quality of the negligence.

5     In Adomako, the House of Lords did not change the law. It declared that gross
       negligence rather than the elaborate legal concept of recklessness was and is the basis
       of the crime. That approach governs the facts of this case. In addition, the prosecution
       will rely on R v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr. App. R. 8 to show that incompetence in a
       person undertaking specialist functions can amount to gross negligence; and may refer
       to Andrews v. DPP [1937] AC. 576; MPC v. Caldwell [1982] AC. 341; Lawrence v.
       MPC [1982] A.C. 626

                                               1
Causation

6      There may have been a number of other causes of death or other negligence in this
       case. The ground was old and. in some respects was dangerous; the pens and the
       entrance to them, for example, presented clear perils for persons who entered them of
       a kind which would not be tolerated today; overcrowding had developed outside the
       ground through inadequate crowd control; the overcrowding was not recognised as
       soon as it should have been; and the reaction to the disaster of the South Yorkshire
       police was slow.

7      Those matters will be investigated by the prosecution at committal only so far as they
       form part of the facts relating to the primary and immediate cause, namely, the
       negligent failure to prevent the overcrowding. It would be sufficient in law to show
       that the negligence of the defendants was a substantial (more than the de minimis)
       cause.

       R v. Cato (1976) Cr. App R. 41
       R v. Malcherek and Steel (1981) 73 Cr. App. R. 173.

Misfeasance in public office

8      The same facts are put forward to support this offence, the ingredients of which are set
       out in R v. Dytham (1979) 69 Cr. App. R. 387. Proof that gross negligence was a
       substantial cause of death is not a necessary element of this offence.

The evidence

9      The committal bundle of witness statements (File 1) has been revised. It is smaller
       than the bundles served previously in August 1998 and earlier this year. File 2 contains
       exhibits. It is expected that admissions will be made of facts which were accepted and
       uncontroversial at previous inquiries by the defendants or their lawyers. Solicitors for
       both defendants, and the defendants themselves, are familiar with them. Most of them
       are drawn from the Taylor Interim report of August 1989. If these admissions are for
       some reason not made, these facts will be proved under section 24 of the Criminal
       Justice Act 1988, and under the public record doctrine. The evidence relied on is :

               statements from 11 spectators ( File 1/2 -12), including three which refer to the
               victims in the charges, namely, Brian Anderson (1/3) and Karl Mullee (1/8)
               who speak of John Alfred Anderson, who died in pen 4, and Carl Sterritt (1/9),
               who speaks of James Gary Aspinall, who died in pen 3;

               a statement from an official of the Football Association present at the stadium,
               Glen Kirton (1/13);

               a statement from a journalist present at the stadium, Steven Curry (1/14);

               statements from two policemen from the Nottingham police force, present on
             duty at the stadium, Constables Brazener and Hoad (1/15 and 16);

             statements from a man who had worked for Sheffield Wednesday, Roger
             Houldsworth (1/1). It is intended to call him live to explain the CCTV system
             and links between the police and club control rooms;

             statements of seven police officers from the South Yorkshire police (1/17-23).
             P.C.        is dead. In spite of numerous requests by the prosecution to the
             South Yorkshire police, the prosecution does not know the addresses of five of
             the other six. Certain statements made in those witness statements will be
             relied on under section 24 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988. If contact can be
             made with these officers, some of them may be called live;

             notes of meetings held on 16th, 17th and 19th April 1989. Statements of the
             defendants, and other statements admissible under section 24 of the Criminal
             Justice Act 1988 will be relied on (File 1/17-26);

             statements made by the defendants between the disaster and the Taylor Inquiry
             (1/24 and 25), and transcripts of evidence given by them to the Inquiry and the
             Coroner’s Inquest. These have been served already;

             notes of an interview between the defendant Murray and the West Midlands
             police of June 1990. These have been served already.

             plans, photographs, and other documents in File 2. Copies of all plans and
             documentary exhibits have been obtained from the CPS by the defendants in
             January this year. Some photographs are attached in the committal File 1.

             a compilation tape, showing an amalgamation of film from the police, club and
             BBC. It is assumed that the defence will accept that this tape can be played to
             save hours of time. If necessary, the originals can be proved and played;

             admissions of uncontroversial facts;

             The exhibits File 2 does not include the post mortem documents previously
             supplied; it is understood from the defence that it will not be necessary to
             prove them formally.

Plans and photographs

10   Photographs are available at the end of Files 1 and 2. Plans of the ground appear in
      File 2, Dividers 1, 3, 6, and 13.

11   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray were on duty, with
     junior officers, in the elevated Control Box (File 2/7, 2/12, photographs 2/34, and end
     of File 1) at the south west corner of the ground, which had clear views across the
     pitch, along the goal line of the west end of the ground, and of the west terraces.

                                             3
12   They had seven monitors from which they could observe, among other things, the
     condition of the terraces and the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground. They had a
     “zoom” facility, allowing them to focus on any problem areas covered by the
     equipment, including pens three and four of the west terraces and the area around and
      outside the turnstiles.

13   Mr Duckenfield had been promoted to the rank of Chief Superintendent at the end of
     March 1989. He was in overall control of the police operation at the ground. He had
     not policed any major games at Hillsborough in the recent past. Mr Murray, a
     Superintendent, was his deputy, and was in control of the Control Box. He had
     occupied this position at the identical fixture the year before, when the same two teams
     had contested the semi-final.

14   The supporters of Liverpool FC were allocated the north and west sides of the ground,
      and arrived from Leppings Lane. By 2.30 pm there was a very substantial crowd at the
      turnstiles, where there was no queuing system, and an insufficient number of turnstiles
      and police officers to process the crowd.

15   Between 2.30 and 2.45 the crowd grew in size more quickly than the turnstiles could
      admit spectators. A press was caused by the increasing numbers funnelling into the
     turnstile area, anxious to get into the ground by kick-off time. The spectator witnesses
      and videotape show that the crowd was enthusiastic and cheerful, characteristic of a
      large football crowd anticipating a big game. Some supporters climbed over the wall
     to get into the ground, apparently to escape the crush. As the videotape and spectator
      evidence illustrates, there was no general misbehaviour. If, contrary to the prosecution
      case, the press had been caused by general misbehaviour, this would not affect the guilt
      or innocence of the defendants.

16   About 2.45, Superintendent Marshall asked for Gate C to be opened to relieve the
     press. At 2.47, that Gate was opened from the inside to eject a supporter, and a
     number of people came in. That gate was shut. Insistent further demands for the gate
     to be opened were made, as it was considered by officers near the turnstiles that the
     press was a danger to life.

17   The risk to life at the turnstiles, which had steadily developed from 2.15 pm, was a
     grave crisis and required two things by 2.45pm:

             (i) an announcement to the supporters inside and outside the ground by the
             public address system and other means that the start of the game would be
             delayed; and

             (ii) that any further supporters entering the west end of the ground, even if by
             turnstiles alone, should be diverted from the tunnel which led to the central
             pens.

18   At 2.52, Mr Duckenfield ordered Mr Murray to relay an order to open the gates. (See
     compilation video.) Gate C was opened. Between that time and kick-off at 3 pm many

                                              4
     hundreds of supporters came in. Those in the Control Box could see both the condition
     of the central pens and the conditions at the turnstiles. The police and stewards
     outside the ground could not see the condition of the pens: while those inside the stand
     and terraces could not see the numbers waiting to come in.

19   When Gate C was opened, the central pens at the Leppings Lane terraces, numbered 3
     and 4, were already full, as was apparent to persons watching (|
                [), and should have been apparent to the defendants, whose responsibilities for
     ensuring safety included monitoring the pens. Access to the pens was through the
     tunnel under the west stand. (Photographs, end of File 1; plans, File 2/9, 2/10) Gates
     at the back of pens permitted persons to walk between those two pens, provided they
     were visible and that easy access to them was possible. Such access to the gates,
     whether they were open or not, was not possible at 2.45 for almost all persons in those
     pens because they were full. Any system for “finding your own level” was evidently
     failing, and in any event was not available for those in the front of the pens, because
     they were packed.

20   If the defendants had ordered officers to block or close off the tunnel to pens 3 and 4,
      the tragedy would have been avoided. The officers owed a duty of care to those in the
      pens, adults and children alike, and those entering the ground, to prevent them from
      being crushed. Diversion from the tunnel was a simple and obvious step that could
      have been taken, had been taken in 1988 (Lang and Crawford (1/17 and 18), and
      should have been taken at 2.45 pm before the request came to open the gates. It
      obviously should have been taken in any event between the time of the request to open
      the gates and the kick-off. It was criminally negligent not to have taken this obvious
      precaution between at the latest 2.45 and the time when the game was stopped,
      3.06pm.

21   It is clear from the photographs, plans and video that persons entering the concourse
     through turnstiles or Gate C would see the tunnel ahead of them, marked “Standing”.
     This was the only obvious access to the terraces, as spectator witnesses will assert, and
     the overcrowding on the terraces would not have been apparent to spectators until
     they had reached pens 3 or 4. It is clear from the video and accounts of spectators that
     there was no stampede or rush to the terraces, simply a convergence of a dense crowd,
     down a slope beginning in the tunnel, into over crowded cages which the defendants
     could see, but which the incoming spectators could not.

22   The deaths of all 96 victims were the direct and immediate consequence of the
     negligent decision not to divert the spectators into the much less full side pens.


23   The omission of the defendants was not a mere error of judgment. In deciding whether
     to divert the spectators, there was no balancing exercise to be undertaken between
     competing factors. There was no argument or competing consideration against closure
     of access to the tunnel. This was not a “spur of the moment” decision, such as a
     negligent motorist might take, and might have to account for in civil damages.


                                              5
24     The defendants’ critical omission took place over a period of over 20 minutes. Several
       minutes elapsed on any view between the request to open the gates, between 2-45 and
       2.47 pm, and the order to open the gates, at 2.52 pm. A further opportunity to take the
       decision to close off the tunnel was available between 2.52 pm and 3.00 pm, but was
       not taken; nor was the kick-off delayed in either of these periods.

25    The videotape shows that the defendants did little or nothing to stop the game until
      3.06, nor to prevent further crushing, until Superintendent Greenwood ran on to the
      pitch on his own initiative, even though people in deep distress were coming out of the
      pens.

The defendants ’ accounts

26    It is submitted that the defendants’ accounts of their conduct provide no coherent
      explanation for their failure to act. The accounts should be read, and are relied on, in
      full. Both defendants make admissions that a jury would be entitled to consider as
      admissions of guilt to manslaughter. Mr Duckenfield shows a tendency to blame the
      stewards and, on occasions, other officers, but both officers accept that they had a
      duty to ensure safety, and, thus necessarily accept, it is submitted, that they had a duty
      of care.

27    Mr Duckenfield’s answers suggest that he did indeed consider, for some purposes,
      where the spectators would go when they entered the exit gates. Further, he obviously
      knew that he was at fault in opening the gates without taking precautions, because he
      lied by suggesting to a number of people that the Liverpool supporters had broken
      down the gates, when it was apparent that a disaster had occurred. Glen Kirton (1.13)
      will give evidence to this effect.

28    Attention will be drawn particularly to the following passages:

       Tavlor Inquiry: Duckenfield

       24/5/89       Page 119-124 and 137; DD accepts responsibilities to ensure safety.

       25/5/89       Pages 12-13; DD accepted that he caused to be instructed, by tannoy,
                     those in pens 3 and 4 to spread out and move forwards and sideways,
                     because he could foresee difficulties;

                      Page 16; 2.30pm; DD was concerned at 2.30 to ask BM whether they
                      would get all the crowd in by 3 pm. (BM considered that they could)

                      Page 28 A; In performing his duties, he was acting on the “advice” of
                      Superintendent Murray.

                      Page 39; About 2.44 pm it was becoming clear that they were not going
                      to get all the crowd in by 3 pm (33 A-B). Duckenfield appreciated that
                      opening gates was “likely to cause potential problems inside”.

                                               6
          Page 4 IB; DD conceded that when the second request came to open
          the gates, that was the time when he thought about where they would
          go. He accepted that people can stumble as they enter the gates
          causing crushing and injury (41E-F)

          Page 43E-H. He knew that it was pretty crowded in central sections;
          and that the tunnel gave on to those the central sections; that the
          spectators would want to get to positions as quickly as possible; and
          that they would take the obvious, easiest route to terraces. He did not
          then think of the tunnel. He might then have given instructions to close
          the tunnel, but he did not because he did not think of the risk. (It is
          submitted that this is an admission to Caldwell/Lawrence recklessness,
          and that the jury would be entitled to treat this as an admission of gross
          negligence manslaughter.)

          Page 47; DD accepted that he was concerned at the possible effects of
          opening the gates would have on the terraces;

          Page 52A-C; DD made observations about the crowds entering Gate C;
          “When I looked at the compilation I saw people walking in, orderly, not
          rushing, not charging towards a particular point.”

          Page 92; DD accepted he made a mistake in not giving an instruction to
          close off the tunnel.

          Page 112; DD apparently accepted that he failed to tell Kelly of the FA
          that he had ordered the gates to be opened.

26/5/89   Page 16 DD accepted that it was a mistake to have opened the gate
          without warning others inside.

          Page 18-19; DD accepted that he had asked officers to intercept those
          entering through the open Gate A about 2.53 pm to prevent them
          entering the all-seater stands, but had not asked them to intercept those
          entering Gate C.

          Page 21; DD accepted that it was even more important [therefore] to
          have a “reception committee” for those entering Gate C.

          Page 24; DD accepted misleading Kelly, and “everyone on the
          afternoon in question.” as to the decision to open the gates, including
          Sheffield Wednesday officials;

          Page 31; DD accepted that he had wrongly blamed spectators entering
          gate C for causing the deaths.

          Page 53; DD accepted that he failed to tell Assistant Chief Constable

                                   7
                   Jackson when he first entered the control room that he gave the order
                   for the gates to be opened.

                   Pages 46-52; DD accepted that he misled various people by saying, or
                   allowing them to believe, that the supporters had forced the gates,
                   rather than explaining that he had ordered them to be opened. The
                   persons deceived included representatives of the Sheffield club; Mr
                   Kelly and Mr Kirton of the FA; and Assistant Chief Constable Jackson.

29   Tavlor Inquiry: Murray

     26/5/89       Page 63; Murray had occupied the same role in 1988 and 1989 and had
                   written a report on the match afterwards, in May 1988. He had taken a
                   leading part in policing a Hillsborough game between Sheffield
                   Wednesday and Liverpool in January 1989. ( His involvement was also
                   well summarised in cross-examination at 1st June 1989, page 1, by Mr
                   Woodward: he had been involved in the 1988 semi-final; the review of
                   the 1988 semi-final; and the planning and preparation for the 1989
                   semi-final.)

                   Page 67; The pens were often filled in accordance with directions from
                   the Control Box. Officers would direct fans down the tunnel. This did
                   not apply to the semi-final, however. No officers were briefed to keep
                   a specific eye on the filling of pens 3 and 4. BM’s role was overall
                   charge of the Control Room and adviser to Duckenfield.

                   Page 68D-E; BM said his role was as “adviser” to Duckenfield.. The
                   policy was to let the fans “find their own level”

                   Page 75B. BM said the policy was to let the supporters “find their own
                   level” and thought there were gates which supporters used to move
                   between pens.

                   Page 92; BM conceded that no instruction was given to close off the
                   tunnel to any police officers or stewards, and that there may have been
                   four requests to open the gates. The request was to open the gates “in
                   the plural”.

                   Page 93E-H. (The jury would be entitled, against the background
                   evidence of the videotape and photographs, to convict Murray on the
                   basis of these answers alone.) He admitted to having given no thought
                   to an obvious risk, and not having considered where the spectators
                   were going to go after Gate C was opened. The basis of negligence is
                   foreseeability, not whether the risk was in fact foreseen.

                           “When I saw the gates opened I was obviously looking in that
                           [pens 3 and 4] direction”.

                                           8
                  It was put to him that “the obvious place to for them to go was down
                  the tunnel:

                         “It is now that I know. I know the ground. I know where the
                         tunnel is. I know where C gate is. I had never drawn any sort of
                         realisation that people coming through C gate would go
                         towards the tunnel or whatever, I have never envisaged C gate
                         as an entry gate of course, but the two things did not register,
                         did not tie up. It seemed so obvious after the event but certainly
                         I gave it no thought and no realisation before.”

                  The attitude of mind admitted by Murray is an admission to
                  Caldwell/Lawrence recklessness, and a jury would be entitled to regard
                  these admissions as admissions to gross negligence manslaughter.

                  Page 118D-H; BM emphasised that he thought that fans could move
                  from pen to pen. However, he conceded that pens 3 and 4 filled up first
                  because they were popular; and they tended to fill up to the back. It is
                  submitted that his assertions that supporters could walk through the
                  gates between the pens are meaningless and irrelevant, when thousands
                  were pouring through gates that had been opened to transfer crushed
                  people from one place to another.

     1/6/89       Page 1; BM accepted that he was involved in policing and preparation
                  in 1988.

                  Page 3 BM accepted that photographic evidence show the pens look
                  full at 2.46pm.

30   Inquest: David Duckenfield

     12/3/91      Page 45; DD accepts that the mood of the crowd before the game, and
                  before he went to the ground, was good. (See also Sir Maurice Kay,
                  witness (V2 ).

                  Page 45; If injury could be avoided by postponing kick-off, “you would
                  consider that seriously”.

                  Page 68E; The directing of spectators was a joint responsibility
                  between police and club.

                  Page 73E-F ; He knew where the tunnel was in relation to the
                  turnstiles.

                  Page 78D-E ; He said that the “find your own level” system had
                  worked well before


                                          9
                     Page 77D-E; BM accepts that he could have got manpower to close off
                     the tunnels had he considered the matter

32   The briefing notes.

             At Divider 26 of Committal File 1 are notes of briefings held by the Chief
             Constable on 16th, 17th and 19th April 1989. They were referred to in a
             statement of DS Carr, at Divider 20, and were produced by Mr Daines,
             Assistant Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police, on 24th May 1999
             following the service on him of a witness summons dated 10th May 1999.

33           The prosecution seeks to rely on the absence of any explanation by Duckenfield
             of his false allegation that the spectators had forced the gates, and the
             recognition by all present as to the existence of previous practice as to closure
             of the tunnel. These statements are admissible under section 24 of the Criminal
             Justice Act 1988, and, in the case of Mr Duckenfield, as admissions against
             interest. See, in particular.

             DD; 16/4, page 17; DD knows that an exit Gate was opened before in 1979;

             DD; 17/4, page 3. DD knows of a set responsibility for diverting the
             spectators from the pens. (The Operational Order he refers to (File 2, Divider
             17) does not, however, support his claim that the responsibility was that of
             Inspector White)

             Nesbitt; page 3; the top of the tunnel in 1988 was solid with horses.

             DD page 6; “The Order has officers listed, and once that central tunnel
             becomes full, the officers control that and it is shut off and people directed to
             the wings.”

             Chief Constable, page 7; “You were well aware that there were contingencies
             to deal with the filled stand, i.e. the shutting off of the tunnel.”

             19/4, page 1; “There is nothing in the operational order nor the briefings about
             contingency for police protection of the tunnel to restrict or prevent spectator
             entry. Officers remembered (particularly Chief Inspector Creaser) that in
             previous years the above has been done by the use of horses and static lines
             (referred to as Supt Freeman’s policy)”

34   It is submitted that the existence of this previous practice is relevant in showing that
      the disaster was both foreseeable and guarded against; and that the defendants were
      both untruthful in affecting ignorance at the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest as to the
      existence of a previous system. They decided after these briefings to change their
      accounts, obviously in an attempt to suggest that they had not been negligent.

35   The statements of the defendants in May 1989 (Committal File 1, dividers 24 and 25),

                                              11
                  Page 83; He said that a “reasonably intelligent individual” in pens 3 and
                  4 who wanted to get into a side pen through the gate at the back of his
                  crowded pen would “immediately... retrace his steps.”

     13/3/91      Page 1C-D; He had no knowledge of the tunnel having been closed in
                  1988.

                  Page 40G-42C; DD, having recognised, as did the Coroner, that
                  answers to questions as to his assertions that the supporters had broken
                  down the gates were incriminating, said that he could not recall what he
                  had said. This was a lie. The assertions were unforgettable.

31   Inquest: Bernard Murray

     11/3/91      Page 3C-E; BM admitted that when Gate A was opened, he did indeed
                  consider that ticketless fans would go to the stand and cause
                  difficulties.

                  Page 17E-F ; It was right to use the same system in 1989 as in 1988.

                  Page 22D-E he was adviser to DD.

                  Page 3 1B-C; He accepted that he had full authority to take steps to
                  avoid the risk to occupants of the ground as a result of opening the
                  gates, had he recognised such a risk. He would not have been
                  dependent on Duckenfield’s authorisation for any such steps.

                  Page 47B-G; The police chose to fill up the pens one by one at league
                  games, but the whole terrace was open to the spectators at a cup semi­
                  final.

                  Page 48B-C; The police had a duty to monitor the pens.

                  Page 55F, asked about a system before 1989 for diverting spectators
                  from the central pens, BM replied;

                          “What system is that, sir?”

                  Page 58B-C ; BM repeated that he knew of no system in advance for
                  closing off the central pens.

                  Page 75F-G; BM accepted that five minutes elapsed between the first
                  request of Superintendent Marshall at 2.47 and the order to open the
                  gates at 2.52pm.

                  Page 76A-B; BM accepted that the request to open Gate A came after
                  Gate C was opened.

                                           10
       and the contents of the interview of Murray with West Midlands police in June 1990,
       are relied on to show that both defendants had taken a conscious decision to omit any
       reference to Mr Duckenfield’s lies about the circumstances in which the gates became
       open; and of the experience, and any knowledge of the 1988 closure and the previous
       policy of closing the tunnel.

36     Statements of South Yorkshire police. Whether or not the police officers attend to give
       evidence, the following passages of the statements will be relied on under section 24 as
       evidence of the facts contained therein. Some of the statements are marked; they were
       provided in this form by the Home Office when copies were also place in the House of
       Commons library in 1998 at the insistence of the Home Secretary. Originals have been
       requested from Mr Daines of the South Yorkshire police.

       Lang (File 1/17). The whole of the statement of 2nd June 1989, and the statement of
       30th June 1990.

       Crawford (File 1/18). The statement in the middle of page 3 witness statement of
       28/4/89, marked with lines in the margin, referring to the usual practice of having
       serials to divert the spectators from the central pens; the passage is omitted from his
       statement of 25/5/89.

       Creaser (Tile 1/19Y The underlined passage at page 3 of his marked statement of
       3/5/89, omitted from the unmarked undated statement, and the unmarked statement
       dated 25/5/89

       Higgins (File 1/21). The statement of 2/6/89, asserting that under normal
       circumstances, instruction came from an Inspector or force control to close the tunnel
       to pens 3 and 4.

       White (File 1/22). The deleted portions at page 1 and “Additional Points arising”in his
       statement of 2/5/89. His statement of 6/5/89 dealing with the previous practice of
       closing the tunnel. The copy provided by South Yorkshire police is very poor. An
       attempt has been made on the statement provided in File 1 to reconstruct it. The
       original is still awaited from South Yorkshire police.

       Guest (File 1/23). The marked passage on page 2 of his witness statement of 10/5/89.

37     These statements are of obvious relevance to the question of foresight and
       foreseeability of risk, and to the defendants’ credibility on the “find your own level”
       assertions they repeatedly made. Section 24 is clearly appropriate for such statements,
       especially those given by officers and later excised under the instructions of others.

38     It is submitted that there is a powerful prima facie case against both defendants.

Abuse o f process

39     Submissions and material to rebut the allegation that the prosecution is abusing the

                                               12
      process of the court will be produced when an outline of the defence material and
      evidence is presented. The defence know the general nature of the prosecution
      approach from:

              (a) the material supplied to the CPS in August, September and October 1998,
              in answer to the very similar argument that public interest factors required the
              termination of the prosecution; and

              (b) the material provided by the prosecution to the Divisional Court in March
              1999 in the course of the defendants’ unsuccessful attempt to judicially review
              the decision of the CPS not to discontinue the case.


3 Raymond Buildings
Gray’s Inn
London WC1



8 June 1999                                                 Alun Jones QC




                                                             Hugh Davies
