                                                                as
                                                               ^JVDED


                                 TH E FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIM ITED
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 I |G. T e le p h o n e 0253 7 2 9 4 2 1. T ele x 67675. Fax 0253 724786               Secretary |. D. D e n t


2/5930                                                                                       13th July, 1989


TO ALL CLUBS


Dear Secretary,
                                          LOCAL PLANS - 1989/90 SEASON

    New Regulation 90 (formerly 91) and Appendix 'C' (Crowd Control Measures)


     I am sure you will appreciate that, in the aftermath of the tragic events
at Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989, it is essential that Local Plans for dealing
with the safety and control of spectators on match days are examined closely and,
where necessary, revised in time for the start of the next season.

     You are requested, therefore, to review your current Local Plan in
consultation with your local police, fire service, ambulance service, local authority
and any other organisation with an interest, and submit a new plan by 19th August,
1989. A revised guide on the contents of a Local Plan is attached. This is not
exhaustive and clubs are invited to include any matters not covered in the guide.

      As a m atter of advice, it is suggested that particular attention is paid to
those sections of the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds that deal
specifically with "Management Responsibilities". Notably, the duties of the
nominated Safety Officer; appointment, duties and training of stewards; emergency
procedures and provision of first aid facilities (including attendance of qualified
medical personnel). A League memorandum on the subject of first aid facilities
at grounds was circulated on Monday, 10th July, 1989.
      Please give this m atter your urgent attention. Should you require advice
or assistance please contact either Chris Whalley or Jack Crawford.

                                                         Yours sincerely,




                                                                 Dent,
                                                            SECRETARY.




                 Ail correspondence to b e addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
                                    LOCAL PLANS



Each club is required to submit details of its own plan for dealing with crowd
control before, during and after matches.   This should be determined after due
consultation with the local police and local authority and should take account of
the following points:-


1.   Ground Plan


     Submit architect's plan(s) of stadium, indicating seats, terraces, entrances/
     exits, turnstiles, service areas and amenities, segregation measures,
     membership/family areas, perimeter fencing, C.C.T.V., police control, first
     aid posts and access to pitch for emergency vehicles.


     Submit map indicating location of ground in relation to surrounding areas,
     and showing car and coach parking facilities (home and away), railway
     stations, etc.


     Submit copy of Safety Certificate issued by local authority, and provide
     details of any revised requirements.


2.   Stadium Operation


     Determine policy for policing and stewarding, including match categorisation,
     and provide appropriate details.


     Provide details of turnstile operation in relation to ground capacity, indicate
     system for determining capacities in pens, include details of any turnstile
     monitoring system, show emergency procedures for dealing with late arrival
     of fans.

      Determine policy regarding exclusion and/or banning orders and provide
     appropriate details.

      Determine emergency plan for dealing with evacuation of crowd, treating
      serious injury, major disaster, etc, and attach copy of plan.
Policing


Determine policy for communicating with police pre-match, match-day and
post-match, and provide appropriate details.


Provide details of CCTV system in use at ground, including arrangements for
maintenance of system.


Outline general policy regarding visiting supporters within the ground with
particular reference to any retention policy adopted.


Indicate police policy regarding reciprocal policing.


Safety Officer

Show name and position in club of designated Safety Officer.


Indicate duties of Safety Officer on match days.


Stewarding

Show name of Chief Steward and deputy and number of stewards retained.


Indicate recruitment policy, i.e., age, sex, status, etc.


Give details of stewards' duties, include how instructions are given.


Give details of stewards' training, show frequency, etc.


Provide details of communication with stewards on match-days.

Outline policy regarding reciprocal stewarding.


First Aid Arrangements


Indicate arrangements for first aid cover on match days, showing numbers,
source, liaison, etc.


List equipment available and show emergency procedures, i.e., ambulance cover,
etc.
                                            -   3   -




 7.   Segregation Procedures


      Detail arrangements for the segregation of home and away supporters, both
      inside and outside the ground.


 8.   Public Address System


      Give details of public address system; indicate whether system covers outside
      the ground.


 9.   Membership/ Family Areas


      Give details of any membership or family areas within the ground.


10.   Intelligence Gathering


      Show procedure for estimating the number of travelling supporters, mode
      of transport, previous experience with specific opponents.


11.   Security Of Players And Match Officials


      Indicate the arrangements for the security of players and match officials:-


      a)   entering and leaving the ground
      b)   entering and leaving the field
      c)   car and coach parking


12.   Ground Regulations


      Consider whether any additional ground regulations are required to standard
      list and provide appropriate details.


13.   Alcohol


      Submit details of licensing arrangements and outlets; indicate policy of club;
      has club been refused Exemption Certificate?
                                          -   4   -




14.   Admission Prices


      Determine scale of admission charges your club intends to operate and provide
      details including prices for seats, terraces, season tickets, juveniles/O.A.P.s,
      family areas, membership areas, etc.


15.   Fixtures


      Outline preferred pairings, choice of midweek days, special requests by police,
      etc.


16.   Cup Matches


      Consider what factors determine date and kick-off time, and provide
      appropriate details, e.g., competition rules, neighbouring matches, police
      availability, etc.


      Consider admission prices and provide 'appropriate details.


      Bearing in mind the competition rules, determine visitors' allocation of
      tickets and provide appropriate details.


17.   All Ticket Matches


      Outline policy regarding use of all-ticket matches.


18.   Sale Of Tickets


      In the interests of segregation, determine policy for selling tickets and provide
      appropriate details of:-


      a)     how you deal with block bookings (personal callers and postal
             applications)
      b)     in normal circumstances, how far in advance are tickets made available
             and are bookings taken
      c)     what policy is employed to identify applicants, e.g., home fan, away
             fan, ticket tout
      d)     what policy is employed for selling tickets on match day
      e)     what policy is employed when you are the away club and are any
             restrictions imposed e.g., through travel club only
      f)     any variation in general policy for high risk games
Travelling Supporters

Indicate any arrangements club has for monitoring its travelling supporters,
i.e., travel clubs, etc.


Supporters/Junior Supporters Clubs


Give details of any Supporters Clubs linked with the club, show liaison with
these clubs, Director involvement, etc.


Transport Arrangements


Give details of public transport arrangements for both home and away fans,
and car/coach parking availability.   Do these vary with kick-off times, etc.


Public Relations

Show relationship with media (local and national), schools, youth organisations,
chamber of trade, licensed victuallers association, traffic commissioners, etc.


Indicate any community initiatives, e.g., Football in the Community etc., etc.
                 LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB


                         LOCAL PLANS

                      SEASON 1989/1990




Ground Plan

Attached Architect's Plans of /the Anfield Stadium indicating

(a)     Seated areas Home and Visiting Supporters     .

(b)     Terrace; area Home Supporters only

(c)     Entrance/Exits

(d)     Turnstiles

(e)     Service Areas and Amenities

(f)     Complete segregation areas for Visiting Supporters

(g)     Family Area

(h)     No perimeter fencing

(i)     CCTV Camera positions

(j)     Police Control CCTV area

(k)     Police Central Control Room

(1)     Safety Certificate currently being revised and
        will be forwarded as soon as received from Local
        Authority.
                                    1


2.   Stadium Operation

     Police The policing of the Anfield Stadium on match days is within
     the divisional boundaries of 'C' Division (Lower Lane) of the
     Merseyside Police.

     The Police at Anfield are accommodated on match days in three
     areas

     (a)      A general enquiry police room situated at the Anfield Road
              end of the Main Stand with a cell facility.

     (b)      A police room situated in the centre of the Kemlyn Road
              Stand, again with cell facility

     (c)      A police control room in an elevated position under the
              roof of the Anfield Road Stand with an excellent view of the
              stadium stands and terrace and is equipped with the
               following

                         Broadcast/Tannoy System
                         Telephone - Safety Stewards
                             "        Internal/External
                         Grainger Fire Indicator Panel
                         Crowd Control Computer and Printer
                         Automatic Gate Locking System Control
                         Loud Hailers
                         CCTV Camera Control (7 cameras)
                         Radios (3 bands)


     Policing Inside Stadium

     By mutual agreement between Police and Club, policing inside the
     Stadium is at private cost.   The basis police requirements, as
     agreed, are:-

     Totals              10 Sergeants      81 Constables

     Police Room          2                 2
     Pitch                2                20
     Control              -                 2

     Others cover cash offices, souvenir shop, turnstiles, main gate,
     etc and general patrols.

     These are based on a minimum requirement to police a crowd of 35s,000.

     The Divisional Commander (Chief Superintendent) or his deputy
     (Superintendent) is in overall charge assisted by a Communications
     Inspector and a Football Liaison Inspector.    The above numbers are
     increased when crowd numbers $re anticipated to be in excess of the
     above figures, or whien match intelligence indicates possible crowd
     disorder.

     Policing Outside Stadium

     Five territorial divisions are required to provide outside stadium
     policing with the following establishment:-

                         11 Sergeants      66 Constables
                                   2

'C     Division also provides

                     1 Sergeant         6 Constables

Operational Support Division

1 Inspector          2 Sergeants       16   Constables

Forming a reserve for rapid deployment

Mounted

1 Inspector or       2 Sergeants       16 Constables (increase as required)
Chief Inspector

Dogs

                     1 Sergeant         4 Constables (handlers)

Motor Cyclists

                     1 Sergeant        10 Constables (Traffic Control)

C.I.D.

1 Det Constable                        (Match Detective)
2 Det. Constables plus 1 Sergeant
2 Constables                           (Plain Clothes)

All the above are responsible for maintaining public order
outside the ground, and ensuring that queues are orderly.

Operation

The police operation can be divided into three phases

Pre-match arrival of supporters
Policing during the game
Dispersal of supporters after the game

Pre-Match

Liaison with both home and away clubs, other Police Football
Liaison Officers, the British Transport Police and also intelligence
in relation to previous matches.   This is all collated to indicate
the number of visiting fans anticipated, history of previous
behaviour and any known rivalry that has led to disorder in the past.
This information will include whether weapons of any description
have been known to be carried.

Close supervision is kept on arriving visiting fans, to ensure that
as far as possible, they only enter the ground at the allocated
entrances.   Visiting supporters are accommodated in an all-seated
area which is situated in the main stand end of the Anfield Road
Enclosure and is clearly marked.

There is a segregation barrier in the centre of the Anfield Road
Stand separating the visitors completely frdm the home seated
supporters with a natural break between the end of the Anfield Road
and Main Stand, which should make for easier policing of the area.
The all seated visitors' area has a total of 3059 seats serviced by
8 turnstiles with separate toilet and refreshment facilities.    This
is always ticketed and the tickets forwarded to the visiting club
for sale approximately three weeks prior to the game.   Some
travelling fans will refrain from wearing any form of identifying
colours or other favours to avoid:-
                               3


             (a)   any form of police escort and
             (b)   to enter the ground at other appointed areas

It is one of the tasks of the Duty Inspector to identify any such
breakaway groups and ensure that the police presence is maintained
in their vicinity to avoid any disorder taking place.

During the Game

Three sides of the playing area is seated and is not fenced.
The only terrace area is the Spion Kop and the barriers erected in
front of this standing enclosure were removed after Hillsborough.
A safety corridor has been installed at the front with stairways to
the pitch level.   The pitch is patrolled by police and stewards with
particular attention given to the standing area. Although the lack
of fencing around the ground has led to some attempts to run on the
pitch at the end of the games, this is mainly by youngsters of 12-14
years wishing to get close to their 1heros1.   The club ensured that
adequare and effective stewards are in position on the pitch
perimeter at full time, together with all police officers not
otherwise committed.   No pitch invasions take place during the
course of play.

Both ourselves and the police agree that seated accommodation does
appear to have reduced to a minimum any violence which occurred
within the ground.  Any point of disorder is quickly apparent and
the culprits easily identified and dealt With either by police arrest
or ejection from the ground under the Ground Regulations.

The Police, Fire Brigade and Ambulance Services are in the process
of concluding their emergency plans for dealing with evacuation of
crowd, treating serious injury, major disaster, etc. and will
forward this when received.

With respect to reciprocal policing the local police are not in
favour of this system, but are having a trial period to assess the
results of this policy.

Post-Game

The post-game police operation is a reverse Of the pre-game
operation, in that the segregation of rival supporters is maintained
by providing a police.escort to the visiting fans back to their
transport, and then continuing this .supervision until
en-trained at two departure points.

Prior to the end of the game, the police officers on duty outside
the stadium take up positions to cover known areas of potential
interaction between rival groups.    Some units are also detailed to
provide the escort from the ground to transport.     These are augmented
by mounted personnel and members ,of ,the Operational Support Division
(O.S.D. ).                                       V '

About 10 minutes before the final whistle, a loudspeaker         ^
announcement is made, requesting that all visitors remain in their
places at the close of play, in order that the police can escort
them to their transport.   By awaiting the departure of the majority
of home supporters from the area, the escort is made easier.    Most
visitors comply with this request, and in the majority of cases the
operation is completed without incident.   However, it has been
found that there are some team supporters who object to any
form of escort or control and endeavour to avoid this.
                                      4

Police Ejections

Identified trouble-makers are ejected from the ground via the Police
Rooms.   The ejection, especially of ring-leaders, is often
sufficient to prevent any escalation of violence.   Quick, positive
action by the Police Officers in the ground is the key.

General Conclusion

Good inter-force liaison, police escort and segregation of supporters
to and from the ground, segregation within the ground, close liaison and
co-operation between Club, Police, Local Authority and Visiting Clubs.,
together with positive policing throughout the operation, will ensure
minimal contact between rival groups Of supporters and thus reduce the
possibility of incidents of disorder.

Exclusion and Banning

Some time ago we had an incident in: a Littlewoods Cup Semi-Final Tie
against Southampton when, after the final whistle, a home supportter used
threatening behaviour towards a visiting club player.     Charged and
found guilty by the Courts, the club has written to the culprit banning
him for life from entering the stadium.   This is' the first time we have
taken action of this nature.    The Police are, of course, advised
accordingly.

The Board have now agreed that, in future, any of our supporters found
guilty of misconduct will be dealt with in a similar fashion.

Turnstile Operation/Ground Capacity

No. of
turnstiles                     Area                     Capacity

    31             Spion Kop - Terrace                    16,090
    17             Main Stand - Seats                      8,773
    10             Kemlyn Road - Seats                     6,494
     8             Paddock Enclosure - Seats               2,568
     8             Anfield Road Enclosure - Seats          2,392
     8             Anfield Road Enclosure - Seats          3,059
                    (Visitors)




    82       ‘                                            39,376


     1             Entrance Paddock.Wheelchairs

Controlling Area Capacity

To monitor the number of spectators who enter each of the above areas is
by computer control and this is available to our Certificate Holder at
the club control centre.   This equipment records .each individual who
passes through each turnstile and records the total number of people
through that particular turnstile, together with the accumulative total
in each particular area listed above.   When each area is near capacity a
distinctive audible signal sounds in the relevant turnstile giving the
Gatemen, Police and-Stewards timely warning to close the turnstiles, thus
avoiding the possibility of exceeding the capacity specified.      59% of
the stadium is seated and for all league ,games these areas are ticketed
and this, of course, also controls the capacity.      A print out can be
obtained at the end of the throughput of e a c h individual turnstile and
the totals of each individual section.    A similar crowd control computer
is situated in the Police Control Room for their guidance.
                                      5

     Telephone links to 23 key points around the stadium are manned throughout
     the period spectators are inside the ground from a central point on a
     completely separate system. • There sire also 8 hand radio links with
     Safety Certificate Holder, Police and Chief Stewards.    Four loud hailers
     are also available if required.    A colour CCTV monitor is used at this
     central point to enable officials to scan crowd movement and control
     inside and outside the stadium..

3.   Policing

     Almost daily communication is maintained with the Police Football Liaison
     Officer on sales of match tickets, anticipated match attendance,
     numbers of travelling visiting supporters and method of travel.     Any
     unusual happenings on the da y , such as any hand-outs at the turnstiles or
     collections for charitable organisations.     Constant liaison during
     the match and post-match critique, including any arrests inside and
     outside the stadium and/or any ejections from the ground.     We currently
     have 7 CCTV cameras positioned around the stadium - 4 outside and 3
     inside.   In addition, the Police use a tripod-mounted CCTV equipment for
     anti-hooliganism, which is shared with our Everton neighbour.     All
     CCTV cameras are operated by the Police.      A maintenance agreement for
     all the CCTV system is held with Cheshire Communications, who carried out
     the recommendation from a Home Office report following a recent inspection
     of the system by Andrew Ford.

4.   Stewarding

     Under the terms of our General Safety Certificate and the Safety of
     Sports Grounds Act 1975, coupled with the recommendation of the
     Popplewell Report and the subsequent Interim Report by Lord Justice Taylor,
     we employ in excess of 220 stewards per first team game.  Our Certificate
     calls for a minimum of 116 stewards, which are split into 4 categories
     with an overall Head Steward and Deputy.   Mr. P. O'Brien is Chief      Steward
     and Mr. I. Nelson is his Deputy.

     Briefly, we have Exit Stewards who are present at all locked closed
     exit gates/doors giving egress from enclosures.    Relief Exit Stewards to
     assist and relieve the Exit Stewards if' and when required.    Crowd
     Stewards to direct, assist and control the public entering, within ^nd
     leaving the stadium.    Safety stewards Who patrol constantly and.
     regularly throughout the period of certified use, that part of the. stadium
     to which they are assigned, being traihed by the local Fire Brigade in
     fire fighting equipment and drill.

     Emergency evaucation drill is at least twice-yearly carried out by the
     club and, as requested by the Police Authority during the period the
     stadium is occupied (this happens about 4 times per season).   The above
     is given in more detail within the Safety Certificate requirements,
     plus attached written instructions to the relevant stewards.
     Stewards receive a verbal instruction on arrival by the Chief Steward or
     his Deputy and stewards' instructipn and training include sessions      inthe
     months of August and January each year, addressed by representatives
     of the Local Authority, the Police, Fire Authority, Ambulance Service and
     Director and Staff of the Club.   This includes exercises of procedures
     for dealing smoothly and promptly with emergencies, especially the
     evacuation of the stadium.

     Steward recruitment is by recommendation or letter application and
     predominently are males over 18 years and under 65 years.   Reciprocal
     stewarding is not encouraged except when showing people to numbered seats
     only.
                                     6



 5•    Segregation

       The away visiting supporters have accommodation in the Anfield Road Stand,
       which is all seated and is completely segregated from home supporters and
       clearly marked.   Capacity is 3059-   This enclosure has separate
       turnstile entrances, refreshment, toilet and programme facilities.  This
       area is always placed on ticket admission only and tickets are forwarded
       to the Visitors, as requested.

 6.   Family Section

      We have an area in our Anfield Road Enclosure for Adult/Child only, which
      can accommodate 1243 seated people, of which 1000 are season ticket
      holders.   This area is ticketed for all league games.   Tickets are sold
      19 days before a game and have a concessionary price for the child
      (Adult £7.00, Child £2.50).   The child should be under 16 years of age.

 7•   Intelligence Gathering

      Covered in previous heading of 'Policing1.

      Constant communication with Police and visiting clubs, and past
      experience in estimating the number of visiting fans and any anticipated
      problems.

 8.   Security of Players and Match Officials

      Visiting team coach is normally escorted from a motorway junctioh point
      to and from the ground by the Police, under the control of the Football
      Liaison Officer, or from a nearby hotel.    The club have a private car
      park and the visiting coach and officials' par(s) are accommodated in
      this private area.

      On arrival at the ground the visiting .team coach is escorted to the
      Players' Entrance, where we have a portable canopy which enables players
      to walk directly from the coach doorway into the Players' Entry Door
      via the canopy.

      On the playing area the players' tunnel leads directly onto the pitch
      leaving very little space for contact with supporters and this area is
      manned by police and stewards when players and officials enter and
      leave the playing area.

 9•   Ground Regulations

      The club consider that the standard list of ground regulations issued by
      the League are adequate and are displayed around the stadium.

10.   Alcohol

      Following the Heysel Stadium Disaster in Brussels, no alcohol is sold in
      the stadium with the exception of the Members' Only Stand in Kemlyn Road
      and a private arrangement with sponsors under strict supervision, not
      visible to the general public or playing area, but these bars are
      closed whilst the match is in progress.     The Police advise that although
      local licensed premises.are.open prior to the game, and are much
      frequented, the incidence of alcohol related offences detected by the
      Police are low, and it is not regarded .that this is a contributory factor
      to violence within the stadium.
Admission Prices


                            Season 1989/1990

                              Season Ticket Price
Area                      Before 21/6    After 21/6      Match Day Price

Seated

Main Stand                  £120.00        £ 125.00           £8.00

Kemlyn Road                  £120.00       £ 125.00           £8.00

Paddock                      £120.00       £125.00            £8.00

Anfield Road (LFC)           £105.00       £110.00            £7-50

Anfield Road Adult           £105.00       £110.00            £7.00
             Child            £40.00        £42.00            £2.50

Anfield Road Visitors           -                -            £7.50

Main Stand Wing Section         -                -            £5; 00

Main Stand Senior Citizen                                     £3.50

Paddock Wheelchair            £50.00           £50.00         £3-00


Terrace Area

Spion Kop LFC Adult           £60.00           £65.00         £4.00

Spion Kop Junior &              -                -            £ 2.50
  Senior Citizen

Spion Kop Adult               £60.00           £65.00          £4.00
          Child               £40.00           £42.00          £2.50


Fixtures

We have, on several occasions, brought possible problem matches forward
to morning kick-off and this has proved to be very successful.
In recent seasons our home game with Manchester United has been
something of a problem fixture.   However, recent T.V. date alterations
have now been agreed and this fixture has been moved to Saturday,
23rd December, 1989, with a 12.30 *>.m. kick-off.  Live television
matches with top teams played on Sundays has helped to reduce the demand
for these all-ticket matches.   The entire Anfield Road Enclosure is
allocated to the visitors for Cup games, giving an allocation of 5451
seats in a completely segregated area.

Early kick-off's are planned toavoid conflict with other sporting
events such as the Grand National races at nearby Aintree.          >

Cup Matches

Should both Everton and ourselves get drawn at home on the same
Saturday in F.A. Cup competitions, by mutual agreement with the F.A.,
Everton and Police, different days or kick-off times would apply according
                                     8


      the away team and support anticipated, or cover by television
      companies.    Similar change of replay dates in the case of ourselves
      and Everton would automatically be arranged as necessary, or with
      other Cup Competitions.    We recently experienced difficulty when
      drawn awayvfWigan Athletic in a Littlewoods Cup fie and the Police;
      at Wigan refused permission to play there on safety grounds.
      Subsequently it was agreed to play the fixture at Anfield.
      We would envisage similar problems in the future when drawn
      against clubs with small capacities..

14.   All-Ticket Matches

      All ticket matches would apply with the appropriate fixtures such as
      local derby games with Everton and Manchester United, etc. and any
      potential sell-out or known support clubs, always, of course,
      with agreement and consent of the Police.

15•   Sale of Tickets

      All seats are ticketed for league-fixtures and most cup games, with very
      few exceptions, and when necessary the home ground area is also
      ticketed.   The visitors' seated area is always ticketed and these are
      forwarded to the visiting club for sale.   Should any tickets be'
      returned they will be placed on the appropriate visitors' turnstiles
      only on the day or evening of the match about 2 hours prior to kick-off,
      to enable the Police to scrutinize that only visiting fans are allowed
      into the Visitors' Section.

      Tickets are available from our Ticket Office for pQStal applicants 19
      days prior to the fixture or 12 days prior to personal applicants,.
      The idea of selling earlier by post is an attempt to combat the ticket
      tputs.   Tickets are sold by a computer ticket printing system,
      together with accompanied VDU screen for operator and customer■visual
      selection.

      Block bookings are received mainly from groups of. children and
      organised parties such as schools, cubs/scouts and young football teams,
      who make the once, twice or more seasonal pilgrimage to Anfield.

      Many of the ticket applicants are known to the Ticket Office personnel
      and also the local ticket tours, who receive no service, despite the
      various and devious methods they attempt to employ to obtain tickets.

      Any unsold tickets on match days are sold from our Match Day Ticket
      Office and appropriate turnstiles to facilitate quick and easy entry.

      The quantity of tickets received from the away club is usually small
      and these are, in general, sold to our Season Ticket Holders and Travel
      Club Members.

      Anticipated sell-out fixtures at Anfield, or high risk games, would
      be all-ticket and to enable regular supporters to receive preference,
      at various matches prior to the event, 'priority' or 'cup tie'
      vouchers would be given out at the turnstiles to the paying customers,
      or the stand ticket holders would be requested to retain their ticket
      stub to enable them to purchase appropriate tickets for that particular
      game .
Transport Arrangements

Merseybus Transport run a shuttle service from the City Railway Station
to and from the ground at a price of £1.00 return. . There are nearby
car parking facilities for the private vehcile and coaches as shown
on the attached map.   This service is underwritten by the club.


Public Relations and Communications

We have a Visitors Centre Museum which,is open to the public at a small
charge by arrangement.   The Centre captures the history and success
of the club, from the beginning to the present day, with exhibits,
memorabilia, audio and video and.a visit to part of the stadium.
Other activities include local senior citizens being invited to the
club on a monthly basis to a free tea dance, bingo session,etc.

Fixtures and ticket sale arrangements are widely advertised by all
methods of communication, i.e. tannoy, programme, taped phone-in
information, local radio (City &nd Merseyside), local press and, of
course, Clubcall.

Supporters/Junior Supporters Clubs

Meetings with representatives from the Football Supporters Association
are held when it is felt necessary by either party to discuss any
relaverrt matter arising.  Irrespective, a minimum of 4/5 meetings
will take place throughout a 12 month period.'   Directors and
Officials are in attendance at these discussions..

First Aid Facilities

The club had 2 First Aid Rooms, fully equipped, prior to Hillsborough
and following the tragic events it was decided to re-site and extend
1 of these rooms.   On match days the club therefore have the
following First Aid Facilities:-

             2 fully equipped rooms
             1 Doctor (other than club doctor)
             3 fully-equipped ambulance (1 St. John, 2 Metropolitan)
            42 fully trained first aiders
Facility for Ambulance to drive directly onto the playing area.
Safety Officer

The club are currently interviewing candidates for the position of
Safety Officer.   The Club Safety Certificate Holder is
Mr. P.B. Robinson, who is responsible for club safety measures.

Public Address System.

The public address system is audible throughout the Stadium.
There is also a facility to cover supporters outside the stadium in
the Main Stand/Paddock area.    Consultation with the Police on other
outside areas of the stadium is' being considered.

Membership Area

The Kemlyn Road Stand, which seats over 6,000 people is a Members'
Only Stand.

Travelling Supporters

The club organise a Travel Club Membership and apart from Season
Ticket Holders the travel club are given preference to purchase
tickets for away matches.   Coaches are arranged and stewards on
board monitor the behaviour of the members.
