               Adlington - v - David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray

Ruling

This case concerns the tragic events which took place on the 15 April 1989 during a
F.A. Cup Semi-Final Soccer Match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at
Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield the home of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
Play was stopped after 6 mins when it was realised that Liverpool Spectators on the
Standing Terrace at the Leppings Lane end of the ground had been seriously
crushed. 95 people died, over 400 required hospital treatment. In 1993 a 96th victim
died.


There followed a series of investigations and other enquiries. L.J. Taylor conducted
a public enquiry for which the West Midlands police collected a large amount of
evidence. The Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) considered criminal charges
against police officers and others.    The Police Complaints Authority considered
complaints against senior police officers.   There was a coroner’s inquest whose
conduct was itself later considered by the Divisional Court. These enquiries and the
inquest and the hearing in the Divisional Court covered the period from 1989 to
1993.    L.J. Stuart-Smith carried out a scrutiny in 1997, the conclusions of which I
shall return to later.


Private prosecutions began in Leeds Magistrates’ Court in July of 1998 with the
laying of informations against David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray.             Each
defendant now faces two allegations of manslaughter and an allegation of
misfeasance of public office.   David Duckenfield also faced a further allegation of
perverting the course of justice which in the meantime has been discharged. The
Defendant’s first appeared at Leeds Magistrates’ Court on the 20 August 1998 when
it was made clear that a section 6(1) ‘old style’ committal would be necessary in this
case.    It subsequently became apparent that the defendants would make an
application to stay these proceedings on the grounds that in all the circumstances
they are so unfair as to amount to an abuse of process. This application has now
been made and has been taken as a preliminary and discrete point before the
committal proceedings.    I have heard evidence and submissions taking five days
  from Monday 5th to Friday 9th July. I have taken time to consider my ruling and give
  it today Thursday 15th July.


  The Law


  It was agreed by Counsel that the Magistrates’ Court whether conducting a summary
  trial or acting as examining magistrates has power to stay proceedings on the basis
  of an abuse of process. I have been referred to numerous authorities on this topic
  and I am most grateful to all Counsel for their assistance.          The power of the
  magistrates’ court has been refined over the years. In R - v - Derby Crown Court
  ex-parte Brooks (1984) 80CR.APP.R.164, the Lord Chief Justice said at page 168


  “The power to stop a prosecution arises only when it is an abuse of the process of
  the court.    It may be an abuse of process if either a) the prosecution have
  manipulated or misused the process of the court so as to deprive the defendant of a
  protection provided by the law or to take unfair advantage of a technicality, or b) on
  the balance of probability the defendant has been or will be prejudiced in the
  preparation or conduct of his defence by delay on the part o f the prosecution which
  is unjustifiable.   For example, not due to the complexity of the enquiry and
- preparation o f the prosecution case, or to the action of the defendant or his co­
  accused, or the genuine difficulty in affecting service.    We doubt whether the other
  epithets which are sometimes used in relation to delay, such as “unconscionable”,
  11inordinate” or “oppressive" do more than add an emotive tone to an already
  sufficiently difficult problem."


  Further assistance was given in the case of R - v - Telford Justices ex-parte Badhan
  (1991) 2Q.B.78 when Mann L.J. said at page 90


  “ We emphasise that the power which the Justices have is one to prevent an abuse of
  process. They have no power to refuse to embark on an enquiry because they think
  that a prosecution should not have been brought because it is for example, “mean-
  minded'’, “petty", or emanated by personal hostility.      It is for this reason that the
  powers of the justices are said to be “very strictly confined".”




                                                                                         2
and on page 91


“as in a case of delay, we think the onus will normally be on the accused to show
that on the balance of probability a fair trial is now impossible. How the accused is to
discharge the onus upon him must depend on all the circumstances of the case.
Thus, he may find his task more difficult in a case wholly dependent on
contemporary and available documents than he would in a case such as is the
present which is dependent wholly upon a late complaint and oral testimony.


In R - V - Horseferry Road Magistrates’ Court ex parte Bennett (1994) 1A.C.42
House of Lords, Lord Griffiths gave yet further guidance to the Magistrates’ Court at
page 62. He said


“the power has recently and most comprehensively been considered and affirmed by
the divisional court (in the Badhan case.) Provided it is appreciated by magistrates
that this is a power to be most sparingly exercised, of which they have received more
than sufficient judicial w arning     it appears to me to be a beneficial development
and I am unpersuaded that there are any sufficient reasons to overrule a long line of
authority developed by successive Lord Chief Justices and Judges in the Divisional
Court who are daily in much closer touch with the work in the magistrates’ court than
your Lordships.     Nor do I see any force in an argument developed by the
respondents which sought to equate abuse of process with contempt of court.            I
would accordingly affirm the power of the magistrates whether sitting as committing
justices or exercising their summary jurisdiction, to exercise control over their
proceedings through an abuse of process jurisdiction.        However, in the case of
magistrates this power should be strictly confined to matters directly affecting the
fairness of the trial o f the particular accused with whom they are dealing, such as
delay or unfair manipulation of court procedures.    Although it may be convenient to
label the wider supervisory jurisdiction with which we are concerned in this appeal
under the head o f abuse o f process, it is in fact a horse of a very different colour
from the narrower issues that arise when considering domestic criminal trial
procedures".




                                                                                       3
The one fundamental principle which arises from these authorities and many others
is one of fairness an imprecise concept and often as in the present case open to
debate.


In Tan - v - Cameron (1993) 96CR.APP.R 172 Lord Mu still at page 184 identified
the question there as


“whether it was unfair any longer to hold the defendant to account".


He stated it was a question to be considered in the round; “a single appreciation of
what is or is not unfair”.


In the unreported case of R - v - Reade Morris and Woodwiss, Mr Justice Garland
added the following propositions to the basic concept of fairness:


1     the burden of establishing unfairness rests on the defendant alleging it.


2     the standard of proof required is on the balance of probabilities, but


3     the jurisdiction to grant a stay should be regarded as exceptionaland to be
       used sparingly and only for compelling reasons.


4      in assessing the relevant degree of unfairness or prejudice a court must bear
       in mind


       i)     the power of a judge to regulate the admissibility of evidence.


       ii)    the trial process, which should ensure that the jury have any relevant
              issues placed before them.


       iii)   the power of the judge to give appropriate directions at any stage of the
              trial and, not least, in summing up.




                                                                                     4
See particularly Attorney General’s reference No. 1 of 1990 (1992) 95CAR296. I
therefore take all these matters into account.


I particularly remind myself that when I consider the concept of “fairness” I should
restrict it to matters directly affecting the fairness of the trial of these particular
accused and put aside issues which would come under the label of the “wider
supervisory jurisdiction” of the High Court.


History


It is necessary to set out the history of this case in some detail in order to understand
the arguments that are put forward by both the defendant applicants and the
prosecution. The disaster occurred on the afternoon of the 15 April 1989.          It was
captured live by BBC and other cameras and was broadcast immediately on
television and radio.   Not surprisingly the media coverage was immense from the
outset. At 9.00 am on the 16 April 1989 a debriefing took place at which Mr Wright
the Chief Constable was present. Also present were the two defendants and many
other senior and junior police officers. There was a further debriefing the following
day at which both defendants were present. The briefing notes will be referred to
later in this ruling. Also on the 17 April 1989 L.J. Taylor was appointed to conduct a
public enquiry. The terms of reference were as follows:


“to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on the 15 April
1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at
sports events”.


The hearing began on the 15 May. It continued for 31 days, concluding on the 29
June. In that period, 174 witnesses gave oral evidence, Counsels’ submissions were
delivered in writing on the 7 July and on the 14 July L.J. Taylor heard their brief oral
submissions supplementing the written argument. Witnesses were not sworn, there
was evidently no power to administer the oath.       L.J. Taylor also took into account
many written statements in addition to oral testimony.         The interim report was
published on the 4 August 1989. It was known that the statements provided to the
enquiry by the West Midlands Police had been edited. The effect of the editing has


                                                                                        5
been subject to much argument since then. Statements had initially been obtained
from police officers of the South Yorkshire Police who had been on duty on the 15
April 1989 and they included their evidence of feelings and opinion. It was thought
right to edit that evidence of feeling and opinion from the statements that were
provided to the Taylor enquiry.      Unfortunately, the tenor of the editing which has
been illustrated to me during this case shows that many adverse comments about
the control by senior police officers were removed from the statements of junior
police officers.   In the event that did not prevent Lord Taylor concluding that “the
main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control” (Interim report
paragraph 278). I consider it is unnecessary to explain the reasons for the disaster
in great detail in this ruling. In brief, David Duckenfield had been promoted to Chief
Superintendent some 21 days before the match was due to take place. He was in
overall charge of the policing operation for that day. He had no recent experience of
policing at any football match let alone a sell-out semi-final. Superintendent Murray
had the relevant recent experience and, basically was Mr Duckenfield’s right-hand
man. There was a dangerous build-up of spectators outside the turnstiles at the
Lepping’s Lane end of the ground between 2.30 and 2.45 pm for a 3.00 pm kick-off.
As a result at 2.47 pm a request was made to the police control room for permission
to open the exit gates to relieve the pressure of the build-up at the turnstiles. David
Duckenfield gave permission for the gates to be opened at 2.52 pm when pens 3
and 4 behind the Liverpool goal were already over full. Gate C was opened and a
large number of spectators entered the ground fairly quickly and made their way
through a tunnel to the rear of pens 3 and 4, immediately behind the goal. This led
to the crushing of spectators in pens 3 and 4 and the stopping of the game at 6
minutes past 3. At chapter 16 Lord Taylor gave a brief summary of the causes of the
disaster.


Paragraph 265. The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding and hence the
disaster was the failure, when Gate C was opened, to cut-off access to the central
pens which were already over full.


Paragraph 266.      They were already overfull because no safe maximum capacities
had been laid down, no attempt was made to control entry to individual pens
numerically and there was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.


                                                                                      6
The findings in an earlier paragraph are also important.


Paragraph 231. It should have been clear in the control room where there was a
view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to be closed. If
orders had been given to that effect when Gate C was opened, the fans could have
been directed to the empty areas of the wings and the disaster could still have been
averted. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.


As I have indicated the police in general have been criticised by Lord Taylor, but
David Duckenfield in particular came in for heavy criticism.


Paragraph 281.     Mr Duckenfield lent heavily on Mr Murray’s experience, between
them they misjudged the build-up at the turnstiles and did little about it until they
received Mr Marshall’s request to open the gate.     They did not, for example, check
the turnstile figures available from club control or check with Tango Units as to the
numbers still to come. They did not alert Mr Greenwood to the situation at the fringe
of his area command. They gave no instructions as to the management of the crowd
at Leppings Lane, inflexibly they declined to postpone kick-off.


Paragraph 282.     When Mr Marshall’s request came, Mr Duckenfield’s capacity to
take decisions and give orders seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last, the
opening of the gates, he failed to give necessary consequential orders to exert any
control when the disaster occurred.


Paragraph 283. Most surprisingly, he gave Mr Kelly and other’s to think that there
had been an in-rush due to Liverpool fans forcing open a gate.       This was not only
untruthful it set off a widely reported allegation against the supporters which caused
grave offence and distress.


Lord Taylor was then prepared to assume that Mr Duckenfield’s lack of candour on
that occasion was out of character.


In Paragraph 284. Lord Taylor described Mr Duckenfield as having “frozen".


                                                                                      7
Lord Taylor also criticised the police in the way in which they conducted their case at
the enquiry.


Paragraph 285. It is a matter of regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions,
the South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede that they were in any
respect at fault at what occurred.        Mr Duckenfield, under pressure o f cross
examination, apologised for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths but,
that apart, the police case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk, and to
blame the club for failing to monitor the pens.


After the interim report a large number of witness statements were sent to the DPP
for his consideration.    It became apparent that it was the edited statements which
were sent to him and of the huge number of witness statements obtained by the
West Midlands Police both from police officers and spectators at the ground, the
DPP was sent approximately 11% of those witness statements. Although it must be
the case that there was a great deal of duplication in those witness statements it is
unknown precisely upon which information the DPP subsequently made the decision
not to bring any criminal prosecutions against any police officer in this case. Two
Senior Queen’s Counsel advised the DPP in relation to this case, the advice has not
been made public.        On the 18 April 1990, Doctor Popper, the Coroner for South
Yorkshire began the first of 95 mini-inquests to decide the statutory questions as to
who each of the deceased was and when and where he or she died. He did not deal
at that stage with the remaining statutory question of how each victim died, since that
could not be answered pending the decision of the DPP as to whether or not any
prosecutions should be brought against any of those involved.


The decision by the DPP not to prosecute was taken in August of 1990. On the 19
November 1990 the inquests were resumed at Sheffield. These proceedings have
been referred to as the ‘main inquest’ since they were concerned with the question
common to all the then 95 deceased of how they came to their deaths. Around 200
witnesses gave evidence at these resumed inquests including 56 who had done so
before Lord Taylor.




                                                                                      8
On the 28 March 1991 the Jury returned verdicts of accidental death in all 95 cases,
by majorities of 9 to 2. The families of the bereaved were unhappy with the way in
which the inquests were conducted, in particular the decision of the Coroner to
impose a 3.15 pm cut-off time in relation to evidence to be called before him.
Evidence has subsequently come to light to suggest that some of the deceased were
still alive at 3.15 pm and died later.


On the 11 July        1991   the Police Complaint’s Authority directed disciplinary
proceedings against both Duckenfield and Murray for neglect of duty. In November
1991 Duckenfield retired from the Police on grounds of ill health.        Disciplinary
proceedings against him were then withdrawn and shortly afterwards the disciplinary
proceedings against Murray were also withdrawn.


In April 1992 the bereaved families approached the Attorney-General inviting him to
exercise his powers under the Coroner’s Act 1988 to apply for new inquests and that
was on the basis of evidence that had come to light since the original inquests. In
August that year the Attorney-General announced that he had declined to do so.


In April 1993, six families who had lost relations at Hillsborough were granted leave
to move for judicial review to quash the verdict of the inquests and seek a fresh
hearing. On the 5 November 1993 the Divisional Court dismissed that application.
Civil claims for compensation have been made throughout the period since the
disaster. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has not contested liability for these
claims, thought he has sought contribution from other parties.


On the 5 December 1996, Granada Television broadcast a programme entitled
“Hillsborough”. The programme presented an emotive and powerful picture of the
plight of the bereaved immediately following and in the aftermath of the tragedy. It
also suggested that there was fresh evidence, which had not previously been
considered which called into question the verdict at the inquests and perhaps some
other decisions.


On the 30 June 1997, the Secretary of State for the Home Department, the Right
Honourable Jack Straw MP, appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to' conduct a
scrutiny into whether there was any fresh evidence which may have a bearing on the
various legal procedures and decisions that had been taken. His terms of reference
were as follows:


      io ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
      Hillsborough stadium on the 15 April 1989 which was not available;


      a)       to the enquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


       b)      to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney-General for the
               purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or


       c)      to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to police
               disciplinary matters;
               and
               in relation to a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
               is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of
               State for the Home Department of a furtherpublic enquiry;          and     in
               relation to b) and c) to draw to their attention toany evidence          not
               previously considered by them which may be              relevant to their
               respective duties; and to advise whether there is       any other action
               which should be taken in the public interest.


The nature of the scrutiny was that it was not a public hearing. Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith was provided with a number of witness statements and that included the
unedited and edited statements of police officers. He was also provided with a list of
submissions made on behalf of the bereaved families which was prepared by Mr A
Jones QC       in advance of the hearing without him knowing exactlywhat Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith    had been provided with or being able to see that evidence.               The
submissions concerning new evidence centred around:


i)    video camera evidence
ii)   the 3.15 pm cut-off time in relation to the inquests




                                                                                          10
iii)   interference with witnesses which specifically related to witnesses concerned
       with the aftermath of the disaster.


The bereaved families were also given the opportunity of putting forward not only
their own submissions but witnesses they considered important and that is how a Mr
Houldsworth was put forward. He was the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club video
technician. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith read those submissions, he read a number of
witness statements and himself interviewed a total of 14 witnesses.      The Scrutiny
was published on the 18 February 1998 and is a total of 222 pages in length. Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith considered what his terms of reference meant and in relation to
evidence which was not previously available, he concluded that that meant either it
had not been given in evidence to Lord Taylor or the Coroner or that evidence had
not been considered by the DPP so long as it was not in the public domain. For the
evidence to be significant he concluded it must first be credible but then must also
differ in some important way from evidence which has already been given.            In
relation to this prosecution the evidence which was of potential significance was the
video evidence.       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith read the statements of Mr Houldsworth
and also interviewed him during the Scrutiny.


Chapter 2 paragraph 96 o f the Scrutiny sets out Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
conclusions about the evidence of Mr Houldsworth and how it affected the video
evidence. He was unable to accept that Mr Houldsworth recollection of the events
was accurate.        To further summarise L.J. Stuart-Smith’s conclusions I quote from
chapter 7 paragraph 6.          “None of the evidence I was asked to consider added
anything significant to the evidence which was available to Lord Taylor's enquiry or
to the inquests. ”


The evidence he was asked to consider included about 100 police witness
statements in their edited and unedited form in order to assess the significance of
the deletions. L.J. Stuart-Smith declined to describe the deletions as a cover up or
misleading but he did state that in a few cases it would have been preferable if the
deletions had not been made.




                                                                                    11
In April 1998 a decision was made by the Hillsborough Family Support Group
(hereinafter referred to as HFSG) to commence private prosecutions against
Duckenfield and Murray.     Initially proceedings began in South Sefton Magistrates’
Court but the defence took a jurisdictional point.         Without conceding that
jurisdictional point the prosecution withdrew those proceedings and began new
proceedings in the Leeds Magistrates’ Court.       This had the effect of delaying
proceedings for a matter of a couple of weeks only.      Informations were laid and
summons signed on the 18 July 1998 requiring the defendants Duckenfield and
Murray to attend for the first hearing on the 20 August.    Almost immediately the
Defendants made submissions to the DPP to intervene in the proceedings and
discontinue them pursuant to the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.              The
Prosecution also prepared detailed submissions. The DPP announced the decision
not to intervene on the 18 December 1998.         He gave written reasons for that
decision in a letter dated 1 February 1999. The defendants applied for a judicial
review of that decision.


The hearing was consolidated with another hearing concerning the legality and
correctness of the defendants’ funding by the South Yorkshire Police Authority. The
DPP’s decision not to intervene was upheld by the Divisional Court on 31 March
1999.


The Issues


I have already indicated the charges each defendant faces. The prosecution case
put simply is as follows:


The primary and immediate cause of the deaths was traumatic asphyxiation, caused
by the gross negligence of the two defendants in allowing severe overcrowding in
pens 3 and 4 of the west terraces to develop between 2.30 and 3.06 pm.           The
defendants were on duty in the elevated control box at the south west corner of the
ground which had clear views across the pitch along the goal line of the west end of
the ground and of the west terraces.     In addition to being able to look out of the
window and use their own eyes they had a number of monitors in the control box
from which they could observe the condition of the terraces and the Leppings Lane


                                                                                  12
entrance to the ground.   They had a zoom facility allowing them to focus on any
problem areas covered by the equipment, which included pens 3 and 4 of the
Leppings Lane terraces and the areas around and outside the turnstiles.          The
supporters of Liverpool club were allocated the north and west sides of the ground,
and arrived from Leppings Lane.


By 2.30 pm there was a very substantial crowd at the turnstiles where there was no
queuing system, and an insufficient number of turnstiles and police officers to
process the crowd. Between 2.30 and 2.45 pm the crowd grew in size more quickly
than the turnstiles could admit spectators. A press was caused by the increasing
numbers funnelling into the turnstile area, anxious to get into the ground by kick-off
time. The spectator witnesses and video tape show that the crowd was enthusiastic
and cheerful, some supporters climbed over the wall to get into the ground,
apparently to escape the crush.     Although there was some misbehaviour as the
video tape and spectator evidence illustrates there was no general misbehaviour.


At about 2.45 pm Superintendent Marshall asked for gate C to be opened to relieve
the press. At 2.45 pm that gate was opened from the inside to eject a supporter, and
a number of people came in. That gate was shut. Insistent further demands for the
gate to be opened were made as it was considered by officers near the turnstiles
that the press was a danger to life.     The risk to life at the turnstiles, which had
steadily developed from 2.15 pm was a grave crisis and the prosecution contend
required two things by 2.45 pm:


i)    an announcement to supporters inside and outside the ground by the public
      address system at the start of the game would be delayed;


ii)   that any further supporters entering the west end of the ground even if by
      turnstiles alone should be diverted from the tunnel which led to the central
      pens.


At 2.52 pm Mr Duckenfield gave an order to open the gates, gate C was opened.
Between that time and kick off at 3.00 pm many hundreds of supporters went in.
Those in the control box could or should have seen both the condition of the central


                                                                                    13
pens and the conditions at the turnstiles. When gate C was opened the central pens
numbered 3 and 4 were already full and should have been apparent to the
defendants whose responsibilities for ensuring the safety included monitoring the
pens.   Access to the pens was through the tunnel under the west stand.           If the
defendants had ordered police officers to block or close off the tunnel to pens 3 and
4, the tragedy would have been avoided.       The defendants owed a duty of care to
those in the pens, adults and children alike, and those entering the ground, to
prevent them from being crushed.       Diversion from the tunnel was a simple and
obvious step that could have been taken and should have been taken at 2.45 pm
before the request came to open the gates. It obviously should have been taken in
any event between the time of the request to open the gates and the kick-off. It was
criminally negligent not to have taken this obvious precaution between at the latest
2.45 pm and the time when the game was stopped 3.06 pm.


The prosecution therefore simply say that the defendants are guilty of manslaughter
because a) they owed the deceased a duty of care; b) that they were negligent; c)
that their negligent actions or omissions were a substantial cause of death and d)
that their negligence was of such a gravity as to amount to a crime within the
principle in R - v - Adomako (1995) 1A.C.181


“the essence o f the matter, which is supremely a jury question, is whether having
regard to the risk of death involved the conduct of the defendant was so bad in all
the circumstances as to amount in their judgement to a criminal act or omission” at
page 107.


The prosecution submit that the only apparent issue in this case can be whether the
negligence was of such a gravity as to amount to a crime.


I have set out these matters in my ruling because it is clear from the case of R - v -
Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate ex parte DPP (1992) 95CR.APP.R.9
that in order to consider prejudice particularly in relation to delay I need to consider
the issues in the case.    In their initial submissions neither Mr Clegg QC nor Mr
Harrison QC set out what the issues were and how either defendant was prejudiced
by the delay in this case. An issue then arose during argument in this way. The


                                                                                      14
prosecution has stated that its case is based upon the findings of the Taylor enquiry.
The Defence said well what about paragraph 78 which reads as follows:


“in the control room no-one noticed the overcrowding or anything amiss in pens 3
and 4 until the first fans spilt out onto the perimeter track just before kick-off. Then
the officers in command assumed that there was an attempted pitch invasion".


The prosecution apparently do not accept this particular finding and intend to put
their case in the alternative, in this way; that the defendants did notice or, in the
alternative, should have noticed the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4. In the light of that
the defence now say that the issue of what the defendants in fact saw in the pens is
a relevant issue in the case and therefore by inference what other witnesses,
particularly police officers on duty on the touch line and in the west stand themselves
saw is an important issue and that their memories on the point are bound to be
affected by the passage of time. Mr Clegg QC also argued that the decision to open
the gates was a difficult one for Duckenfield and goes to the issue of foreseeability.
He went on that in any consideration of foreseeability it was important for
Duckenfield to rely upon other people’s perception which would be difficult after 10 or
11 years. I shall now move on to deal with this and other arguments raised during
submissions.


Counsels’ Submissions


Mr Harrison expressly adopted the submissions of Mr Clegg and then expanded
upon them particularly on the topic relating to publicity. They both submitted that in
the light of the history of the case the prosecution reflected a refusal on the part of
those responsible for bringing the case to accept the decisions of various
investigations into the tragedy, including the Taylor enquiry where Duckenfield and
Murray gave evidence over a lengthy period, the decision of the DPP not to
prosecute either defendant in August 1990, the accidental death verdict of the
Coroner’s Jury and the findings of the Stuart-Smith Scrutiny. It was argued that the
findings of the Scrutiny impliedly affirmed that the decision of the DPP not to
prosecute was right and that there was no significant evidence to alter that decision.
They argued that after 10 years of enquiry, investigation, inquest and scrutiny it is


                                                                                     15
oppressive then to bring a private prosecution.            I take the use of the word
“oppressive" to mean unfair in the context of this application.


They further submitted that the essential criminality alleged by the prosecution is the
same as that which was investigated at the Taylor enquiry, that the evidence upon
which they rely is essentially the same as the evidence the DPP had in deciding not
to prosecute and that to commence private prosecutions based on the same
evidence so long after the event is unfair and would test the public confidence in and
the integrity of the system. They also submitted that the delay of 10 years is such
that a fair trial is impossible; that would be the case irrespective of any fault by the
prosecution but in any event the prosecution, they say, could and should have been
brought many years earlier than it has been.


They then submitted that in the context of delay the court should consider the
alleged breach of article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights. They both
went on to make strong submissions about the media coverage in the case; that it
had been very extensive and intense; that much of it had been instigated by the
prosecution and by that they meant the HFSG; that it was overwhelmingly prejudicial
and that there could not be a fair trial at any time in the future.


They further submitted that the Prosecutor Ann Adlington had lost all sense of
objectivity, had unfairly selected evidence upon which the prosecution rely and had
failed to consider the effect of bringing a prosecution upon either defendant.


Mr Jones submitted that the prosecution did accept the findings of the Taylor enquiry
and that was the basis of the prosecution case. He did not accept the verdict of the
Coroner’s Jury and did not accept Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny save in so far
as it supported the Taylor findings. He said that neither the prosecution nor the court
were bound by these decisions because there is no doctrine of issue estoppel in
English criminal law. He also submitted that the South Yorkshire Police had carried
out a concerted cover up, had concealed evidence, edited statements and had
misled the DPP, the Coroner’s Court and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.           He further
submitted that the onus was on the applicants to show unfairness and or oppression
and that they had not called any evidence to support their submissions. He said of


                                                                                     16
delay that the defence had not at any stage identified the issues in the case so as to
enable the court assess any prejudice the defendants may have suffered or will
suffer. He argued that the essential issue was one of gross negligence and that the
vast majority of the evidence would not be in dispute, much of it was captured on
video, witness statements were taken at the time, and therefore the issues would not
be adversely affected by the delay in this case. He argued that the delay was not
the fault of the prosecution in this case, that there were good reasons for the delay
which included; a lack of funding; the concealment of evidence; the difficulties over
disclosure and the drip feed effect of the evidence in this case. He submitted that
the publicity was not such as to render a fair trial impossible. He argued that there
were two conflicting interests of the police and the Liverpool fans both of whom had
influenced the media and that they balanced each other out to some extent.


Of necessity these are only brief summaries of careful, detailed and extensive
submissions, but further arguments put forward by both parties will be referred to in
the remainder of my ruling.


Many of these submissions have been made both by the prosecution and the
defence at various stages of this case, particularly in relation to the recent
proceedings concerning the DPPs decision not to intervene in these private
prosecutions.   .


It follows from what 1 have just said that the applicants did not call any evidence to
support their submissions of oppression or how that and the delay and the alleged
adverse publicity has directly affected the defendants.      Neither has any written
evidence of the defendants’ health, state of mind, personal circumstances or how
these proceedings have in any way affected them been put before me so I am,
therefore, only able to make proper inferences where I can. The court clearly has
power to hear evidence during an abuse of process application and ought to if either
party wishes to call evidence.   See R - v - Clerkenwell Stipendiary Magistrate ex
parte Bell (1991) 55.J.P.669.


On the other hand the prosecution has called the Prosecutor Ann Adlington to
explain various aspects of the background to this prosecution. She is a solicitor who


                                                                                    17
was working for Liverpool City Council in 1989 when the disaster took place. In 1992
she became the Solicitor for the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party and in that
capacity advised bereaved families generally in relation to all aspects of the disaster.
In August 1997 she was seconded to become the Solicitor for the HFSG.               She
explained that she had been chosen as the prosecutor as a kind of figurehead and to
avoid any clash of personalities within the HFSG had a bereaved member of the
HFSG been chosen instead.


I deal now with the various submissions in turn.


1      O ppression
       I reject the defence submission that the prosecution or this court is in any way
       bound by earlier decisions or findings, accepting as I do that there is no
       doctrine of issue estoppel in English criminal law.      See Director of Public
       Prosecutions - v - Humphrys (1977) A.C.1 House of Lords.          Regarding the
       Taylor enquiry the prosecution does accept the findings of the Taylor enquiry
       and bases its case upon them. The defence pointed to an earlier submission
       made by Mr Jones when he stated that the Taylor enquiry “almost” amounts
       to a prima facie case, but I accept Mr Jones’ response during which he
       reminded me of the terms of reference which in no way permitted Lord Justice
       Taylor to give an opinion upon anyone’s criminal responsibility let alone
       recommend criminal proceedings.       In that sense the findings of the Taylor
       enquiry do stop short of a prima facie case.


       Regarding the DPP’s decision not to prosecute, I do not know the basis upon
      which a decision was reached, I do not know what evidence the DPP was
       provided with and I have not seen the QCs advice which has not been made
       public.   I do not accept that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny implies that
      the DPP was right in its decision not to prosecute and that as a result of the
       Scrutiny no subsequent prosecution ought to be brought although I have
       borne in mind the Scrutiny as a whole.         It was further argued that it can
       amount to an abuse of process in circumstances where a prosecution is
       brought after a defendant has been informed that he will not be prosecuted.
      The defence referred to a number of authorities, including R - v - Croydon


                                                                                      18
J.J. ex parte Dean (1980) C.A.R.76 and R - v - Bloomfield (1997) 1 .C.A.R.35.
I agree with Mr Clegg when he stated that it must be a question of fact and
degree whether a private prosecution amounts to an abuse of process after a
decision by the DPP not to prosecute has been made and communicated to a
suspect. Clearly if a decision to prosecute privately is made immediately after
the decision by the DPP it will be almost impossible to establish abuse
because the effect would be to fetter the right of a private individual to
prosecute when the state declines.       Mr Clegg argues that where, however,
nine years elapses between the two decisions then the existence of
unfairness can be presumed. If it were argued that this amounts to an unfair
manipulation of the court proceedings I would reject that argument because
whatever the delay the effect would be to fetter right of a private individual to
prosecute. This point, therefore, is better left to be considered with the other
points relating to the issue of delay.


There is little I need to say about the inquest. The purpose of an inquest is
specific and the verdict of accidental death in my view does not undermine
this prosecution or in itself make it unfair.    L.J. Stuart-Smith indicated in
chapter 1 paragraph 66 that the verdicts of accidental death did not, as had
been suggested, undermine or reverse the findings of L.J. Taylor.


Regarding the Scrutiny I have already made comments about the Scrutiny in
so far as it affects the issues in this application. The terms of reference were
very specific and related to the evidence of Mr Houldsworth, video evidence
and the editing of police statements to which I shall return later.      Neither
Duckenfield nor Murray were called before the Scrutiny, and I have no
evidence as to how the fact the Scrutiny took place affected them.           It is
difficult in those circumstances to infer oppression or unfairness in relation to
this matter. The defence have argued that the failure of the prosecution to
accept the various findings can be equated with the Maxwell No.2 case
(unreported) where Mr Justice Buckley said at page 24.


“I am suggesting that if all parties have played their part and the essential
criminality alleged has been placed before a Jury who have acquitted, it


                                                                               19
should be unusual for a second trial to take place. The reason is that it would
be very likely to appear to the public that the authorities were not prepared to
accept the verdict of a jury and were determined to pursue the defendant at
whatever cost to the public purse, court time or disruption of the defendant’s
personal life, business or professional career. That must not happen. ”


That case is wholly distinguishable from the present case in that there had
already been a jury trial and the issues in the second trial were very similar,
although relating to a different transaction, essentially boiling down to a
question of the defendant’s honesty. A jury’s verdict after a very lengthy trial
cannot in my view be equated to decisions that have taken place in these
present proceedings.     The Maxwell No. 2 case is an illustration of a case
where oral evidence was given (by Kevin Maxwell’s wife) of the terrible strain
and stress suffered by the whole family. As a result Mr Justice Buckley said
this at page 27.
“Finally, an important, though not decisive consideration; fairness to the
defendants. I have mentioned the time that these criminal proceedings would
have been hanging over their heads in the event of a further trial, at least five
years, that would be so in Mr Kevin Maxwell’s case, not withstanding that in
going through the extremely lengthy trial process he gave evidence before a
jury for twenty days and not withstanding the acquittals, the disruption to
personal and business life is inevitably considerable. The stress and pain that
criminals inflict on their families is a sad but inevitable consequence of their
misdeeds.    Courts are mindful of it but obviously cannot allow it to outweigh
consideration for victims and the general public interest in punishing crime,
but I remind myself here that these defendants have been acquitted in the
circumstances I have described."


There is no similar situation in the present case, neither defendant has
already faced a criminal trial, the cases are not sufficiently similar to place any
great weight on the defendants’ submissions. Finally the defence have also
suggested that the prosecution must show that the earlier decisions were in
some way flawed. I disagree for the reasons I have already given; although
Mr Jones spent time trying to show that various people including the DPP, the


                                                                                20
    Coroner and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had been misled, in my view without
    much success.


    I should also mention that my attention has been drawn to the submissions
    made by the Defence to the DPP in their attempts to persuade the DPP to
    intervene   in   these   proceedings    and   discontinue.      The   defendant’s
    submissions to the DPP are similar to those put forward before me and failed
    to persuade the DPP to discontinue, therefore the prosecution says how can I
    come to a different decision to his where it is said he has a wider discretion
    than I.


    I have already indicated that I am not bound by earlier decisions in these
    proceedings, and it is particularly so in this instance, where it is clear from the
    DPP’s reasons that he is able to take into account the seriousness of the
    offences charged in weighing up the ‘public interest’.. I cannot take such a
    matter into consideration although as Buckley J said in Maxwell No.2 there
    are matters of “public interest” which go to the issue of “fairness” to both the
    prosecution and the defence and can properly be taken into account.


    I am not persuaded that these submissions give me grounds for staying these
    proceedings as an abuse of process.


2   Delay


    In a case involving delay the court will consider the reasons for the delay and
    the responsibility, if any, of either the prosecution or the defence for the delay.
    The court wili also consider the issues which are likely to arise at the hearing
    and the nature of the evidence which is likely to be relevant. (See Badhan). I
    have already set out the history of the case which goes some way to
    explaining the delay.     Further Ann Adlington refers to the history in her
    statement which she adopted as her evidence in chief and upon which she
    was cross-examined.       The reasons for the delay can be summarised as
    follows.




                                                                                    21
Although I would not go so far as to say that there has been a cover up, the
South Yorkshire Police have made it difficult for anyone considering a private
prosecution to obtain the evidence to bring one. I agree with L.J. Stuart-Smith
(Chapter 4 paragraph 100) that “in the days following Hillsborough the South
Yorkshire Police perceived themselves to be on the defensive. This was also
the perception of their Legal Advisers.   There was an understandable desire
not to give anything away."    Statements were edited for use at the Taylor
enquiry and for consideration by the DPP.      South Yorkshire Police via the
West Midlands Police were able to influence what evidence went before the
Coroner.    The HFSG fairly and reasonably did nothing about a private
prosecution between the DPP’s decision not to prosecute in August 1990 and
the Jury verdict in March 1991. Again, fairly and reasonably they awaited the
outcome of the disciplinary proceedings during which there was an embargo
on further disclosure of evidence and then awaited the outcome of the judicial
review of the Coroner’s inquest. After the outcome of the judicial review in
1993, Ann Adlington states at paragraph 41 of her statement that the HFSG
were demoralised and believed that they had come to the end of the legal
road. No money was available nor was there any prospect of raising it. This
was not challenged.     So even if private prosecutions were considered the
HFSG had no funds.


An approach was then made to Jimmy McGovern about making a drama
believing this to be the best way to raise public awareness. The Drama was
shown in December 1996, it did raise public awareness, there was great
interest in the media and in Parliament and the Scrutiny then followed. About
this time a memorial concert took place which raised substantial funds. The
Scrutiny was published in February 1998.       The decision to bring private
prosecutions followed in April 1998 soon after the Scrutiny was published and
further evidence had been made public in the House of Commons Library.
Once private prosecutions began the only delay has been the defendants
decision to apply to the DPP to intervene, a course of action which they are
entitled to take.   The prosecution encountered further problems concerning
disclosure from the South Yorkshire Police which was only resolved by them




                                                                             22
taking out a witness summons on A.C.C. Daines pursuant to S.97 of the
Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980.


The defence argue that private prosecutions should have been brought earlier
and ideally that is the case but I consider there are good reasons for that not
being done.     The prosecution say that the defendants themselves have
directly or indirectly contributed to the delay by participating in an alleged
cover up or by the concealment of evidence or in the lack of disclosure.
There is no evidence to support those submissions but I take the view that the
South Yorkshire Police must take some responsibility for that, not these
defendants.     I, therefore, conclude that neither party is responsible for
“unjustifiable” delay in this case.


I have already set out the issues under that heading, and in the absence of a
great deal of help from the defence on this point they appear to me to be fairly
narrow. I conclude that much of the relevant evidence relating to the issues is
contained on video tape and in transcripts of evidence at the Taylor enquiry
which took place very shortly after the disaster. The only specific prejudice
alleged by the defence concerns the possibility of calling police witnesses as
to the state of pens 3 and 4 at the relevant time and those police officers who
may have had a perception of the opening of the gates. I do not consider this
to be a strong argument because it is these defendants’ perceptions and what
they saw or ought to have seen which is important. If other officers did not
have a perception of the danger when the gates were opened, or the state of
pens 3 and 4, it could be construed as a further example of the lack of care of
the police, but it was these two defendants who had overall responsibility on
that day.   In so far as the case will depend upon the memory of witnesses,
these defendants and those witnesses will have had every reason to have the
events very much in mind since the day of the disaster. I, therefore, consider
that the prejudice caused by the delay is not so strong as to render a fair trial
impossible.


When Lord Justice McCowan said this at page 41 of the judgement in relation
to the judicial review of the Coroner’s inquest “I have to consider the interests


                                                                              23
    of all concerned including those of all the witnesses who would have to come
    along five years later and try to cast their minds back to events that they must
    have been trying to forget’' he was referring to spectators and the bereaved
    who may have to give evidence as to precisely where the deceased were in
    the pens, when and where they were taken, what attempts were made to
    revive them and matters of that sort.       He was therefore talking about a
    completely separate issue.


3   European Law


    In support of their submissions on delay the defence allege a breach of article
    6 of the European Convention on Human Rights which provides


    “in the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any criminal
    charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a
    reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law".


    A number of authorities have been put before me. The principal argument
    between the prosecution and defence concerns the period to be taken into
    account in determining the length of the proceedings.       According to those
    authorities the time runs from what has variously been described as when the
    person is “charged”. This may occur upon “arrest" or “official notification given
    to an individual by the competent authority o f an allegation that he has
    committed a criminal offence” or the opening of “a preliminary investigation".
    Thus the defence have argued that time runs from the time of the Taylor
    enquiry i.e. the opening of a preliminary investigation.    But the prosecution
    say that the use of the expression the ‘opening of a preliminary investigation’
    has been taken from the case of Ringeisen - v - Austria 1 EHRR.455 and
    ignores the basic fact that a preliminary investigation is a stage in criminal
    proceedings in Austria which follows the charge. The prosecution states that
    the time must run from the date of commencing these proceedings i.e. when
    the defendants were first charged in Sefton Magistrates in June of 1998.        I
    consider that I do not have to decide when the time begins for the following
    reasons.


                                                                                  24
The authorities set out the principles which the European Court considers in
determining what is a reasonable time, I refer to Boddaert - v - Belgium
(1992) EHRR 242.       In the judgement of the court at paragraph 36, I quote,
“the reasonableness of the length o f proceedings is to be determined with
reference to the criteria laid down in the court’s case law and in the light of the
circumstances of the case,        which in this instance call for an overall
assessment” and paragraph 39 “article 6 commands, that judicial proceedings
be expeditious, but it also lays down the more general principle of the proper
administration o f justice. In the circumstances of the case the conduct o f the
authorities was consistent with a fair balance which has to be struck between
the various aspects o f this fundamental requirement." In Allenet De Ribemont
-   v- France (1995) 20.EHRR 557, I quote paragraph 86 of the'Commission’s
opinion, “the commission reiterates that the reasonableness of the length of
proceedings must be assessed in the light o f the circumstances of each case
and having regard to the following criteria; the complexity of the case, the
conduct o f the parties and that of the authorities dealing with the case and in
the light o f the circumstances of the case, which may call for an overall
assessment”. The Commission further recalls that in civil cases exercising
the right to a hearing within a reasonable time is subject to diligence being
shown by the party concerned. Nevertheless this principle does not absolve
the court from ensuring that trials are conducted within a reasonable time.
The principles laid down in these authorities therefore are no different, in my
view, to the principles I have to decide in the abuse of process application
according to UK Law. This appears to be confirmed by L.J. Buxton in R - v -
Stratford Justices ex parte Imbert, The Times, February 25 1999 when
considering another part of article 6 of the Convention, he said this, “the
principle o f looking at the fairness in their entirety of their particular criminal
proceedings that were under criticism permeated the whole of the Strasbourg
jurisprudence”. Therefore if I were to accept the defence submission upon the
length of the proceedings (approximately 10 years) any consideration of a
breach of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights adds
nothing to the matters I already have under consideration in the abuse of
process application.


                                                                                 25
Publicity


I have been taken through an enormous volume of material which was mainly
made up of newspaper articles over the last 10 years. I have also seen video
tapes of various television programmes, including the McGovern drama
‘Hillsborough’. I have been shown samples of internet coverage, three books
on the subject and the words of a song by the Manic Street Preachers called
‘SYMM’ which stands for South Yorkshire Mass Murderer. It is clear that the
media coverage has been widespread, extremely voluminous and unrelenting.


From the outset the media coverage was vast, which is not surprising as this
is the worst disaster in British sporting history and was therefore of the
greatest public interest and concern. In the early stages, the South Yorkshire
Police decided to deflect blame onto the drunken Liverpool supporters so that
on Wednesday 19 April, for example, we see on the front page of the Daily
Express “Police Accuse Drunken Fans”, and on the same day on the front
page of the Sun “The Truth. Some fans picked pockets o f victims, some fans
urinated on the brave cops”. These allegations were roundly rejected by Lord
Justice Taylor; but I accept Mr Jones’ point that in the early stages the media
coverage reached saturation point and it may be those early perceptions
which sink into the public consciousness.          However, both before and
particularly since the Taylor interim report, the blame for the disaster has been
laid on the police.   In the early stages it was Superintendent Marshall who
received a lot of attention because it was he who had “opened the gates”.


During and after the Taylor enquiry Duckenfield’s name appears regularly in
newspaper articles, Murray’s not so often. There has been substantial media
coverage of each step in the history of the case. For example, The Guardian,
31 August 1990 “Prosecutions ruled out in Hillsborough disaster.             The
decision by the Director of Public Prosecutions was attacked by Liverpool
MPs as a scandal and a whitewash.” Terry Fields, Labour MP for Broadgreen
said   "“my initial reaction is one of shock and absolute disgust,           this
announcement is an absolute scandal”. The Independent, 29 March 1991
“Hillsborough inquest ends with tears and scuffles. The anger o f the relatives
o f those who died spilled over as the jury’s verdict of accidental death was
read out. People in court screamed and began crying, one woman shouted “it
was no accident”. The Times, 30 October 1991, “Police Chief blamed over
Hillsborough retires early”. The report stated that David Duckenfield was to
retire from the South Yorkshire Police Force on health grounds and not face a
planned disciplinary tribunal. Philip Hammond of the HFSG whose 14 year-
old son was among those who died said “we feel we have been cheated of
justice”. There appears to have been something of a lull after this until 1996
when there was substantial media coverage of the McGovern drama and the
alleged new evidence that had come to light. A headline in the Daily Mirror for
Thursday, December 5 1996, provides an example “Why everyone in Britain
must watch, at last we’ve seen the terrible truth . .. now why doesn’t someone
say sorry”, and the Daily Mirror the following day contained headlines as
follows “It took us back into hell”. “Victims who still wait for justice” and “My
rage over the cover-up, the paramedic”.


The prejudice the defence allege is that much of the media coverage has
been generated by the prosecution and by that they mean the HSFG and that
they have linked many of the legitimate grievances they have concerning the
tragedy (e.g! the inquest and the 3.15 pm cut-off time, the lack of disclosure,
and poor treatment by the authorities) with their calls for justice. Further many
allegations of police cover up (lying about the video evidence, the editing of
statements) in the light of the Scrutiny are, the defence say, inaccurate, unfair
and prejudicial. There was, of course, much media coverage to mark the 10th
Anniversary of the disaster in April of this year, with renewed calls for justice.


I do accept that the media coverage in this case is bound to create some
prejudice against these two defendants, more so against Mr Duckenfield than
Mr Murray. However, I also bear in mind Mr Jones’ argument that unusually
in this case there are two polarised views and each have used the media to
put forward their point of view, and that any potential jury will be from a cross
section of the community. I note that there is no evidence as to the effect of
the publicity on the public, there are no opinion polls concerning the publicity


                                                                                 27
      as there were in the Maxwell case, although I accept that Mr Justice Phillips
      said that the opinion polls in the Maxwell case should not set a precedent or
    . become the norm. Having accepted that there is some prejudice against the
      defendants I have to weigh that up against the need to report matters of public
      interest and concern and ask myself this question: Is the prejudice so great
      as to make a fair trial impossible? Bearing in mind those matters to which I
      have just referred and the powers of the Judge at trial to regulate the trial
      process and give appropriate directions to the jury I answer the question in
      the negative.


5     Other Matters


      The defence have argued that the prosecutor lacks objectivity and the
      selection of the evidence is unbalanced and unfair.         Ann Adlington gave
      sworn evidence before me.       She clearly feels very strongly about the case
      and has been involved in it, indirectly at first, and then directly for many years.
      However, I found her evidence to be reliable and credible and she certainly
      did not give me the impression that she had lost her sense of objectivity. She
      came across as a responsible prosecutor mindful of her duties as such. An
      example can be given when she was asked about the media coverage. She
      considered the Manic Street Preachers ‘SYMM’ song to be in bad taste and
      was prepared to support the defence application to the Attorney-General to
      prevent its publication (N.B. the defence application to the Attorney-General to
      have the song stopped failed). She further indicated that she had been very
      careful to avoid adverse publicity, that she had given members of the HFSG a
      severe telling off when they made various outbursts to the press and she said
      that she didn’t want anything to prejudice the prosecution case. The defence
      have criticised Ann Adlington for relying upon Mr Houldsworth as a
      prosecution witness after he had been discredited by Lord Justice Stuart-
      Smith. In my view he did not go quite that far. In chapter 2 at paragraph 99,
      he said this “I am unable to accept that his (Mr Houldsworth) recollection of
      events now is accurate. Even if it was correct it would not have any effect on
      the previous proceedings.     It would simply have been the evidence o f one
      more person who thought that the central pens were full at 2.52 pm .1’ He


                                                                                      28
therefore describes Mr Houldsworth evidence as inaccurate and even if
accurate of marginal         relevance.    Ann Adlington    said   she found     Mr
Houldsworth a truthful witness and I accept her evidence on that point,
whether the jury were to find Mr Houldsworth truthful is a matter for them. I
was referred to the case of R - v - Epping & Harlow Justices ex parte
Massaro (1972) 1.Q.B.433 in which the Lord Chief Justice Lord Widgery had
to decide the purpose of committal proceedings. At page 435 he said this “is
it as the prosecution might contend, simply a safeguard for the citizen to
ensure that he cannot be made to stand his trial without a prima facie case
being shown or is it as Mr Beckman would contend, a rehearsal proceeding
so that the defence may try out their cross examination on the prosecution
witnesses with a view to using the results to advantage in the Crown Court at
a later stage?        For my part I think it is clear that the function of committal
proceedings is to ensure that no-one shall stand his trial unless a prima facie
case has been made out”. The way in which the prosecution have prepared
the committal bundle accords with the duties of the prosecution at committal
proceedings.


The defence have also criticised Ann Adlington for failing to have various
police witnesses in the committal bundle, in particular Superintendent
Marshall who is involved in the opening of gate C or any of the three police
officers, apart from the defendants, who were in the control box. I accept the
reasons given by Ann Adlington for their absence in that bundle.                Ann
Adlington was also criticised for failing to take into account the DPP’s decision
not to prosecute the defendants. She said that she had taken that matter into
account but was unaware of the reasons for the decision, I reject that
criticism. I therefore find that the defence have not made out a case of lack of
objectivity or bias on the part of the prosecutor.


Finally, during cross examination of Ann Adlington the defence suggested that
a primary purpose of bringing these proceedings was to enable the
prosecution    to   obtain    disclosure   of further   evidence   after   committal
proceedings and that it was an unfair manipulation of the court process. Ann
Adlington denied that this was a primary purpose of the prosecution and I


                                                                                 29
accept that. Although I find that the bringing of this prosecution may have that
consequence it is not an unfair manipulation of the court process.


It was alleged by the prosecution that new and important evidence had come
to   light   since   the   commencement   of these    proceedings,    particularly
concerning the closing of the tunnel in 1988 at the corresponding match the
previous year. The prosecution referred to debriefing notes and also a ‘new’
statement from Inspector White which arrived from the South Yorkshire Police
archive during the submissions. On the face of this statement, it purported to
show that Superintendent Murray had been aware of the practice of closing
off the tunnel at the semi-final the previous year in 1988 and that he knew
before the 15 April 1989.       If that were right it would be very important
evidence in this case. Upon a close analysis of that evidence, however, Mr
Harrison was able to demonstrate that the submissions of the prosecution
were incorrect.      He showed that Inspector White was referring in this new
statement to the practice of filling up pens 3 and 4 first, then closing off the
tunnel before redirecting spectators to outside pens at league games only.
This practice was known at the Taylor enquiry and paragraph 170 of the
interim report makes that clear.


Mr Harrison further demonstrated that Murray had referred to this practice of
filling up pens 3 and 4 first and then redirecting the fans to the wings at league
matches during the Taylor enquiry. Inspector White’s statement further shows
that he was not on duty in the Leppings Lane area of the ground at either the
semi-final in 1987 or the semi-final in 1988.        So when he refers in that
statement to speaking to Superintendent Murray about the way in which the
pens were to be filled it is clear he was referring to the difference between
filling up those pens at a league game and how they were to be filled on that
day the 15 April 1989. The fact that the tunnel had been closed off in 1988
was also known to the Taylor enquiry (see paragraph 230 of the interim
report) “since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50 pm, the tunnel should have been
closed whether gate C was to be opened or not.        The exercise was a simple
one and had been carried out in 1988. All that was necessary was for a few
officers to act as a cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and divert fans
elsewhere. Unfortunately, the 1988 closure seems to have been unknown to
the Senior. Officers on duty at the time.    It did not figure in the debriefing
notes. It therefore had no influence on the planning for 1989”. The statement
of Inspector White therefore sheds no further light on Lord Justice Taylor’s
findings that I have just quoted.   The prosecution have referred me to the
briefing notes of the 17 April 1989 at which these two defendants were
present.   It is not known who made these notes.      From the top of page 3 I
quote:


CC - Go back to the control inside the tunnel. Whose responsibility is it there
to divert people - anybody?


Duckenfield - Inspector White with serials 14 and15. Specific instructions on
the order at phase 2.


 CC - Inspector White experienced individual.


Mole - M r Creaser was the Inspector who worked it before Mr White.


Nesbitt - A t the crucial time Inspector White was returning having dealt with an
arrest.


Top of the tunnel solid with horses - that procedure happened last year. ”


That is the only reference which may relate to the tunnel being blocked off the
previous year. It is not known who said this and therefore does not assist me
greatly.


I have also had my attention drawn to the debriefing notes dated 19 April
1989, this was with Supervisory Officers deployed at Leppings Lane on 15
April 1989, neither of the defendants were present. In relation to this point I
quote from the first page “there is nothing in the operational order nor at the
briefings about contingency for police protection of the tunnel to restrict or
prevent spectator entry.    Officers remembered (particularly Chief Inspector


                                                                              31
Creaser) that in previous years the above had been done by the use of horses
and static police lines (referred to as Superintendent Freeman’s policy).


Neither of these passages support the prosecution’s submission that either of
these defendants knew about the policy to close off the tunnel at the match
the previous year. At its highest the prosecution may be able to argue that
this policy of closing off the tunnel was known to some officers of a senior
rank and therefore was above junior level.      I want to make it quite clear
therefore that I have not placed any weight on the prosecution’s submissions
of new evidence concerning what happened in 1988 in determining this
application.


In conclusion I have considered all the above matters, everything I have read
in the case papers and all that Counsel has urged upon me.           Although I
appear to have dealt with various aspects of the argument one by one, I have
considered their cumulative effect and therefore have considered matters in
the round. I have concluded that the defence have not persuaded me to the
required standard of proof that a fair trial is not possible in this case.    I
therefore dismiss this application.




                                                                             32
