          ■J?V
          Iw t/T L o c a l Authority
                                             C   I   T     Y        O    F
                                                                                      LIVERPOOL
          BUILDING                                                      L. N. BUSH,   F.R.I.C.S., C.Eng., M .I.S tru ct.E ., F.I.A.S.,

          CONTROL                                                       CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR,
                                                                        5th Floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                        Liverpool L3 2AJ.

          Our ref:     A 5 -A /N R W /IJ B                              Telephone: 051-227 3911 Ext:        3852
                                                                        Facsimile: 051-225 3886
          Your ref:                                                     Direct Line: 051-225 3 8 5 2


                                                                        Date:   22nd February 1990

           Liverpool Football Club
           & Athletic Grounds PLC,
           Anfield Road,
           Liverpool L4 OTH


           Dear Peter,

           Anfield Road Stand: Evacuation Routes

          Thank you for the copy of the letter you received from Doctor John Ashton in
          which he sets out his observations with regard to the provision of exits «nH
          his experiences during a normal and dispersal of the crowd at the end of each
          match from the Anfield Road (Home Supporters) Stand.

          The exit provision in the Anfield Road Stand was originally designed to
          accommodate standing spectators to facilitate an evacuation time within the
          time recommended by the Guide to Safety at Sports Ground. Following the
          conversion of this part of the stadium to all—seater accommodation the
          provision of stairways and final exits remained substantially unaltered
          although the capacity of the stand was reduced by 50%. The gangway width
          leading from the seats to the staircase at the rear has been designed and
          constructed in accordance with the aforementioned safety guidance. The
          staircase is wider than the gangway giving access to it, therefore in
          accordance with good practice the evacuation route widens towards the final
          exit from the stadium.

          It is a fact that the flow rate down a stairway, of unit width, is less
          that for the same width of approach on the flat, or even upwards on a terrace
          or seated area of comparatively slacker pitch. The 'green guide' embraces
          this by avocating a restricted access to the head of a stair from a spectator
          enclosure. It is accepted to be less of a risk to hold spectators in the
          enclosure rather than allow their full weight to be imposed on those
          descending the stairway.




                                                               Mr N.R. Whibley
             When calling or telephoning please ask fo r
NW 1AC0
                                             -   2   -




          Furthermore, the author of the letter perhaps does not appreciate that
          alternative and additional exit provision is available to spectators in the
          Anfield Road Stand should there be the need to evacuate in an emergency.
          These alternative routes are not made available for normal evacuation due to
          the unfortunate but realistic need to maintain crowd segregation between home
          and visiting fans.

          Having looked carefully at the area concerned I cannot agree that in the
          event of crowd trouble a disaster could occur due to the design of the
          stadium. Some minor alteration to the barrier at the entrance to the
          staircase could be carried out to taper the available width for entrance onto
          the staircase. The alteration involves the splaying of the barrier and step
          on a line from the back of the topmost seat to the corner of the flanking
          wall to the staircase. This will improve access to the staircase without
          imposing additional downward pressure on people using the stairway. I would
          recommend that this alteration is carried out but would emphasise that there
          is no such state as complete safety in any structure, in the presence of
          crowds who do not behave in an orderly and sensible manner.


          Yours sincerely,




          City Building Surveyor




■JWlACr
