         EASTER DAY 1990


                      1
         THE FIRST
   ANNIVERSARY
                    OF
  HILLSBOROUGH



Sunday, April 15th 1990 at 2.45 p.m. at Anfield
W ea llsta n d a s the M ersey side Church Leaders make their way to thedais.


WELCOME

The M ost Reverend Derek Worlock, Archbishop o f Liverpool, welcomes
everyone to the service and announces the hymn, which everyone is invited
to sing:


HYMN

Abide with me; fast falls the eventide:
The darkness deepens; Lord with me abide:
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, O abide with me.

I fear no foe with thee a t hand to bless;
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness.
Where is death’s sting? Where, grave thy victory?
I triumph still, if thou abide with me.

Hold thou thy Cross before my closing eyes;
Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies:
Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee;
In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me.


We sit for:

THE READING

Read by Mr. Rogan Taylor

2 Corinthians Chapter 1 verses 3-7

The God o f Comfort

Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the all merciful
Father, the God whose consolation never fails us! He comforts us in sill
our troubles, so th at we in turn may be able to comfort others in any trouble
of theirs and to share with them the consolation we ourselves receive from
God. As C hrist’s cup of suffering overflows, and we suffer with him, so
also through Christ our consolation overflows . . . I f our lot be consolation,
it is to help us to bring you comfort and strength to face with fortitude
the same sufferings we now endure. And our hope for you is firmly
grounded; for we know th at if you have part in the suffering, you have
part also in the divine consolation.
N ow the M erseyside Church Leaders join in pronouncing

THE BLESSING

God bless Liverpool
and make her people
strong in faith,
steadfast in hope,
and generous in charity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Now we all sing:

When you walk through a storm
Hold your head up high
And don’t be afraid of the dark.
A t the end of the storm there’s a golden sky
And the sweet silver song of a lark.
Walk on through the wind,
Walk on through the rain,
Though your dreams be tossed and blown;
Walk on, walk on with hope in your heart
And you’ll never walk alone,
You’ll never walk alone.




W E WOULD B E V E R Y GRATEFUL IF M E M B E R S OF TH E PUBLIC
WOULD VAC ATE TH E A R E A ARO U ND TH E GROUND A S
Q U ICKLY A S POSSIBLE, SO T H A T TH E D ED IC A TIO N OF THE
HILLSBO RO U G H M E M O R IA L W H IC H I S S T R IC T L Y P R IV A T E
TO TH E B E R E A VED F A M ILIE S, C A N T A K E PLACE.
               THE DEDICATION
                OF THE ANFIELD
HILLSBOROUGH MEMORIAL




Bishop David Sheppard says these words o f Scipture


God is our refuge and strength: a very present help in trouble.


Jesus said, “Let not your heart be troubled, believe in God, believe also
in me; in my Father’s house are many mansions.”


St. Paul said, “ I am sure t h a t . . . n o th in g . . . in all creation will be able
to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.”



                         M R S N E S S IE S H A N K L Y
            U N V E IL S T H E H ILLSBO RO U G H M E M O R IA L
A s we stand and sing this hymn, ninety-five roses, one for each life lost
at Hillsborough, are brought to the dais by Jenny Cunningham, Timothy
Knowles, Ian Price and Helen Thomas, four o f those injuredin the tragedy.


HYMN

The Lord’s my shepherd, I ’ll not want;
he makes me down to lie
In pastures green; he leadeth me
the quiet waters by.

My soul he doth restore again,
and me to walk doth make
Within the paths of righteousness,
e’en for his own name’s sake.

Yea, though I walk through death’s dark vale,
yet will I fear no ill;
For thou art with me, and thy rod
and staff me comfort still.

Goodness and mercy all my life
shall surely follow me;
And in God’s house for evermore
my dwelling place shall be.


Now we sit for

THE ADDRESS

The Right Reverend David Sheppard, Bishop of Liverpool

Incorporated in the Address, at 15.06 we all stand for

THE SILENCE
A fter the B ishop’s closing remarks the Church Leaders bless

THE NINETY FIVE ROSES

to be placed by the families on the Anfield Hillsborough Memorial during
the private dedication o f that Memorial later this afternoon.

Heavenly Father, as we commemorate on this E aster Day the life and love
of your son, Jesus Christ, which death itself could not conquer, bless sill
those whose love is stronger than death and sanctify these roses as tokens
of the undying love and devotion of the families and friends of those who
died at Hillsborough.

Lord in your mercy

All: Hear our prayer

THE PRAYERS

Dr John Newton, Moderator of the Free Church Federal Council

O Lord God, from whom neither life nor death can separate those who
tru st in your love, and whose love holds in its embrace your children in
this world and the next; so unite us to yourself th at we may always be
united to our loved ones whether here or there: give us courage, constancy
and hope, through him who died and was buried and rose again for us,
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Heavenly Father, look in your mercy on those who still suffer as a result
of the Hillsborough tragedy, whether from physical disability or mental
distress. Bless all who give of their time and energy in the continuing
process of caring and making whole, through him who brings heeding to
all creation, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Grant, O Lord, th at we may journey through the years with your love in
our hearts, your tru th in our minds and your strength in our wills; of your
mercy, take from us all bitterness, anger and strife; th at when we finally
stand before you, it may be with the assurance of your welcome and the
joy of seeing our loved ones again; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
D r John N ew to n reads the names o f those who died at Hillsborough


John Alfred Anderson               Thomas Anthony Howard
Colin Mark Ashcroft                Eric George Hughes
Jam es Gary Aspinall               Alan Johnston
Kester Roger Marcus Ball           Christine Anne Jones
Gerard Bernard Patrick Baron       Gary Philip Jones
Simon Bell                         Richard Jones
Barry Sidney Bennett               Nicholas Peter Joynes
David John Benson                  Anthony Peter Kelly
David William Birtle               Michael David Kelly
Paul David Brady                   Carl David Lewis
Andrew Mark Brookes                David William M ather
Carl Brown                         Brian Christopher Matthews
David Steven Brown                 Francis Joseph McAllister
Henry Thomas Burke                 John McBrien
Peter Andrew Burkett               Marian Hazel McCabe
Paul William Carlile               Joseph Daniel McCarthy
Raymond Thomas Chapman             Peter McDonnell
Gary Christopher Church            Alan McGlone
Joseph Clark                       Keith McGrath
Paul Clark                         Paul Brian Murray
 Gary Collins                      Lee Nicol
 Stephen Paul Copoc                Stephen Francis O’Neill
 Tracey Elizabeth Cox              Jonathan Owens
 Jam es Philip Delaney             William Roy Pemberton
 Christopher Barry Devonside       Carl William Rimmer
 Christopher Edwards               David George Rimmer
 Vincent Michael Fitzsimmons       Graham John Roberts
 Thomas Steven Fox                 Steven Joseph Robinson
 Jon-Paul Gilhooley                Henry Charles Rogers
 Barry Glover                      Colin Andrew Hugh William Sefton
 Ian Thomas Glover                 Inger Shah
 Derrick George Godwin             Paula Ann Smith
 Roy Harry Hamilton                Adam Edward Spearritt
 Philip Hammond                    Philip John Steele
 Eric Hankin                       David Leonard Thomas
 Gary Harrison                     Patrick John Thompson
 Stephen Francis Harrison          Peter Reuben Thompson
 Peter Andrew Harrison             S tuart Paul William Thompson
 David Hawley                      Peter Francis Tootle
 Jam es Robert Hennessey           Christopher Jam es Traynor
 Paul Anthony Hewitson             M artin Kevin Traynor
 Carl Darren Hewitt                Kevin Tyrrell
 Nicholas Michael Hewitt           Colin Wafer
 Sarah Louise Hicks                 Ian David Whelan
 Victoria Jane Hicks               M artin Kenneth Wild
 Gordon Rodney Horn                Kevin Daniel Williams
 Arthur Horrocks                    Graham John Wright
 Thomas Howard
Archbishop Derek Worlock says this prayer

Lord Jesus Christ, risen from the dead yet bearing the scars of suffering;
bind up our broken hearts, heal our deep wounds and assuage our common
grief; th at as we are bound together in the loss we share, so we may be
bound together in the strength we find, in the days ahead.

    Lord, we your servants make this prayer;

All: Be it your care. Amen.

Now the Merseyside Church Leaders dedicate the Memorial

               IN THE FAITH OF JESU S CHRIST,
                 WHO DIED AND ROSE AGAIN,
               WE DEDICATE TH IS MEMORIAL
                 TO THE SACRED MEMORY OF
             THOSE WHO D IED AT HILLSBOROUGH;

Dr Newton:

May the stone on which their names are engraved, be a sign of the
indestructability of God’s care for those we love.

Archbishop Worlock:

May the living flame be a sign th a t death is not the end of life for them,
nor of our love for them.

Bishop Sheppard:

May this spot, on ground so loved by those who died at Hillsborough, ever
be a hallowed place in memory of them.

Everyone says: Amen.

NO W N IN E T Y -F IV E R O S E S A R E L A ID A T TH E M E M O R IA L B Y
             TH E F A M IL IE S OF THOSE WHO DIED.
 LIVERPOOL CATHEDRAL




  THE SECOND
ANNIVERSARY
              OF
HILLSBOROUGH


Monday, April 15th 1991 at 2.45 p.m.
2
We all stand as the Clergy enter the Cathedral.

WELCOME

The Very Reverend Derrick Walters, Dean of Liverpool, welcomes
everyone to the service and announces the hymn, which everyone
is invited to sing:

HYMN
Abide with me; fast falls the eventide:
The darkness deepens; Lord, with me abide:
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, O abide with me.

Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day;
E arth’s joys grow dim, its glories pass away;
Change and decay in all around I see:
O thou who changest not, abide with me.

I need thy presence every passing hour;
W hat but thy grace can foil the tempter’s power?
Who like thyself my guide and stay can be?
Through cloud and sunshine, Lord, abide with me.

I fear no foe with thee at hand to bless;
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness.
Where is death’s sting? Where, grave thy victory?
I trium ph still, if thou abide with me.

Hold thou thy Cross before my closing eyes;
Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies:
Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee;
In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me.




                                3
We sit for:

THE READING
St John Chapter 14 verses 1-6
Jesus said to his disciples,
‘Set your troubled hearts at rest: Believe in God; believe also in
me. In my Fathers house are many rooms; if it were not so, I
would have told you; for I am going there to prepare a place for
you. And after I have gone and prepared a place for you, I will
come again and take you to myself, so that where I am, there you
may be also; and where I am going you know, and the way you
know.
Thomas said, ‘Lord, we do not know where you are going; how
can we know the way?’ Jesus said to him, ‘I am the way, the
truth, and the life; no one comes to the Father except by me.
We stand and sing:
HYMN
The Lord’s my shepherd, I ’ll not want;
he makes me down to lie
In pastures green; he leadeth me
the quiet waters by.
My soul he doth restore again,
and me to walk doth make
Within the paths of righteousness,
e’en for hfc own name’s sake.
Yea, though I walk through death’s dark vale,
yet will I fear no ill;
For thou a rt with me, and thy rod
and staff me comfort still.
My table thou hast furnished
in presence of my foes;
My head thou dost with oil anoint,
and my cup overflows.
Goodness and mercy all my life
shall surely follow me;
And in God’s house for evermore
my dwelling place shall be.



                                4
Now we sit for


THE ADDRESS


After the Address, we all stand for

THE SILENCE

THE PRAYERS

O Lord God, from whom neither life nor death can separate those
who trust in your love, and whose love holds in its embrace your
children in this world and the next; so unite us to yourself that we
may always be united to our loved ones whether here or there:
give us courage, constancy and hope, through him who died and
was buried and rose again for us, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Heavenly Father, look in your mercy on those who still suffer as a
result of the Hillsborough tragedy, whether from physical disability
or mental distress. Bless all who give of their time and energy in
the continuing process of caring and making whole, through him
who brings healing to all creation, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Grant, O Lord, that we may journey through the years with your
love in our hearts, your truth in our minds and your strength in
our wills; of your mercy, take from us all bitterness, anger and
strife; that when we finally stand before you, it may be with the
assurance of your welcome and the joy of seeing our loved ones
again; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

We all say
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, be with us all evermore.
Amen.




                                5
Now we all sing:
When you walk through a storm
Hold your head up high
And don’t be afraid of the dark.
At the end of the storm there’s a golden sky
And the sweet silver song of a lark.
Walk on through the wind,
Walk on through the rain,
Though your dreams be tossed and blown;
Walk on, walk on with hope in your heart
And you’ll never walk alone,
You’ll never walk alone.




At the end o f the singing the Organ music continues as the
families leave for the Anfield Memorial.




                              6
            AT THE ANFIELD MEMORIAL

THE DEDICATION OF THE ROSES
Minister:

Heavenly Father, as we remember the life and love of your son,
Jesus Christ, which death itself could not conquer, bless all those
whose love is stronger than death and sanctify these roses as
tokens of the undying love and devotion of the families and
friends of those who died at Hillsborough: Amen.
Lord Jesus Christ, risen from the dead yet bearing the scars of
suffering; bind up our broken hearts, heal our deep wounds and
assuage our common grief; that as we are bound together in the
loss we share, so we may be bound together in the strength we
find in the days ahead. Amen.

The Roses are now laid at the Memorial




                               7
          THE THIRD
       ANNIVERSARY
                     OF
      HILLSBOROUGH
            W ednesday, 15th April, 1992
               at 2.45 pm at Anfield


          Clergy      Fr.J.Thompson

            M usic provided by

Salvationists from various Liverpool centres
ORDER OF SERVICE

WELCOME

Mr.Trevor Hicks, Chairman of The Hillsborough Family Support Group
welcomes everyone to the service and announces the hymn, which
everyone is invited to sing:

HYMN
Abide with me; fast falls the eventide;
the darkness deepens; Lord with me abide!
When other helpers fall, and comforts flee,
help of the helpless, O abide with me.

Swift to its close ebbs out life's little day;
earths joys grow dim, its glories pass away;
change and decay in all around I see;
0 thou who changest not, abide with me.

1 need thy presence every passing hour;
what but thy grace can foil the tempter's power?
Who like thyself my guide and stay can be?
Through cloud and sunshine, O abide with me.

I fear no foe with thee at hand to bless;
ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness.
Where is death's sting? Where, grave, thy victory?
I triumph still, if thou abide with me.

Hold thou thy cross before my closing eyes;
shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies;
heaven's morning breaks, and earths vain shadows flee;
in life, in death, O Lord, abide with me.
THE READING
Read by Mr. Alan Hansen

Isaiah Chapter 25 verses 6-9

The Lord will destroy death for ever.

On this mountain,
the lord of hosts will prepare for all peoples
a banquet of rich food.
On this mountain he will remove
the mourning veil covering all peoples,
and the shroud enwrapping all nations,
he will destroy Death for ever.
The Lord will wipe away
the tears from every cheek;
he will take away his people's shame
everywhere on earth,
for the Lord has said so.
That day, it will be said: See, this is our god
in whom we hoped for salvation;
the Lord is the one in whom we hoped.
We exult and we rejoice
that he has saved us.

This is the word of the Lord.


THE ADDRESS
Fr. J. Thompson

Incorporated in the Address, at 15.06

THE SILENCE
HYMN
There is a green hill far
Outside a city wall,
Where the dear lord was crucified,
Who died to save us all.

We may not Know,
We can not tell,
What pains He had to bear,
But we believe it was for us,
He hung and suffered there.

He died that we might be forgiven,
He died to make us good,
That we might go at last to heaven,
Saved by His precious blood.

There was no other good enough
To pay the price of sin;
He only could unlock the gate
Of heaven, and let us in.

O dearly, dearly has He loved!
and we must love Him to,
And trust in His redeeming blood,
And try His work to do.
THE SILENCE


  A t 3.06 pm all stand to observe a minute ofsilence fo r all the victims ofHillsborough.

  The Golden Book is then placed before the Paschal Candle which is the symbol o f
  the Risen Christ.

THE FIRST READING
  A ll sit fo r the first lesson read by Mrs. Veronica McAllister
  A reading from the first letter o f St. Paul to the Thessalonians (4:13-18)

  We want you to be quite certain, brothers and sisters, about those who have died, to
  make sure that you do not grieve about them, like the other people who have no hope.

  We believe that Jesus died and rose again, and that it will be the same for those who
  have died in Jesus: God will bring them with him. We can tell you this from the Lord's
  own teaching, that any o f us who are left alive until the Lord's coming will not have
  any advantage over those who have died. At the trumpet o f God, the voice o f the
  archangel will call out the command and the Lord himself will come down from
  heaven; those who have died in Christ will be the first to rise, and then those o f us who
  are still alive will be taken up in the clouds, together with them, to meet the Lord in the
  air. So we shall stay with the Lord forever.

  With such thoughts as these you should comfort one another.



  This is the word o f the Lord
 R. Thanks be to God



HYM N
 All jo in in singing the hymn:
  1. I watch the sunrise lighting the sky
     casting its shadows near
     And on this morning bright though it be
     I feel those shadows near to me
           But you are always close to me
           following all my ways
           May I always be close to you
           following all your ways, Lord.
  2. I watch the sunlight climb through the clouds,
     warming the earth below.
     And at the mid-day, life seems to say:
     "I feel your brightness near me".
        For you are always .. .

  3. I watch the sunset fading away,
      lighting the clouds with sleep.
     And as the evening closes its eyes
      I feel your presence near me.
         For you are always . . .

 4. I watch the moonlight guarding the night,
    waiting 'til morning comes
    The air is silent, earth is at rest
    only your peace is near me.
       Yes, you are always . ..

THE SECOND READING
  The second lesson is read by Mrs. Margaret Aspinall.
       A reading from the Holy Gospel according to St. John (6:37-40)
       Jesus said to the crowd:
       "All that the Father gives me will come to me
       and whoever comes to me
       I shall not turn him away;
       because I have come from heaven,
       not to do my own will,
       but to do the will o f the one who sent me.

       "Now the will o f Him who sent me
       is that I should lose nothing
       o f all that He has given to me,
       and that I should raise it up on the last day.
       Yes, it is my Father's will
       that whoever see the Son and believes in Him
       shall have eternal life,
       and that I shall raise him up on the last day".

        This is the word o f the Lord
       R. Thanks be to God
THE ADDRESS
   The Rev. Gerald Tedcastle, Deputy Chairman o f the Liverpool Methodist District,
   gives the address:

HYMN
   All stand up and join in singing:
   1. Easter glory fills the sky! Alleluia!
      Christ now lives, no more to die! Alleluia!
      Darkness has been put to flight, Alleluia!
      By the living Lord o f light! Alleluia!

   2. See, the stone is rolled away! Alleluia!
      From the tomb where once he lay! Alleluia!
      He has risen as he said, Alleluia!
      Glorious firstborn from the dead! Alleluia!

   3. Seek not life within the tomb; Alleluia!
      Christ stands in the upper room! Alleluia!
      Risen glory he conceals, Alleluia!
      Risen body he reveals! Alleluia!

   4. Though we see his face no more, Alleluia!
      He is with us as before! Alleluia!
      Glory veiled, he is our priest, Alleluia!
      His true flesh and blood our feast! Alleluia!

   5. Christ, the victor over death, Alleluia!
      Breathes on us the Spirit's breath! Alleluia!
      Paradise is our reward, Alleluia!
      Endless Easter with our Lord. Alleluia!

THE PRAYERS
The Very Rev. Derrick Walters, Dean o f Liverpool Cathedral, leads the prayers

     O Lord God, from whom neither life nor death can separate those who trust in your
     love, and whose love holds in its embrace your children in this world and the next;
     so unite us to yourself that we may always be united to our loved ones whether here
     or there: give us courage, constancy and hop e, through him who died and was buri ed
     and rose again for us, Jesus Christ our Lord.
     R. Amen
      Heavenly Father, look in your mercy on those who still suffer as a result o f the
      Hillsborough tragedy, whether physical disability or mental distress. Bless all who
      give their time and energy in the continuous process o f caring and making whole,
      through him who brings healing to all creation, Jesus Christ our Lord.
      R. Amen

      Grant, O Lord, that we may journey through the years with your love in our hearts,
      your truth in our minds and your strength in our wills; o f your mercy, take from us
      all bitterness, anger and strife; that when we finally stand before you, it may be with
      the assurance o f your welcome and the joy o f seeing our loved ones again; through
      Jesus Christ our Lord.
     R. Amen

Dean Walters then invites everyone to join in saying the Lord's Prayer:
     Our Father, who art in heaven,
     hallowed be thy name.
     Thy kingdom come.
     Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.
     Give us this day our daily bread,
     and forgive us our trespasses,
     as we forgive those who trespass against us,
     and lead us not into temptation,
     but deliver us from evil.
     For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory,
     for ever and ever.    Amen

THE BLESSING
   The Clergy then say:
     May the God o f all consolation
     bless you in every way
     and grant you peace all the days o f your life.
     R. Amen

     May he free you from all anxiety
     and strengthen your hearts in his love.
     R. Amen

     May he enrich your with his gifts o f faith, hope and love,
     so that what you do in this life,
     will bring you the happiness o f everlasting life.
     R. Amen
THE PRAYERS                Fr.J. Thompson

Heavenly Father, look in your mercy on those who still suffer as a result
of the Hillsborough tragedy, whether from physical disability or mental
distress. Bless all who give of their time and energy in the continuing
process of caring and making whole, through him who brings healing to
all creation, Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN

Lord hear our prayers.
By raising your son from the dead, you have given us faith.
Strengthen our hope that our dear loved ones will also have his
resurrection and enjoy eternal life.
We ask this through Our Lord Jesus Christ, your Son, who lives
and reigns with you and the Holy Spirit, our God,
for ever and ever. AMEN

God, our Father, our loved ones have been called from this life,
we mourn -we remember!
Father of mercy fulfil their faith and hope in you and lead them
safely home to you in Heaven, to be happy with you for ever.
Lord, we believe, increase our faith.
Lord, we hope, increase our hope.
Lord, we are only human, give us strength. AMEN.
Now we all sing:

When you walk through a storm
Hold your head up high
And don't be afraid of the dark.
At the end of a storm there's a golden sky
And the sweet silver song of the lark.
Walk on through the wind,
Walk on through the rain,
Though your dreams be tossed and blown;
Walk on, walk on with hope in your heart
And you'll never walk alone,
You'll never walk alone.
WE WOULD BE VERY GRATEFUL IF MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
WOULD VACATE THE AREA AROUND THE GROUND AS
QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE, SO THAT FAMILIES CAN LAY A BASKET
OF NINETY FIVE ROSES AT THE MEMORIAL.
Fr. J. Thompson reads the names o f those who died at Hillsborough

John Alfred Anderson             Thom as A nth on y Howard
Colin Mark A shcroft             Eric George H ughes
Jam es Gary Aspinall             A lan John ston
Kester Roger Marcus Ball         Christine A nne Jones
Gerard Bernard Patrick Baron     Gary Philip Jones
Simon Bell                       Richard Jones
Barry Sidney B ennett            N icholas P eter Joynes
D avid John Benson               A nthony Peter Kelly
D avid William Birtle            Michael D avid Kelly
Paul D avid Brady                Carl D avid Lewis
Andrew Mark Brookes              D avid W illiam Mather
Carl Brown                       Brian Christopher M atthews
D avid Steven Brown              Francis Josep h M cAllister
Henry Thom as Burke              John McBrien
Peter Andrew B urkett            Marian Hazel McCabe
Paul William Carlile             Joseph D aniel McCarthy
Raymond Thom as Chapman          Peter M cDonnell
Gary Christopher Church          A lan McGlone
Joseph Clark                     K eith M cGrath
Paul Clark                       Paul Brian Murray
Gary Collins                     Lee Nicol
Stephen Paul Copoc               Stephen Francis O ’Neill
Tracey Elizabeth Cox             Jonathan Ow ens
Jam es Philip D elaney           William Roy Pemberton
Christopher Barry D evonside     Carl William Rimmer
Christopher Edwards              D avid G eorge Rimmer
V incent Michael Fitzsim m ons   Graham John Roberts
Thomas S teven Fox               Steven Joseph Robinson
Jon-Paul Gilhooley               Henry Charles Rogers
Barry Glover                     Colin Andrew H ugh William Sefton
Ian Thomas Glover                Inger Shah
Derrick George Godwin            Paula Ann Sm ith
Roy Harry H am ilton             A dam Edward Spearritt
Philip Hammond                   Philip John Steele
Eric Hankin                      D avid Leonard Thomas
Gary Harrison                    Patrick John Thom pson
Stephen Francis Harrison         Peter Reuben Thompson
Peter Andrew Harrison            S tuart Paul William Thompson
D avid H aw ley                  P eter Francis Tootle
Jam es Robert H ennessey         Christopher J ames Traynor
Paul A nthony H ew itson         M artin Kevin Traynor
Carl Darren H ew itt             K evin Tyrrell
Nicholas Michael H ew itt        Colin Wafer
Sarah Louise Hicks               Ian D avid Whelan
Victoria Jane H icks             Martin Kenneth Wild
Gordon Rodney Horn               Kevin D aniel Williams
Arthur Horrocks                  Graham John W right
Thomas Howard
 v S B O i%




        The
Fourth Anniversary
         of
   Hillsborough
       Thursday, 15th April, 1993
        Metropolitan Cathedral
          of Christ the King
              Liverpool
                              ORDER OF SERVICE

 ENTRANCE
 As the procession o f clergy enters the Cathedral, all stand and jo in in singing:

1. Abide with me; fast falls the eventide:
   The darkness deepens; Lord with me abide
   When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
   Help o f the helpless, O abide with me.

2 . 1 fear no foe with thee at hand to bless;
    Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness.
    Where is death's sting? Where, grace thy victory?
    I triumph still, if thou abide with me.

3.     Hold thou thy Cross before my closing-eyes;
     Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies:
     Heaven's morning breaks, and earth's vain shadows flee;
     In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me.

WELCOME
A ll sit and the Administrator o f the Cathedral, Mgr Peter Cookson, welcomes
everyone

PRESENTATION OF THE GOLDEN BOOK AND READING OF THE NAMES
The Golden Book, which contains the names o f the Victims o f Hillsborough, is
brought forw ard to the lectern and the names are read.

Representatives o f the fam ilies place a lighted candle on the altar fo r each victim.

A Cantor sings:
     They are not dead, they are in the hands o f God.
     May He embrace them in peace.

A ll repeat
     May He embrace them in peace

After each group o f names is read, the Cantor sings:
     They are not dead, they are in the hands o f God.
Each time all sing:
     May he embrace them in peace.
John Alfred ANDERSON            Thomas Anthony HOWARD                A ll jo in in saying:
Colin Mark ASHCROFT             Erice George HUGHES                    The peace o f God our Father, and the love o f Jesus Christ, and the fellowship o f the
James Gary ASPINALL             Alan JOHNSTON
                                                                       Holy Spirit be with us all evermore. Amen
Kester Roger Marcus BALL       Christine Anne JONES
Gerard Bernard Patrick BARON   Gary Philip JONES
Simon BELL                     Richard JONES                      CONCLUSION
Barry Sidney BENNETT           Nicholas Peter JOYNES                A ll sit and Mr. Trevor Hicks, Chairman o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
David John BENSON              Anthony Peter KELLY                  addresses the Congregation.
David William BIRTLE           Michael David KELLY
Paul David BRADY               Carl David LEWIS
Andrew Mark BROOKES            David William MATHER                 Mr. Hicks then invites everyone to stand and join in singing:
Carl BROWN                     Brian Christopher MATTHEWS
David Steven BROWN             Francis Joseph McALLISTER               When you walk through a storm,
Henry Thomas BURKE             John McBRIEN                            Hold your head up high
Peter Andrew BURKETT           Marian Hazel McCABE
                                                                       And don't be afraid o f the dark.
Paul William CARLILE           Joseph Daniel McCARTHY
Raymond Thomas CHAPMAN         Peter McDONNELL
                                                                       At the end o f the storm there's a golden sky
Gary Christopher CHURCH        Alan McGLONE                            And the sweet silver song o f a lark.
Joseph CLARK                   Keith McGRATH                           Walk on through the wind,
Paul CLARK                     Paul Brian MURRAY                       Walk on through the rain,
Gary COLLINS                   Lee NICOL
                                                                       Though your dreams be tossed and blown;
Stephen Paul COPOC             Stephen Francis O'NEILL
Tracey Elizabeth COX           Jonathan OWENS                          Walk on, walk on with hope in your heart
James Philip DELANEY           William Roy PEMBERTON                   And you'll never walk alone,
Christopher Barry DEVONSIDE    Carl William RIMMER                     You'll never walk alone.
Christopher EDWARDS            David George RIMMER
Vincent Michael FITZSIMMONS    Graham John ROBERTS
                                                                  ORGAN VOLUNTARY: Theme and Variations by Hendrik Andriessen
Thomas Steven FOX              Steven Joseph ROBINSON
Jon-Paul GILHOOLEY             Henry Charles ROGERS
Barry GLOVER                   Colin Andrew Hugh William SEFTON     The public are asked to remain in their seats during the organ voluntary to allow the
Ian Thomas GLOVER              Inger SHAH                          fam ilies and guests to leave fo r their return journey to Anfield.
Derrick George GODWIN          Paula Ann SMITH
Roy Harry HAMILTON             Adam Edward SPEARRITT
Philip HAMMOND                 Philip John STEELE
Eric HANKIN                    David Leonard THOMAS                                  THANK YOU FOR JOINING US - GOD BLESS
Gary HARRISON                  Patrick John THOMPSON
Stephen Francis HARRISON       Peter Reuben THOMPSON
Peter Andrew HARRISON          Stuart Paul William THOMPSON
David HAWLEY                   Peter Francis TOOTLE
James Robert HENNESSEY         Christopher James TRAYNOR
Paul Anthony HEWITSON          Martin Kevin TRAYNOR
Carl Darren HEWITT             Kevin TYRELL
Nicholas Michael HEWITT        Colin WAFER
Sarah Louise HICKS             Ian David WHELAN
Victoria Jane HICKS            Martin Kenneth WILD
Gordon Rodney HORN             Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS
Arthur HORROCKS                Graham John WRIGHT
Thomas HOWARD                  Tony BLAND
The Sixth Anniversary
                of

     Hillsborough




Saturday 15 April 1995          *»
                                0




           2.45pm

            The Kop

    Liverpool   Football Club
            A nf ield
        /
            Th e W e l c o m e      -    Monsignor Austin Hunt
                          Hpn* welcomes the congregation and 4-sfrs tHOT W               TtSS
£               for the first Hymn

                Hymn
                Abide with me, fast falls the eventide;
                The darkness deepens, Lord, with me abide,
                Whenother helpers fail, and comforts flee,
                help of the helpless, 0 abide with me.
                Swift to its close ebbs out life's i ^ t i e day;
                earth's joys grow dim, its glories pass       y,
                       aid delay in all around I see;
                0 thou who changest not, abide with me.

                1 need thy presence every passing hour,      __lTQ_9
                ih“ Sut th? grace can foil the ^ m P t e r ^ P°«er7
                Who like thyself my 9 " ^ ® an?n®| y ,S?Se with me.
                Through cloud and sunshine, Lord,
                 t   fear no foe with thee at hand to bless;
            ' ^ e ? e h!sedeath-s9s ^ n g f W h l ? e ? grave t h y ^ c t o r y ?
              I triumph still, if thou abide with me.
                 wnid thou thy cross before my closing eyes;
                 Shine through the gloom, and P ° ^ h ' s % a i n shadows flee;
                 heaven's morning breaks, and earth s'vain snauu »
                 in life, in death, 0 Lord, abide with me.

    ^       ^ please sit

                                                              Reverend Steven Pierce
                 The Book of- R e m e m br a nc e             Reverend John Joughlin
                                                              Monsignor Austin Hunt


            7 •             ,     iM,       frnm The Rnok of Remember an            each <?f tha

    „       t    a t'S                          r:«; a?.LTi
                     rr-r         -1—      ™— • a111n1n 1n s1Tin1nn th* rwpwMt
                     Tn 11fr    in death. 0 lord afeidff with WSL.




    £ ^ Irfu c s.

                                                          2
                                                        ""Xian JOHNSTON
 John-Alfred ANDERSON                                     Christine Ann JONES
 Colin Mark ASHCROFT                                      Gary Philip JONES
 James Gary ASPINALL                                      Richard JONES
 Kester Roger Marcus BALL                                 Nicholas Peter JOYNES
 Gerard Bernard Patrick BARON                             Anthony Peter KELLY
 Simon BELL                                               Michael David KELLY
 Bany Sidney BENNETT                                      Carl David LEWIS
 David John BENSON                                        David William MATHER
  JayidWjUiam BIRTLE
                                                         -i-
      lavid BRADY


In life, in death, O Lord abide with me.
                                                        Francis Joseph McALLISTER
  Carl BROWN                                            John McBRIEN
  David Steven BROWN                                    Marian Hazel McCABE
  Henry Thomas BURKE                                    Joseph Daniel MCCARTHY
  Peter Andrew BURKETT                                  Peter McDONNELL
  Paul William CARLILE                                  Alan McGLONE
  Raymond Thomas CHAPMAN                                Keith McGRATH
  Gary Christopher CHURCH                               Paul Brian MURRAY
  Joseph CLARK                                          Lee NICOL
                                                        Stephen Francis O’NEILL
 ftulCLARK
In life# in death, 0 Lord abide with me^
                                                    Jonathan OWENS
                                                    William Roy PEMBERTON
 Stephen Paul COPOC                                 Carl William RIMMER
 Tracey Elizabeth COX                               David George RIMMER
 James Philip DELANEY                               Graham John ROBERTS
 Christopher Barry DEVONSIDE                        Steven Joseph ROBINSON
 Christopher EDWARDS                                 Hepry Charles ROGERS
 Vincent Michael FITZSIMMONS
                                                    Colin Andrew Hugh William SEFTON
 Thomas Steven FOX
                                                     Inger.SHAH
                                                     Paula Ann SMITH
Inlife, in death                O Lord abide with me7
   • jan ‘lhnmas GLOVER                                 Adam Edward SPEARRITT
     Derrick George GODWIN                              Philip John STEELE
     Roy Hany HAMILTON                                  David Leonard THOMAS
     Philip HAMMOND                                     Patrick John THOMPSON
     EricHANKIN                                         Peter Reuben THOMPSON
• . Gary HARRISON                                       Stuart Paul William THOMPSON
      Stephen Francis HARRISON                          Peter Francis TOOTLE
      Peter Andrew HARRISON                             Christopher James TRAYNOR
      David HAWLEY                                      Martin Kevin TRAYNOR
      James Robert HENNESSEY                            Kevin TYRELL
 in life, in death, O Lord abide with me.
   " Paul Anthony HEWITSON                              Colin WAFER
     Carl Darren HEWITT                                 Ian David WHELAN
     Nicholas Michael HEWITT                            Martin Kenneth WILD
   ' Sarah Louise HICKS                                 Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS
     Victoria Jane HICKS                                Graham John WRIGHT
     Gordon Rodney HORN
     Arthur HORROCKS                                    ToM        SiANJ)
     Thomas HOWARD
     Thomas Anthony HOWARD
     Eric George HUGHES
  In life, in death, 0 Lord abide with me.
        /'




      T h e Sile nce
      At.3.06 all stand to observe a minute of silence in
      remembrance and thanksgiving.

      Blessed are you, Lord our God# lover of souls;
      you uphold us in life and sustain us in death;
      to you be glory and praise for ever!
      As you give light to those in darkness and
      who walk in the shadow of death,
      so remember in your Kingdom your faithful servants,
      where with your saints, you live and reign
      one in the perfect union of love
      now and for ever. Amen.

  ^ please sit
      The First Readin g from the Holy Bible
      The Book of the Phophet Isaiah chapter 25 verses 6 to 9 read
      by David Alton MP
  ^ The Lord will destroy death for ever.

      On this mountain,
      the Lord of hosts will prepare for all peoples
      a banquet of rich food.
      On this mountain he will remove
      the mourning veil covering all peoples,
      and the shroud enwrapping all nations,
      he will destroy Death for ever.
      The Lord will wipe away
      the tears from every cheek;
      be will take away his peoples shame
      everywhere on earth,
      for the Lord has said so.
      That day, it will be said: See, this is our God
      in whom we hoped for salvation;
      the Lord is the one in whom we hoped.
      We exult and we rejoice
      that he has saved us.
       This is the word of the Lord.



       Song for Reflec t i o n
       All listen to the words of ’Tears from Heaven1 - Eric Clapton

i*M          ■




                                       4
y
    /      '■  ■
          ftaconfl Reading

          ^ i ? ^ U f-JM » a g e ? Po r N e « J " « e 3uil^d/e^?ivIrpco? S a y e r

          Jesus said to his disciples.
          •Do not let your hearts be troubled
          Trust in God still, and * ™ * t*“r? g ’hou8e;
          ifethereewereYnot?m i should have told you.


          I shall return to take you with me,
          so that where I am
          E S knowbthe°way to the place where I am going’.
           Thomas said. 'Lord, we do not know where you are going, so how
           can w e know the way?' Jesus said.

                                 the^Father^except^through me.
        , if anyone loves me he wi^ keep my w              ,
          and my Father will love him,
          and we shall come to him
           SSJTSo°S STlS          ?   - 1   £   not keep my words.

           ^ i f t S f S o r l S ? t 5 one*who sent me.
           I have said these things to you
           while still with you;
           but the Advocate, the Holy Spirit,
           Shorn the Father will send in my name,
           will teach you everything                    „on
           and remind you of all I have sa                  •
           Peach I bequeath to you,
           my
            a p own    peace I give you,         4-v,no is mv gift to you.
                e a c e the world cannot give, this is my girt
            £0 not let your he.arts be troubled or afraid.

            This is the Gospel of the Lord.

            The Prayers
    0 7     .11 at:and as +1° «»v«rend .Inhn .IninMig begins
                                   ,       ,fhor life nor death can separate
            0 Lord God, fromwhomneither 1                   love holds in its
            those who trust in your love^                   ^   nexti so unite us
&           embrace your children in this             lves to be united to our
            to yourself that we may kno o                courage, constancy and
                   S S a S T J r - S ^ i f f i - S was buried and rose again for
                  Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


                                                    5
The Reverend Steve Pierce continues:
Remember in mercy, O God our Father, those who still suffer as
a result of the tragedy at Hillsborough, and especially those
for whom we now pray in the silence of our hearts...•
Bless all that is being done for their good, and surround them
with your healing love and power, that your will may be done,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Monsianor Austin Hunt concludes:
Grant, 0 Lord, that we may journey through the years with your
love in our hearts, your truth in our minds and your strength
in our wills. In your mercy, take from us all bitterness,
anger and strife, that when we finally stand before you, it
may be with the assurance of your welcome and the joy of
seeing our loved ones again; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
All loin together in the Lords prayer:-

~      Our Father who art in heaven
       hallowed by thy Name,
       thy Kingdom come, thy will be done,
       on earth as it is in heaven.
       Give us this day our daily bread;
       and forgive us our trespasses,
       as we forgive those who trespass against us,
       and lead us not into temptation,
       but deliver us from evil.
       For thine is the kingdom, the power and t;h© glory,
       for ever and ever. Amen.


Hymn
I watch the sunrise lighting the sky,
casting its shadows near.
And on this morning bright though it be,
I feel those shadows near me.
But vou are always close to me
following all my ways.
Mav I be always close to you
following all vour ways Lord.
I watch the sunlight shine through the clouds,
warming the earth below.
And at the mid-day, life seems to say;
I feel your brightness near me.

For vou are always.
I watch the sunset fading away,
lighting the clouds with sleep.
And as the evening closes its eyes,
I feel your presence near m e .

For you are always...
I watch the moonlight guarding the night,
waiting till morning comes.
The air is silent, earth is at rest
only your peace is near me.
Yes, vou are always,.,


The Blessing
The Lord bless and keep you
the Lord, make his face to shine upon you
and be gracious to you.
The Lord lift up the light of his countenance
upon you and give you peace.
Anfl the blessing of God Almighty,
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit,
be among you and remain with you always. Amen.


Conclasion
All sit and Mr Trevor Hicks. Chairman of the Hi.UgfrorQugh
       Support Group, addresses the Congregation^.
Mr Hicks then invites everyone to stand and loin* in giflflihfiP

 When you walk through a storm
 Hold you head''up high
 And don't be afraid of the dark.
 At the end of the storm there's a golden sky
-And the sweet silver song of a lark.
'Walk on through the wind,
 walk on through the rain,
 Though your dreams be tossed and blown;
 walk on, walk on with hope in your heart
 and you'll never walk alone,
 You'll never walk alone.

 Thank vou for joining us ~ God bless you—all?



 (Instructions for dispersal of the crowd in the <Urectipn_of
 the Memorial . )
Service led by:
iPhfl wight Rev- Monsianor Austin Hunt, All Saints AnfjQl<l
TOO Ramrenra Steve Pierce. Christ Church, W?lt<?n Brft<?k, A n f i s a
r .           .Tnhn Jouah) 1n . oakfleld Methodist rhyrch, flnfWK},-




        /«           f               ■< *"*
      * .      7 * »
