PBR/MG

12th August 1997
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Roc® 528,
50 Queen Anne's Oats,
London, SMB 9AT.




                              ecent data concerning four appointment to
conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough
Disaster.
We regret that we do not have any material new evidence to submit although
we do believe that the Hillsborough Family Support Group, with whoa we
maintain close contact, is In possession of new information which ia very
relevant.
Although we have no new evidence to submit we would nevertheless be quite
willing to seet with you If you consider this might be of benefit to you.
Ro doubt you will let us know your thoughts on this.
He note that you hope to report your findings to the Home Secretary by the
end of this year.

Yours sincerely,



Peter Robinson
Chief Executive
           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
J g j l j k Room 528
P ot l | i l 50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
toR s T Direct Line 0171 273 4046 Fax 4028



 P Robinson Esq                                                  Your reference:
 Chief Executive
 Liverpool FC                                                    Our reference:
 Anfield Road
 LIVERPOOL L4 OTH                                               Date:               July 1997




 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

 As I expect you know, I have been appointed by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny of
 possible fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.

 It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of my scrutiny is to establish whether there
 is any significant new evidence which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry,
 to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities. If there is significant
 evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have affected the outcome of any of the
 proceedings. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary by the end of the year.

 If your Club knows of evidence which was not available at the Inquiry conducted by Lord
 Taylor of Gosforth or at the Inquests, and which might have affected their outcome or the
 decisions of the authorities in relation to prosecution or police disciplinary proceedings, I
 should be grateful if you would let me bave it by 1 September. It would be helpful if you
 could first contact my Secretariat at the address above.

 They will be happy to discuss possible arrangements with you if you wish. Please note that
 the telephone and room numbers shown above are temporary - we will notify you of our
 permanent address and telephone as soon as we have them.

 I have sent similar letters to the chief executives of the Football Association and the Sheffield
 Wednesday and Nottingham Forest clubs. I have also written to the Hillsborough Family
 Support Group, to the South Yorkshire police, and to others with an interest in the matters
 which I am examining.




 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH
                                                                                             r
               [E HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           loom 528
             i Queen Anne's Gate, London^Wl H 9AT
           Dihsct Line 0171 273 434J^Fax 2703


Peter Robinson                                              Your reference:
Chief Executive
Liverpool Football Club                                     Our reference:
Anfield Road
LIVERPOOL L4 OTH                                            Date:             August 1997




I am writing to acknowledge your letter of 12 August to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.


Thank you for your offer of a meeting with the Judge. We may contact you later about that,
though we do of course note that you have no new information to submit. As I expect you
know we are already in touch with the Family Support Group.




 C F BONE
 Secretary to the Scrutiny




 G:\HSLLSBOR\MASN\LFC.051
