           FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION, P.O. BOX 11, LIVERPOOL L26 1XP


 PETER ROBINSON
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE
 LIVERPOOL F.C.
                                                                             COLIN MONEYPENNY


                                                                             LIVERPOOL
                                                                             L19

                                                                  14TH FEBRUARY 1997

                                                                  0151 225 2431 Work
                                                                  0151 427 7751 Home


 De          ins cm

 HILLSBOROUGH DJ^ASTER CAMPAIGN OFFICE

v You may^|>e^aware that last night (13th February) the Merseyside
 vS^anetr"of the FSA held a meeting to discuss how supporters
  organisations and fans in general can provide support to the
  present campaign of the Hillsborough Family Support Group for
  justice, particularly in the light of the impending opening by the
  HFSG of a Campaign Office in the City Centre. As well as our own
  members many family members were also in attendance at the
  meet ing.

Amongst the many matters discussed was the outstanding issue of
the usage of the money awarded in two recent seasons for "Fair
Play" to the supporters of Liverpool Football Club. The Club has
previously asked for the opinions of this organisation and of the
International Supporters Club as to how this money should be spent
and indeed certain ideas have previously been put forward. However
at last night's meeting there was a unanimous resolution of this
Branch of the FSA that Liverpool Football Club should be requested
to utilise such monies now to enable the HFSG to help to meet the
running costs and to provide equipment for the Campaign Office.

The overwhelming feeling last night was that not only would this
be a choice which would meet with the strong approval of the vast
majority of Liverpool supporters who were after all responsible
for earning the award, but that it would also be by far the most
fitting and beneficial use for the money. I was asked to convey
the request to you and to request that, in the light of the
imminent opening of the Office, you give it full consideration as
soon as possible.
I should add that I am aware that the International Supporters
Club have already informed the HFSG of their willingness to
support the families campaign and that they have also informed the
FSA that they are keen to work with us in providing that support
in whatever way necessary. I will therefore now be formally
requesting the ISC to support the request which the FSA is today
making to y o u .


Yours sincerely



C w -i   L.J.J.   i ■i w   J.J.v—   y   v— *   y

Branch Secretary
Merseyside Branch - Football Supporters Association
£ TT EE a nd M EM BE R SE R VI C ES TEL - - 0 1 5 1 2 2 5 2 4 2 7                                         15 A p r ’9?     9:44 N o .001 P.02




         Football Supporters' Association
         Winners of the 1995 Citizenship Award
         supported by (Jib ContmifisiMiiw Racial Equality and ibelnsfim iao/C U iirajhlpSw dtet




                                                                                                                         CQT.TN MOTCTIY?ENNY

                 BRYCE MORRISON                                                                                          ________________
                 ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                                                                     LIVERPOOL
                 LIVERPOOL F.C.                                                                                          LI9

                                                                                                                         0151 225 2431
                                                                                                                         0151 427 77bl

                         ^        ^                                                                                      15th April lay7

                  Bear B,j?yce\

                  HILLSBOROUGH "OAY OP SUPPORT" -                                                 LIVERPOOL V SPURS - MAY 3RD 1 9 9 7

                 I write to fcnank you for the very constructive meeting last night
                 to discu^s^preliminary ideas for the above Day of Support for the.
                 Hillslj^ough Families campaign for justice.

                 I will provide you with more of the details which you have
                 requested hopefully by the end of this week but in the meantime as
                 promised I submit the proposal that approximately £600 from the
                 ’’Pair Play" money awarded to Liverpool supporters should be
                 allocated to enable the production of 36 banners. These banners
                 would be produced by the Football Arts Initiative and would form a
                 focus around the Stadium, along with the smaller cards we are
                 producing with the generous support of a local printer, for the
                 day of support. I would emphasise that it would also be intended
                 to incorporate the banners in some way into the Justice Concert
                 being staged at Anfield the following Saturday - thus providing a
                 link between the two events. The banners, which will bear the
                 names of each of the deceased, would in the longer term also be
                 available 'for any other commemorat ive events, in particular of
                 course future memorial services. Given the reputation of the FAI T
                 would foe confident the banners will be of excellent, and lasting
                 quality.

                 Certainly I will be ensuring that this suggestion and a31 our
                 detailed proposals for the Spurs game meet with the full
                 endorsement of the Family Support Group but I am led to understand
                 that such agreement will almost certainly be forthcoming. The
                 ideas will also be discussed in full at FSA and ISC meetings on
                 Thursday and Friday of this week but again I would anticipate full
                 support from those meetings. In the interim in view of the short-
                 period before the Spurs game Peter Carney from the FAI is keen to
                 at least receive a provisional indication that the proposal could
                 be funded. He will of course be able to provide more detail in the
                 next few days.
                        Football Supporters’ Association PO Box 11, Liverpool, L26 1XP. Telephone/Fax; 0151 73? 2385
^•CTTEEandMEMBERSER VICES TEL :01512252427
                                                 15 A p r !97   9:44 No .001 P.03




          I ara of course aware of the previous request'made for the Club to
          consider utilising the “Fair Play” money to help to purchase
          equipment for and assist with the running costs of the
          Hillsborough Campaign Office - which the Families were intending
          to establish. At the moment this suggestion and therefore our
          request are "on hold'1 but I would hope in any case that that idea
          and indeed any other proposals which may yet emerge to utilise the
          substantive part of the Pair Play money would not influence a
          decision to spend this relatively small amount on something which
          will produce such important short and long term benefits for the
          fans, the Club but most importantly for the Hillsborough families.


          Yours sincerely



          Colin Moneypenny
          Secretary - Merseyside Branch
          Football Supporters Association
