                                                       HOME OFFICE
                                                Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                        Direct line: 071-273- nnn
                                                      Switchboard: 071-273-3000


 Our reference:
                   CRN/90 70/3/1                                     21 June 1991
 Your reference:



The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
Royal Courts of Justice
The Strand
LONDON
WC2A 2LL



Dear Lord Justice Taylor

I am writing to you in my capacity as chairman                     of    the   Inter­
departmental Working Group on Disasters and Inquests.
The group's terms of reference are:

                   "to consider the duplication of inquiries which results when
                   a major public inquiry is held into a civil disaster and the
                   deaths in the disaster are also investigated in a coroner's
                   inquest in England and Wales; and to make recommendations".
The group's membership comprises officials from various Government
Departments with interests in disaster inquiries and inquests.
As a first step the group is          seeking to identify the problems which
arise from the overlap between        a public inauirv and an inauest and the
purpose of this*" letter is to         seek youi* “'Views in the light of your
experience in conducting the          inquiry into the Hillsborough Football
Stadium disaster.

We would welcome your views on any problems which arose from the need
to have two separate systems of inquiry and any suggestions you may wish
to offer on how these might be resolved.     In particular, it would be
helpful to learn your views on the following areas:

                   the areas of overlap which might have occurred between the
                   inquiry and the inquest;

                   whether this overlap was unnecessary and could have been
                   avoided, e.g by changes in the terms of reference of the
                   inquiry, or whether the inquiry and the inquest served two
                   separate functions;
           whether the knowledge that there was to be an inquest had
           any effect on the way in which the inquiry was planned and
           carried out;

           whether there was contact with the coroner and provision of
           information before or/and during the inquiry and if this
           caused any difficulties.

It would also be helpful to have any views which you may have formed
about reaction of the relatives of those who died to the inquiry, in
particular whether you consider that they gained sufficient information
from the public inquiry about the individual circumstances of their
relatives' death.

Finally, I should welcome any other observations which you may wish to
make.


I am writing in similar terms to the Chairmen of the inquiries into the
Bradford Football Stadium Fire, Zeebrugge Ferry Sinking, King's Cross
Tube Fire and the Clapham Train Crash and also to the coroners who held
inquests into these disasters.

The next meeting of the Working Group is planned to take place on 23
July and it would be very helpful if you were able to let us have your
comments before then.
                                        V b o u i S maCj u e(




                                          P R C STORR
                                          E Division




5jun-5
