                                                                 tag?
                                                                 ■H r

                                                        m i
                                   THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
   L ytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG. T e le p h o n e 0253 729421. T elex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                    S ecretary J. D. D e n t




5/8209                                                                                                                29th June, 1990.




The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor,
The Royal Courts of Justice,
The Strand,
LONDON,
WC2A 2LL.


Dear Lord Justice Taylor,

        The Football League and its member clubs are actively pursuing the
implementation of the recommendations contained in your Final Report. Whilst
most of the recommendations can be and are being implemented through the clubs'
safety certificates, the longer-term move towards all-seated accommodation is a
massive project.

        Following the publication of your Final Report, the League wrote to clubs
asking them to produce five or ten year plans for the development of their
grounds. The returns from the clubs are now being collated. We feel that the
next step is to provide to clubs the necessary information on how they can best
put their plans into action.

        The Football League has, therefore, arranged a club seminar at which the
various issues can be addressed. The seminar is to be held at the Albany Hotel,
Smallbrook, Queensway, Birmingham, B5 4EW on Thursday, 2nd August, 1990
commencing at 9.00a.m. Attendance at the seminar is being limited to two
representatives per club and these are likely to be the club Chairman and the
club Secretary.

        The purpose of my writing to you is to ask if you would be able to give
the opening address at this seminar. This would be a great honour for the
Football League and I am sure that the clubs would value the opportunity to hear
your comments and receive your encouragement for the task that lies ahead.




                                                                   -   1   -




                   All correspondence to b e addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
                                      -   2   -




        I very much regret the short notice of this invitation; we have, however,
only recently received confirmation of the date. If you are able to accept, we
will of course take care of your travel and acccmmodation requirements.

        I look forward to hearing frcm you as soon as possible.


                                Yours sincerely,




                                   J.D.
                                   Secretary
