                                                                                     h i
                                                                   'A f- *s(Aa. fl(w ftL--

                      Cc          V<JZ/
                                                      HOME OFFICE
                           Nn . J o k v ,     Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9 AT
                                                     D irect line: 01 -273 3 1 4 6
                                   I'lCwJLv         Switchboard: 01-273 3000



Our reference:
Your reference:
                            c    tv-



    R M Whalley Esq
    Secretary
    Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
    Home Office                                                N il
    Room 662
    50 Queen Anne's Gate
    London SW1H 9AT                                       16 November 1989




    You told me that Lord Justice Taylor would welcome our views on
    the suitability of attendance centre orders for those convicted of
  I football-related offences. He would also like to know the present
  |position on intermittent custody or weekend imprisonment.   ----

    I attach a paper about attendance centres.       It explains the
    statutory basis on which they operate; describes how they are
    nW c ^ e U and jrun ; and offers some comments on their suitability for
    fqotbaJ.1 hooligans. Whether an attendance centre order is        “
    suitable for an individual will depend upon the circumstances and
Vjjhis personal characteristics.        Some of those convicted of
/In football-related offences can sensibly be given attendance centre
 lilorders. However, we doubt whether the disposal is suitable for
   Ideterminedly anti-social offenders.
                                     .
   We considered a year ago whether attendance centres would be
   suitable reporting places for football hooligans prevented from
 a attending matches abroad, under Part II of the Football Spectators
f\Bill. We concluded they could not be used for this purpose,
| jmainly b ^ a i T ^ 'centires were 'urilikely ta be open at: "'the times and
* places that football matches are being played.

   On intermittent custody, in 1984 the Government issued a Green
   Paper seeking views on the desirability and practicability of
   introducing a new disposal of this kind.   In the 1986 White Paper
   on Criminal Justice (Cmnd 9658), it announced that it had decided
   not to pursue the idea. The view among respondents to the Green
   Paper was that a new disposal of this kind was not nfinsssarv and
   there was no agreement about the kind of offender for whom it
   would be suitable. Many felt that it would r e p lace existing
   community sentences rattier than custody; and there was no
agreement over the form it should take. The additional costs were
a significant factor. Ministers have considered the issue again
since 1986 but their view remains the same. Their approach to
sentencing is set out in last year's Green Paper on Punishment/
Custody and the Community (Cm424). Custody should be used only
for the most serious and violent offenders. When it is not
necessary, offenders should be dealt with in the community.
Ministers are considering what fresh powers courts might need to
encourage greater use of community disposals and their proposals
are likely to be published in the New Year.


                                             1   ,K -




                                            MISS J M GOOSE
ATTENDANCE CENTRES:    FOOTBALL HOOLIGANS

1.     Under section 17 of the Criminal Justice Act 1982 courts
have the power to make ^attendance” centre orders for young people
under 21 who                   '                          ""


     (a)    have been convicted of an imprisonable offence; or


     (b)    have defaulted on payment of their fines etc; or
              r         ----------- -— —   —   ------------                        —-»

     (c)    have failed to comply with the requirements of a
            probation or supervision order.


Attendance centre orders may not be used for those who have
previously been given a custodial sentence except in special
(undefined) circumstances.' The minimum length of an order is 12
hours, except for those under 14.                The maximum is 24 hours for
those under 17, and 36 hours for those aged 17 to 20.


2.        The network of centres is managed centrally by the Home
Office, which has delegated the management of individual centres
to local agents.     In most areas, the agent is the Chief Officer of
Police.     At present there are 137 centres:                  111 junior centres
(some mixed) for those aged under 17; and 26 senior centres for
those aged 17 to 20 (males only).                A list of the centres is
attached.     The need for centres is determined by the numbers of
young people coming before the courts locally, and they are mostly
in towns.     Some 50 new centres were opened between 1979 and 1984.
There is a reasonable geographical spread of junior centres in
England and Wales, but senior centres are                     for the most part, in
the larger conurbations.          With the fall in number of juveniles
under 17 being dealt with by the courts, the number of attendance
centre orders has also dropped.                The Home Office has recently
                                                              - ■'.u ;ij , i v .   ......   ,

reviewed the use of the junior centres and a number with low
attendance figures are being closed.


3.        Most centres are in school premises.                      They are normally
open for 2 (junior) or 3 (senior) hours every other Saturday,
usually, but not invariably, in the afternoon.                    A typical order
might be completed in 9 sessionsover an 18 week period.                        Each
centre is staffed by an officer in charge, normally an off-duty,or
retired police officer, assisted by other instructors.                       Rejgi.pes,.
      ........——
      -            Wl^fffftea!|p;a‘i‘
include physical education and at least one other activity.                         Each
centre determines its own programme in accordance with general
guidance from the Home Office.                    The range of activities is very
wide and includes instruction in socially useful skills (first-
aid, life-saving) and handicrafts (woodwork, pottery).                       The aim is
to encourage the young people to make more constructive use of
their free time during an enforced period of loss of leisure.


4.        Attendance centre orders are used for those convicted of
all kinds of offence except the most serious offences of violence.
There is no reason why they should not be used for those convicted
of football-related offences.                     However, there would be
difficulties in their systematic use for determinedly anti-social
football hooligans.                     Attendance centres are not secure.     Although
they are run in a disciplined environment, the staff have no means
beyond their own authority of enforcing discipline and some
 centres have no police officers on their staff.                    Football
hooligans are unlikely to be the most assiduous attenders.
 Imposing an attendance centre order on a person who is unlikely to
I attend and will be returned to court with a view to a different
Iorder being made is counter-productive.                    The activities at centres
 areunlikely to be attractive to many football hooligans.                         Those
 who do attend may well be disruptive and undermine the
 constructive work being done with other, more co-operative
 offenders.


 5.        If the intention is to take football hooligans out of
 circulation while matches are in progress, it should be noted that
 attendance centres can only be run on Saturdays, even on Saturdays
 their hours do not necessarily co-incide with the times of
 matches, and local education authorities might not be prepared to
 lease their premises for use as centres, if they thought there was
 a risk of damage to their property.                    Some authorities are already
 reluctant - or refuse - to do this.
6.        This is not to say that attendance centre orders should not
be used for some football hooligans.     The orders continue to have
a useful place in the range of sentencing options available to the
courts.     However they should be used for those young people,
whether football hooligans or not, for whom they are suitable and
who are likely to respond to the activities.




C1 Division
Home Office
November 1989
JUNIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRES IN ENGLAND AND WALES

Accrington
Barnsley
Barrow-in-Furness
Basingstoke
Bedford
Bilston
Birkenhead
Birmingham (2)
Blackpool
Bolton
Bournemouth
Bradford
Brighton
Bristol
Bury St Edmunds
Cambridge
Canterbury
Cardiff
Carlisle
Chesterfield
Colchester
Corby
Coventry
Crewe
Derby
Dewsbury
Doncaster
Droitwich
Gateshead
Gloucester
Great Yarmouth
Grimsby
Guildford
Halifax
Hertford
Ipswich
Kings Lynn
Kingston upon Hull
Lancaster
Leeds
Leicester
Lichfield
Lincoln
Liverpool (2)
London (central)
London (Croydon)
London (East)
London (Isleworth)
London (North)
London (North West)
London (West)
London (Romford)
London (Sidcup)
London (South)
Luton
Macclesfield
Manchester South
Mansfield
Medway (Chatham)
Middlesbrough
Milton Keynes
Netherton
Newcastle upon Tyne
Northampton
Norwich
Nottingham (2)
Oldham ( 2 )
Oxford
Peterborough
Plymouth
Portsmouth
Prescot (St Helens)
Preston
Reading
Rotherham
St Albans
Salford (2)
Scunthorpe
Sheffield
Slough
Smethwick
Southampton
South Durham (Newton Aycliffe)
South East Northumberland (Ashington)
South Tyneside (Hebburn)
Stockport
Stockton
Stoke on Trent
Sunderland
Swansea
Telford
Tonbridge
Torbay
Tynemouth
Warrington
West Cumbria (Workington)
Wickford
Wigan
Wrexham
York

JUNIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRES FOR GIRLS IN ENGLAND AND WALES

There are 7 junior centres for girls only at

Cleveland
Leeds
London
Manchester
Merseyside
Sheffield
West Midlands

These are to be amalgamated with nearby boys' centres.
SENIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRES IN ENGLAND AND WALES
Bedfordshire (Luton)
Bolton
Bristol
Cleveland (Middlesbrough)
Coventry
Derby
Dewsbury
Doncaster
Essex (Chelmsford)
Hampshire (Fareham)
Leicester
London (4)
Manchester
Medway (Chatham)
Merseyside
Nottingham
Preston
Runcorn
South Wales (Cardiff)
South Yorkshire (Sheffield)
Tyneside (Blaydon)
West Midlands (Birmingham)
West Yorkshire (Leeds)




j 26
                                                                                          £ * r K A c - r fK o * 4
                                                                                                    U O H tf*




relationship betw een the A tto rn e y G e n e ra l, the prosecution and the judiciary     Jt/sTtcd*-
in a way which would not contribute to public confidence or serve the interests
of justice.

  9. T h e G o v e rn m e n t has therefore gone on to consider a third approach
which might achieve the original aim while avoiding the drawbacks of the other
options. This third option would be to build on and give statutory force to the
existing arrangem ents by which the C ourt of A ppeal gives guidance to the
Crown C ourt on m atters of sentencing principle through guideline judgem ents
and th at guidance is p rom ulgated to the judiciary through the Judicial Studies
Board. The C o u rt's practice of providing judgem ents of this kind and the
B o a rd 's work in bringing them to the attention of judges is already making an
im p ortant contribution to achieving g reater consistency in the sentences
im posed. T he C o u rt of A pp eal is concerned to m ake sure that guideline
judgem ents are available for all types of case in which they w ould be helpful
and practicable, and it is ready to provide them for new classes of case w here
they are not available already and to ensure that existing guidelines are
periodically reviewed and k ept up to date. This practice could be further
developed and reinforced if the Judicial Studies Board were given a statutory
duty to assemble and publish, for the benefit of judges and for the information
of the wider public, the C ou rt of A pp eal's guidelines as they apply to particular
classes of offence or particular classes of offender. G uidance of this kind,
published u n d e r the authority of P arliam ent, m ade readily available in a single
and readily com prehensible docum ent and kept regularly u p to d ate, would
both reinforce sentencing standards and provide a sound basis for well
inform ed public d ebate.

   10. T he G o v e rn m e n t has thus considered 3 main options:

  (a) Reviving the proposal which was included in the Prosecution of Offences
      Bill.

  ( b ) G oing furth er and in addition conferring on the C ourt of A ppeal the
        p o w e r to increase the sentence passed in a particular case referred und er
       (a).
   (c) Giving statutory form to the Judicial Studies B o ard 's function of publish­
       ing the C ourt of A p p e a l’s sentencing guidelines and arranging for it to do
       so in a much m ore coherent and m uch m ore accessible form.

   11. The G o v ern m en t has considered these options with very great care and
believes that (c) is likely to be the most generally acceptable and the most
effective in reinforcing sentencing standards and public confidence. The
G o v e rn m e n t would welcome further com m ents on this proposal, but it is at
presen t disposed to include the legislation to give effect to it in the planned
Crim inal Justice Bill.

Sentencing Options
   12. Parliam ent has provided the courts with a wide range of sanctions to deal
with convicted offenders. Prison sentences may be suspended either wholly or
in p a rt, an d the non-custodial options available include com m unity service;
fines; p ro b a tio n (with or without specific conditions) an d, for young offenders,
atte n d a n c e centre orders. In its consultative d o cum ent on the idea of "in term it­
tent custody" (C m n d 9281) the G o v e rn m e n t p^nvassed opinions on the
possibilitv of a new . primarilv punitive, semi-custodial sentence, involving
d e te n tio n for onlv p a rt of th e day or p a rt of th e w eek, as a fu rth e r alternative to
full custody The responses to the d o c u m e n t suggested, how ever, that the
 e x i s t i n g sentencing powers already cater adequately for most of those who
 mi^ht be suitable for such a sentence. T h e r e was no significant measure ot
 agr ee me nt on the form which a new sentence might take, and many of those
 wrho respo nde d expressed the view that it was more likely to replace non­
 custodial measures than full custody. M o reov er, the creation of the necessary
 facilities would involve additional costs. F o r these reasons the G o v ern m en t has
 d ecided not to p u rsu e the proposal.

    13.      T h e courts do have a pow er, u n d e r section 134 of the M agistrates’
 C ourts Act 1980. to o rd er offenders to be detain ed for up to fo u r days in police
 cells T h e G o v e rn m e n t's view is th a t if th e re were to be a sentence involving
 sustained overnight detentio n oth e r th a n in prison, it should involve accom­
 m o d a tio n . and supervising agencies, suitable for that p urpose— as did the
 proposals in the G re e n P a p e r on in term itten t custody. But the pow er under
 section 134 of the 1980 A ct involves the use of unsuitable accom m odation
 in deed in som e areas there are no police cells certified for deten tio n under the
 p ow er— and in a p p ro p ria te p ersonnel, the police being properly used to p re ­
 vent a n d investigate crime, not as an agency for carrying ou t court sentences
 T he G o v e rn m e n t accordingly proposes to repeal section 134 of the 1980 Act.

     14. T he G o v e rn m e n t is also considering w hether the courts should be given
  a dditional pow ers in relation to rep aratio n betw een offenders and victims.
  E xperience in th e U nited States, and som e limited experience h ere, suggests
  that w ith the clear initial consent of th e victim and with careful handling
  re p a ra tio n can be effective in giving greater satisfaction to the victim and
  bringing the offender to face up to the consequences of the crime. The
  G o v e rn m e n t is funding several experim ental schemes (operating un d er the
  existing limited pow ers) in o rd e r to exam ine the potential of reparation further
   and to shed light on som e of the practical issues which arise. T h e relevant issues
   are se t out in m ore detail in a consultative docum ent published recently.

      15 T he G o v e rn m e n t recognises th a t th ere is concern to im prove courts
   p ow ers to deprive convicted offenders of the proceeds of their crimes. T h a t
   concern arises with special force and urgency in drug trafficking cases, and the
   G o v e rn m e n t has accordingly placed b efore Parliam ent proposals for dealing
   with that m a tte r in this Session’s D ru g Trafficking Offences Bill. T hese p ro ­
   posals include a re q uirem en t upon the C row n C ourt to m ak e a confiscation
   o rd e r to the value of th e proceeds which the offender has derived from drug
   trafficking; pow er for the High C ou rt to m ake orders "freezing ’ the assets ot
   p erson s suspected of d ru s trafficking and of third parties to w hom such assets
   have been passed; provision for the en forcem ent of confiscation orders by
   proceedings in th e High C o u rt to realise any of the offender s assets w ithout
    w aitin° to see w h eth er he defaults in p a y m en t; and an increase in the m axim um
    te rm s of custodv which a court m ay o rd e r to be served in the event of wilful
    d efault in pav m en t. In o rd e r to take account of th e particular difficulty in drug
    trafficking cases of establishing exactly w hat proceeds th e offender has derived
                                                    8
from his crimes, th e proposals include p ow er for th e C ou rt in a p p ro priate cases
to assume th a t all his assets re p resen t the proceed s of drug trafficking except in
so far as the judge is satisfied to the contrary.

  16. T h e G o v e rn m e n t accepts that som e of the'pro po sals listed in the p re ­
vious p ara g ra p h m ay not be a p p ro p ria te to many crimes, though similar
considerations do applv to . for exam ple, w hat is term ed “organised crim e” , or
verv s e n o u s fraud. It intends to move further down this p a th , and would
welcome anv com m ents on the extent to which some or all of the special
arran gem en ts which it proposes for drug trafficking cases might be applied to
other'crim es. It will announce its conclusions in due course.

   17. T he G o v e rn m e n t also proposes to strengthen courts' pow ers to order
the forfeiture of pro p e rty used in connection with crime. T h e presen t general
pow ers (in section 43 of the Pow ers of Crim inal Courts A ct 1973) only apply to
offences punishable with two years im prisonm ent or m ore, to goods in the
offender's possession or control at the tim e of arrest, and to goods used, or
in ten ded for use, in com m itting an offence. A ny wider pow er has to be
specifically p rovided, on an ad hoc basis, in legislation dealing with particular
 offences. T he G o v e rn m e n t’s proposal is to extend the general pow er to all
 offences, to pro p e rty lawfully seized at any time and to goods of which
 possession is itself an'offence. This wider provision will ensure that the pow er
 to o r d e r forfeiture will be available as a sentencing option w henever it might be
 needed.


 Young Offenders
    18.       Part I of th e Criminal Justice A ct 1982 introduced a strengthened and
 simplified structure of sentencing pow ers for dealing with offenders aged under
 21. T h e new stru ctu re has been in place for little m ore than two years and the
 G o v e rn m e n t has no plans for radical change. T h e re is, how ever, one im portant
 a d ju stm e n t in the provisions for custodial sentences which the G overn m ent
 believes would be desirable, in the light of experience so far. Broadly speaking,
 the A c t provides that if a custodial sentence passed on a m ale young offender
 aged 15 or over is betw een three weeks an d four m onths it is to be served in a
 d e te n tio n centre; if m ore than four m onths in a youth custody centre. T he A ct
 also provides that where a young offender has been re m a n d e d in custody
 b e fo re sentence the time spent on re m a n d should count tow ards sentence, as it
  does for adults. T h e W hite P a p e r on Y o un g O ffenders (C m n d 8045, 1980)
  recognised th at this would call for some flexibility in allocating young offenders
  within the prison system. It noted that there would be cases w here the time
  spent in custody after sentence fell below the m inim um for th e type of sentence
  im posed because time spent in custody on rem and had been taken into
  accou nt, and w ent on to p rop o se that in such cases the Secretary of State should
  have discretion to place young offenders in w hatever kind of young offender
  a ccom m odation seem ed most approp riate. T h e 1982 A ct gave only partial
  effect to this, and provided no means by which young offenders with short
  “effective” youth custody term s to serve could be held o th e r than in youth
  custody centres o r prisons. E xp erience has shown that these arrangem ents do
  not enable the best use to be m ade of the existing resources. T h e re are
