                                                   U N I V E R S IT Y OF
                                                NEWCASTLE U P O N TY N E



LM/DR


6th September, 1990

                                              Department of Mechanical, Materials
                                                and Manufacturing Engineering
The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor
Royal Courts of Justice,                             Stephenson Building
                                                        The University
Strand,                                          Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU
LONDON.
                                                      Head of Department
WC2A 2LL                                         Professor L Maunder OBE FEng




      The Advisory Design Council - to be slightly renamed as
the Football Stadia Advisory Design Council - met for the
first time last week under the Chairmanship of Gwilym
Roberts, sometime     President of the Institution of Civil
Engineers and a leading (but apparently withdrawing) light in
various construction companies. Chris Nicholson of H.S.E. is
also on the Council, together with Simon Inglis, Alan
Butterfield (of George Corderoy & Co.) and Geraint John of
the Sports Council.      Service is being provided by the
Football Association and the Football League, with an initial
budget of £100,000    for its first year. I thought you might
like to know that,    on the whole, the position lookspretty
good: the FA and the FL seem quite prepared to stay at arm's
length, and Gwilym Roberts has made a vigorous start.

      On another front, a revised draft of the Green Guide
has been circulated widely by the Home Office, although in
the first rush of their enthusiasm they neglected your
Technical Working Party. However, a copy found its way to me
by other means, and I am trying to persuade the new Council
to respond collectively.

      A final note - Peter Bolton of the Home Office has sent
me the enclosed text of an address he gave recently.    There
may be a few more thing for the legislators to do.




                                                  Telephone • 091 222 6000
                                                   Direct d ia l-091 222 6200
                                                        F a x-091 261 0191
                                                  T e le x -53654 (UNINEWG)
