       DRAFT


       HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY - PART II

       Meeting at Home Office (Room 662) Queen Anne's Gate)
       Monday 11 September 12.15 pm


       Aide-Memoire on Points for Discussion on Structure of Part II


       1.      Timetable and scope:


                    expectation of completion in January;


                    how much more to say on interim recommendations and
iu f
                    direct Hillsborough experience;


            /-      how radical an approach:   ("a new charter for
                    football";   "last hope for sanity");


                    or piecemeal approach to various key issues;


                    extent of expectations in Final Report and balance of
                    diagnosis and prescription;


                    centrality of discussion on organisation and
                    administration of professional football and policing of
                    football matches;
                                                            /        /
                    range of ^ports to be covered (football, Rugby Union,
                    Rugby League, tennis and cricket)   ? golf, horse
                    racing, greyhound racing, (athletics, boxing, indoor
                    stadia^


       2.      Visits at home:


                    Calendar of Major Sporting Events and Barclays League
                    fixture list (available for reference at meeting);
    possible visits by Sir Peter so far considered:-


    23 September     Millwall -v- Chelsea
    30 September     Chelsea     -v- Arsenal
    6 October        Manchester United and Manchester City
                      (Friday visit to grounds)
    7 October        Salford     -v- Leigh (Rugby League)
    25 November      Barbarians -v- All Blacks (Twickenham)
    12 December      Varsity Match (Twickenham);


    invitations also from Leeds, Luton and Derby;


    other big grounds (Tottenham Hotspur, Aston Villa,
    Everton).


Scotland:


    Ibrox;


    ? Murrayfield and Aberdeen;


     ? Scottish organisations (Scottish Office, Scottish
    branches of FA and FL, RFU, and Sports Council;         COSLA;
    police, fire and ambulance services).


Wales:


    Cardiff Arms Park (invitation from Welsh RFU)


Visits abroad:


    Nimes        to see gates;    c.f. video, article by
     Monsieur Cloez (copy available at meeting), visit by FA
     (Annex J to their Part II submission);


     Utrecht     (to see new stadium built by 88 Construct,
     and meet officials of Dutch Government and football
     authorities to discuss membership schemes);
            Milan         (to see San Siro stadium shared by AC Milan
            and Inter Milan and meet officials of football
            authorities to discuss membership schemes and briefing
            on arrangements for World Cup 1990);


            ? Barcelona       (Olympic Games 1992) and ? Lisbon;


            ? Canada/USA      (to see super stadia)


6.   Meetings to discuss points raised in evidence (umbrella
     listI)


            Home Office
            Department of the Environment
            Football Association and Football League
            Football Trust and Football Grounds Improvement Trust
            Rugby Football Union and Rugby Football League
            Sports Council and Central Council for Physical
            Recreation                 . .
            Representative groups:      police, fire, ambulance
            (statutory and voluntary)
            Local authorities (ACC, AMA, ADC and London)
            Football Supporters' Association and National
            Federation of Football Supporters' Clubs
            Disabled groups
            Technical groups (see also 7 below):
                    Institution of Structural Engineers
                    Building Research Establishment
                    Institute of Building Control
                    Royal Town Planning Institute


7.   Grfeen Guide:


Options:-           (a)   a working party to "review and recommend
                          amendments or additions" (on model of
                          Appendix E to Popplewell);


                    (b)   a selective approach to areas of difficulty
                          (eg crowd densities, perimeter fences, crush
                       barrier testing - ie further development by
                       HSE of work done so far);


                 (c)   consideration whether it should be mandatory
                       in some form (statutory or in a code of
                       practice);   extent of discretion permitted by
                       Guide;   means of enforcement;


8.    Other analytical work (feasible in timescale)


           crowd behaviour (Professor Canter (University of
           Surrey), University of Leicester);


           surveys of crowd attitudes eg to membership schemes,
           all seater stadia and pre-match entertainment (FA Annex
           N);


           community relations schemes (FA Annex P).


9.    Identity cards and membership schemes


           Department of Environment evidence


           views of football authorities and police


           overseas experience


           feasibility studies                 (FA Annexes L and M),
                                     (FA Annex 0)


           demonstration of technology (GEC).


10.   All seater stadia - FA Annexes E, F and G;


Questions of


           desirability (balance of safety and control arguments)


           acceptability to the public
            financial viability


11 .   Super-stadia


The same questions as at 10 above.


            ? Scope for advocacy of radical change - sharing of new
            stadia between existing clubs;


            geographical location (greenfield sites or urban areas;
            transport links;   spread across Great Britain);


            planning considerations;


            availability for other sports and other commercial
            enterprises;


            preservation and positive development of existing club
            loyalties and community involvement under football
            trust schemes.


12.    Alcohol and drugs


            existing provisions and their effects including
            displacement effects pre-match (off-licences, pubs,
            late arrivals);


            extent of crowd behaviour problems directly
            attributable to alcohol and drugs and views of police
            and clubs;


            balance of need to induce earlier entry into ground
            against wrong "signals" on alcohol;


            searching for alcohol and drugs and effects on progress
            through turnstiles.


13.    Ticketless fans and ticket touts
    availability of tickets for various kinds of matches;
    arrangements and control;


    "all ticket" -v- "pay as you enter";


    linkage with membership schemes;


    problems of away supporters;


    are touts a menace?    effective action to stop them
     (police action:   offences);


    displacement effects if touts are driven underground
     (pubs, coaches etc)


Safety Certificate procedure


    build on it as basis of current controls;


     linkage with Green Guide and extent of mandatory
     requirements;


     scope of present legislation (eg Orders under 1987 Act
     and bids to add compulsory conditions in Certificates
     by statute);


     effectiveness of local authority procedures;


     national oversight - functions of Football Licensing
     Authority (Hansard columns 545 to 550 on 20 July -
     copies available at meeting);


     role of HSE - extension of competence of Health and
     Safety at Work Act
