                 ^SUNDAY CAMPAIGN
                                                                                                   A ll enquiries: Jubilee House


                                                   S                                               3 H o o p e r St. C a m b rid g e , CB1 2 N Z
                                                                                                   Tel. C a m b rid g e 0223 311596
                                                                                                   Fax. C a m b rid g e 0223 61646




Lord-Justice Taylor, Q.C.
Royal Court of Justice,
LONDON WC2A 2LL                                                                                           18th June 1990




Dear Lord-Justice Taylor,


     In the light of your recent report on the Hillsborough Disaster, I
copy to you a letter which I had written to the Commercial Director of the
Football League, dated 2nd April 1990.
     We feel very deeply in this Campaign that professional Sunday sport
and the amendment of the law in relation to Sunday shop opening hours are
inexplicably linked, and in view of the continuing and distressing level of
football-related violence, it was most unfortunate that reference was made
in your report to the prospect of yet more games being switched to Sundays.
Your observation that the day is relatively more peaceful and quiet than
the other days of the week is good for as long as Sunday is still regarded
as special in the way that it is now.   Any move to deregulate shopping
hours would of course have an immediate bearing upon Sunday professional
sport, and of course all those who would be drawn into work because of
either one or the other. I am sure,too,that you would appreciate the
incredibly increased demand upon the forces of law and order giving
increased opportunities for crime when shops are open, and when other
services such as banks and building societies would no doubt open to serve
them, together with the need for policing resources to be maintained at
sports grounds.
       I hope therefore that you do not mind if I send you some of our
 latest material on the Sunday Shopping controversy, because I believe that
 the question of Sunday professional sport cannot really satisfactorily be
 segregated from other considerations. I hope therefore that upon further
 consideration you might wish to consider modifying or withdrawing your
 original recommendation.   I know that our concerns are shared by the
 police authorities, not to mention organisations representing those that
 would have to work on Sundays to provide the leisure for the rest of us.
 These matters are fully covered in my letter of the 2nd April, a further
 copy of which I enclose in case the original did not reach you.



                         P a tro n s :   D on a ld An de rso n MP • Sir N o rm a n A nderson OBE • Lord Beaum ont o f W h itle y - A la n Beith MP                  _
   Rt. Hon. Sir Bernard Braine D.L. MP • Viscount C a ld e c o te • Rev. C live C a lv e r • S ir F. C a th e rw o o d M.E.P. • C yril D avidson • Mnrs- V ic t° n ° G ‘lhc k
  L o rd G ra h a m o f Edmonton • Lord G ra n c h e ste r • Miss M ild re d H ea d OBE • Viscount Ingleby • V e ry Rev. Dr. W . B. Johnston • Rt. Rev. L. M c C a rtie
                   Sir Peter M ills • Rt. Rev. H ugh M o n te fio re • BUI “ C o m p o ” O w e n MBE • Rt. Rev. D a vid S hepperd • Rt. Rev. John T a y lor
                                           Viscount T o n ypa n d y • Professor D uncan Vere FRCS ■ Mrs. Ann W in te rto n MP
                                             O ffice rs: C h a irm an : V iscount B re ntfo rd • H on Treasurer: A. Russell FCA.
                                                 D ire c to r: Dr. M. Schluter • O p e ra tio n s D ire c to r: D avid Blackm ore
     Perhaps in due course you would be kind enough to let me have a
response, or if you feel a meeting would be desirable, we would be only too
delighted to make satisfactory arrangements.

     With best wishes,


                             Yours sincerely




                   David Blackmore - 0         s Director
                                                                                                   A ll enquiries: Jubilee House
                                                                                                   3 H o o p e r St. C a m b rid g e , CB1 2 N Z
T. Phillips Esq.,                                                                                  Tel. C a m b rid g e 0223 311596
Commercial Director,                                                                               Fax. C a m b rid g e 0223 61646
Football League Ltd.
319 Clifton Drive,
Lytham St. Anne,
Lancashire.                                                                                                      13th June 1990




Dear Mr. Phillips,

     On 2nd April 1990, I wrote to you expressing concern about the number
of professional soccer fixtures switching to Sundays and the inextricable
links between the mention of Sunday soccer in the Taylor Report and the
whole question of Sunday shopping and the whole question of Sunday shopping
and commercialisation. I expressed the hope that in the light of the
research that we have undertaken, we might open up a dialogue on this
difficult but crucial quality of life issue.

     In the light of the recent distressing and continuing football
violence at certain grounds, and the lack of confidence that we have in the
future that this violence will cease, I do hope that the football
authorities are reconsidering their earlier enthusiasm for yet more
fixtures on Sundays at the expense of the quality of life of local
residents and those drawn into work.   I do hope therefore that
you will be in a position to let me have a response to my letter as we
would very much like to open up a sensible and realistic dialogue with you
and colleagues on this very important issue.

        Looking forward to hearing from you at your earliest conveniences


                                                              Yours sincerely




                                       David Blackmore ^ttoe'fations Director




                          P a t r o n s : D o n a ld A nderson MP • Sir N o rm a n An de rso n OBE • Lord Beaum ont o f W h itle y • A ta n Beith MP
   Rt. Hon. S ir Bernard Braine D.L. MP • V iscount C a ld eco te • Rev. C live C a lv e r • Sir F. C a th e rw o o d M.E.P. • C yril D avidson • Mrs. V ic to ria G illic k
  L o rd G ra h a m o f Edm onton ■ Lord G ra n che ster • Miss M ild re d H e a d OBE • Viscount Ingleby • V e i7 Rev. D r. W . B. Johnston • Rt. Rev. L. M cC artie
                   Sir Peter M ills ■ Rt. Rev. H ug h M o n te fio re • Bill “ C o m p o " O w e n MBE • Rt. Rev. D a vid Shepperd • Rt. Rev. John T a ylor
                                                Viscount T o nypandy • Professor D uncan V ere FRCS • Mrs. A nn W in te rto n MP
                                                    O f f i c e r s : C h a irm an : Viscou n t B re ntfo rd • H on Treasurer: A . Russell FCA.
                                                           D ire c to r: Dr. M . S chluter • O p e ra tio n s D ire cto r: D avid Blackm ore
           ’SUNDAY CAMPAIGN
                                                                                    All enquiries: Jubilee House
                                                                                    3 H ooper St. Cambridge, CB1 2NZ
                                                                                    Tel. Cambridge 0223 311596


DB/JK

T. Phillips E sq.,
Commercial Director,
Football League Ltd.
319 Clifton Drive,
Lytham St. Anne                                                                                          2nd April 1990
Lancashire


Dear Mr. Phillips,
     I am writing to you to express deepest concern about the issue of
increasing the number of football league fixtures that take place on
Sunday. We are aware that the matter has received attention recently, due
to the recommendations of the Taylor Report and the spectator opinion poll
findings of 'The Missing Voice'.
     Taylor's opinion, that 'Sunday matches ought also to be considered an
option', was based on the absence of heavy traffic, commercial activity and
of alcohol on a Sunday.    'The Missing Voice', it seems, found a small
majority of 42 percent against 38 percent in favour of matches being played
on Sunday. However only 561 people were interviewed (mostly single males
between the ages of 15 and 24 following First Division clubs . This has
qiven rise to what we would contend are extremely superficial and
misleading comments in the media and elsewhere. I understand, though, you
are intending to carry out more extensive research to provide more reliable
soundings.
      Clearly, the Football League has to address a wide range of important
 issues affecting the game as we enter the new decade, and w e w i s h you eveiy
 success in meeting the challenges. Our concern, of course, is with the use
 made of Sunday football.
      The stance that the Keep Sunday Special Campaign has taken towards
 Sunday football has sought to balance conflicting interests, as we try to do
 on the issue of Sunday trading. T h e s e interests include on the one hand
 those of the playersr ground staff, police and others employed on a day
 that they would normally expect to have off, and those affected by the
 decision to hold a match, particularly local residents who are used to a
 quiet Sunday environment. On the other hand are those that derive
 legitimate recreation from going to watch a football match, and the
 commercial interests involved.
       At the moment, commercial interests direct that one :mportant League
  fixture a week should be switched to Sunday to be televised live, and that




             P a tro n s: Sir Norman A nderson OBE • Lord B eaum ont o f W hitley • Alan Beith MP • Rt. H on Sir B ernard Braine D.L. MP
                   V iscount Caldecote • Rev. Clive Calver ■ Sir F. C ath erw o o d M.E.P. • Cyril Davidson • Lord Gra h am o fE d m o n to n
                 Lord G ranchester • V iscount Ingleby • V ery Rev. Dr. W.B. Joh n ston • Rt Rev L M cC artie ^M iss MUdred H ead OBE
                       Sir P e te r Mills • Rt. Rev. Hugh M o n tefio re • Rt. Rev. Lord Bishop o f St. Albans • T he Rt. Rev. D. Sheppa a
                                                         V iscount Tonypandy • Mrs. Ann W in te rto n MP
                                           O fficers: C hairm an: V iscount B rentford • Hon. T reasurer: A- Russell FCA.
                                                Director: Dr. M. Schluter ■ O p eration s D irector: David Blackmore
two or three other matches on any given Sunday might take place. This is
of course in addition to F.A. Cup matches under the control of the F.A. We
hope that the Football League will not seek to extend this schedule without
the most careful consultation involving all parties to the debate. These
soundings, we submit should not come only from those who benefit from the
service, but also from those who provide it (players, ground staff,
administrators, police and those in public transport,and services to name a
few) and those local residents who are affected by the noisy and
complicated arrangements made each weekend.    These latter folk are
important especially since nearly all Football Leagues grounds are in
heavily residential and urbanised areas.

     We have not come to this conclusion lightly. A previous Secretary of
the Professional Football Association, has said that "Professional
footballers much prefer to play on Saturdays!" A poll we conducted of
residents living close to seven football league grounds demonstrated that
62 percent would be inconvenienced or disturbed if more matches were played
on a Sunday ('Soccer on Sundays', copy enclosed).   The Police Federation
were deeply concerned about recent proposals in Parliament to deregulate
all professional Sunday sport and betting. We are pleased that Parliament
took note of such widespread concern.

     It is important that the wishes of many people not to have to work on
Sundays, or to have their day disrupted by those who do, should be of
primary importance in this respect. A decision to switch more and more
matches or even the entire football league programme to Sunday will surely
prejudice their well-being and quality of life. Safeguards for the
interests of everyone concerned are needed, the more so when Sunday retail
trading, sport and betting are inextricably linked.

     We have proposed that Sunday Sport should be regulated by the local
authority, after having taken soundings from all those involved or affected
by it. These detailed proposals can be found in chapter 6 of 'The Sunday
Sport Question' (copy enclosed), and are deemed a constructive response to
the needs and wishes of each party to the debate.

     We would welcome your comments on them, and on your approach both to
collecting opinion poll evidence on Sunday football, and the achievement of
arrangements s at is factory to all those involved.

                            Yours sincerely,




                             Davij^j&tftflanore
                           Operations Director
