                            w ith compliments



H.M. Treasury                   TREASURY
Parliament Street               PRESS
London SW1P 3AG                 OFFICE
Tel JOT 270   $ 'L O c <>
                                                                 INLAND
                                                                REVENUE
                                                        Press Release
     INLAND REVENUE PRESS OFFICE, SOMERSET HOUSE, STRAND, LONDON WC2R 1LB
          NATIONAL MEDIA: 071 438 6692/6706/7327 REGIONAL MEDIA: 071 438 7356
   NON MEDIA ENQUIRIES: YOUR OWN TAX OFFICE OR PUBLIC ENQUIRY ROOM 071 438 6420




[3x]                                                 25 June 1990




                             HELP FOR FOOTBALL


In his Budget Speech the Chancellor announced his plan to
help football implement the recommendations in Lord Justice
Taylor's report on the Hillsborough disaster.  His main
proposal is a reduction in the pool betting duty from 42.5
per cent to 40 per cent.



The Chancellor wants football to get the full benefit of
this duty reduction.   A new clause to the Finance Bill has
therefore been tabled.   This will remove certain liabilities
under the direct tax system which would otherwise arise.




                                    DETAILS

B a c k g ro u n d

1.  The pools promoters, who pay pool betting duty, have
agreed with the Football League and the Scottish Football
League that amounts equal to the reduction of 2.5 percentage
points in the duty will be paid to the trustees of the
Football Trust 1990. And the trustees have resolved to
spend the money on capital works to improve the safety and
comfort of spectators at football grounds in accordance with
Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations.




                                            1
 Effect of new clause

 2.   The new direct tax clause deals with four separate
 points:


     (a)   It provides that the pools companies can have
           a deduction for the payments they make to the
           trustees of the Football Trust 1990 in
           computing their trading profits.


     (b)   It removes the payments from the charge to
           income tax.


     (c)   It removes Inheritance Tax charges on payments
           which are either distributed to the football
           clubs or held in the Trust.


    (d)    It enables football   clubs to claim capital
           allowances on their   gross qualifying capital
           expenditure and not   merely on the net amount
           after deducting the   contribution received from
           the trustees.



Commencement

3.  The special treatment proposed by the new clause will cover
all payments made by the pools promoters from 28 May 1990, which
is the date the pool betting duty reduction came into force.




                         NOTES FOR EDITORS

1.   Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report on the Hillsborough
Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989 was published on 18 January
1990 (Cm 962).   The Report makes a number of recommendations
which are designed to improve safety and comfort at football
grounds.   In his Budget Speech, the Chancellor recognised that
these recommendations placed a significant financial burden on
football clubs.   He also recognised that many clubs are in a weak
financial position and only a handful are profitable.


2.   The Chancellor therefore announced his intention to help
football by arrangements involving a reduction of pool betting
duty which would inject cash into the game of about £100 million
over five years.   The purpose of the new direct tax clause is to
ensure that the full amount of the reduction reaches football.




                                   2
