AWKWARD QUESTIONS



Police



       1.   Do you think Peter Wright should resign?



       2.   Do you think anyone else should resign?



       3.   Do you think Mr Duckenfield should


                 (a)   be charged with manslaughter;



                 (b)   be left in his current post;



                 (c)   be disciplined or dismissed from the service?



       4.   Do you think Mr Murray should have been more active?



       5.   Do you think Mr Marshall deserves any blame?



Club



       6.   Do you think the Club were incompetent or negligent?



       7.   Do you think the Hillsborough ground should now be
            condemned as unsafe?
     8.    Do you think the Leppings Lane end should be closed
           until it is redesigned?



     9.    Do you think clubs can afford the changes you propose?



Dr Eastwood



     10.   Do you think Dr Eastwood was misled by the Green Guide?



     11.   Do you think he should have tested the barriers more
           rigorously?



     12.   Do you think he should have realised that barrier 124a
           would collapse sooner or later?



Citv Council



     13.   Do you think the elected members of the Council should
           resign because of the incompetence of their staff?



     14.   Do you think Mr Bownes should remain in charge of
           licensing?



     15.   Why do you think the City Council took so long to amend
           the Safety Certificate?
     16.   Do you think the FA would be unwise to hold another
           Semi-Final at Hillsborough?



Liverpool Supporters



     17.   You say "the presence of an unruly minority who had
           drunk too much aggravated the problem".   How
           significant was that?



     18.   Do you think the Liverpool fans tried to provoke the
           police?



Photographers



     19.   You've seen the Press Council report, presumably.     Do
           you agree with them that the behaviour of some
           photographers at the scene appeared "unhelpful or
           insensitive"?



Green Guide



     20.   What changes are needed to the Green Guide?



     21.   Should it now be made statutory?
Recommendations



Maximum Capacities



     22.   You say that the Green Guide criteria may not have been
           applied with sufficient rigour at other grounds?   Have
           you reasons to think this is a wide-spread problem?



     23.   Why do you suggest a figure of 15% for reduction in
           capacities?



     24.   Do you mean all terraced areas or just pens?



Filling and Monitoring Terraces



     25.   You say that there should be police or stewards on the
           perimeter checking crowd conditions.    What should they
           be looking for?



     26.   What do you mean by "crowd dynamics"?



     27.   What kind of demonstrations and photographs do you have
           in mind?



Fences and Gates



     28.   Don't you think it would be safer if all the fences
           came down now?
     29.   If perimeter gates are open, don't you think there is a
           danger of more pitch invasions?   Won't that make police
           attitudes even harder?



     30.   Don't you think it's unwise to rely on such narrow
           gates as Emergency Exits?



Crush Barriers



     31.   Do you think a whole new approach is needed to the
           testing of crush barriers?



Safety Certificates



     32.   Would you expect there to       be many groundswherethe
           Safety Certificate needs reviewing?



     33.   You're laying down pretty stringent rules    about Safety
           Certificates - are these really necessary?



     34.   Do you see the Advisory Group as a first step to
           greater football "democracy?"



Duties of Each Football Club



     35.   What had you in mind when you said each turnstile
           should be inspected and its potential rate of flow
           measured?
    36.    Why do you specify a period of one hour for the flow
           rate through turnstiles?



     37.   How much detail should there be on signposts and
           tickets - surely most supporters know their way in?



     38.   What sort of pre-match entertainment do you think will
           get people in earlier?



Police Planning



     39.   You say that a Chief Constable should nominate a "chief
           officer" for liaison duties.    How senior should he be?



     40.   Do you think the police will need to review their
           Operational Orders comprehensively?



     41.   How much trouble do you think the police should be
           prepared for outside grounds?



     42.   Do you think police should screen fans well away from
           grounds like they do abroad?



     43.   Don't you think delaying kick-off will just encourage
           fans to make a habit of coming late?
Communications



     44.   Do you think it's possible in fact to have effective
           communications at football grounds, given all the
           problems you found happened at Hillsborough?



     45.   Don't you think the police ought to be able to cope
           without hand signals?



Co-ordination of Emergency Services



     46.   Do you think there's a long way to go before there's
           really effective liaison?



First Aid. Medical Facilities and Ambulances



     47.   What do you think first aiders could have done at
           Hillsborough?



     48.   What do you have in mind by way of first aid rooms?



     49.   Wo n 't the recommendations on doctors and ambulances be
           costly for clubs?
PART TWO



General



     50.   Will you be having extensive talks for Part Two?



     51.   What grounds do you hope to visit?



     52.   What other sports are you going to be looking at?



     53.   Will.you be making study visits abroad?



Identity Cards



     54.   Will you be meeting Mr Moynihan to talk about identity
           cards?



     55.   Will you be making advance recommendations about
           identity cards so that they can be incorporated into
           the Bill?



All-seater Stadia



     56.   Do you agree with the Home Secretary that all-seatex
           stadia are now necessary?



     57.   Who do you think should find the money for all-seater
           stadia?
Alcohol



     58.   The Sunday Times suggested you were in favour of
           alcohol sales at grounds.    Are you going to be
           recommending this in Part Two?



Ticketless fans and Touts



     59.   Do you think more legislation is needed to deal with
           ticketless fans and touts?



Final Report



     53.   Can you say more precisely when you will have finished
           your Final Report?
