ROYAL COMMISSION ON
TRIBUNALS OF INQUIRY
                             1966
Report of the Commission under the Chairmanship
      of The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Salmon




         Presented to Parliament by Command of Her Majesty
                            November 1966


                           VilATOB


                     LIBRARY

         H E R M A JE ST Y ’S STA TIO N ER Y O F F IC E
                       FIVE SHILLINGS NET
Cmnd. 3121
ROYAL COMMISSION ON
TRIBUNALS OF INQUIRY
                             1966
Report of the Commission under the Chairmanship
      of The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Salmon




         Presented to Parliament by Command of Her Majesty
                            November 1966




                          LONDON
         H E R M A JESTY ’S STA TIO N ER Y O F F IC E
                        FIVE SHILLINGS NET
Cmnd. 3121
  The estimated gross total expenditure of the Commission is £15,053. Of this
sum, £638 represents the estimated cost of printing and publishing this
Report and £2,615 the estimated cost of printing and publishing the Evidence.
                          THE ROYAL WARRANT

             E lizabeth R.



                                                        Signed on behalf of
              M argaret                                     Her Majesty




  E lizabeth T he S econd, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Our other Realms and
Territories Q ueen , Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith to
  Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Counsellor Sir Cyril Barnet Salmon,
knight, one of Our Lords Justices of A ppeal;
  Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Cousin and Counsellor James Gray,
Viscount Stuart of Findhorn, Member of the Order of the Companions of
Honour, Member of Our Royal Victorian Order, upon whom has been
conferred the Decoration of the Military Cross ;
  Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Arnold Abraham, Baron Goodman ;
  Our Trusty and Well-beloved:—Wilfred Lanceley Heywood, Esquire,
Commander of Our Most Excellent Order of the British Em pire;
  John Blackstock Butterworth, Esquire ;
  Dick Taveme, Esquire, one of Our Counsel learned in the Law ; and
  Henry William Rawson Wade, Esquire ;
                                                                Greeting!
  W hereas W e have deemed it expedient that a Commission should forth­
with issue, to review the working of the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence)
Act, 1921, and to consider whether it should be retained or replaced by some
other procedure, and, if retained, whether any changes are necessary or
desirable ; and to make recommendations.
  N o w K now Y e that We, reposing great trust and confidence in your
knowledge and ability, have authorized and appointed, and do by these
Presents authorize and appoint you the said Sir Cyril Barnet Salmon (Chair­
man) ; James Gray, Viscount Stuart of Findhom ; Arnold Abraham, Baron
Goodman ; Wilfred Lanceley Heywood ; John Blackstock Butterworth ; Dick
Taveme; and Henry William Rawson Wade to be Our Commissioners for
the purposes of the said inquiry:
  A nd for the better effecting the purposes of this Our Commission, We do
by these Presents give and grant unto you, or any three or more of you,
 fuU power to call before you such persons as you shall judge likely to
 afford you any information upon the subject of this our Commission; to
 call for information in writing; and also to call for, have access to and
 examine all such books, documents, registers and records as may afford you
 the fullest information on the subject and to inquire of and concerning the
 premises by all other lawful ways and means whatsoever:
   A n d We do by these Presents authorize and empower you, or any of
 you, to visit and personally inspect such places as you may deem it expedient
 so to inspect for the more effectual carrying out of the purposes aforesaid:
  A n d We do by these Presents will and ordain that this Our Commission
shall continue in full force and virtue, and that you, Our said Commissioners,
or any three or more of you may from time to time proceed in the execution
thereof, and of every matter and thing therein contained, although the same
be not continued from time to time by adjournment:
  -And We do further ordain that you, or any three or more of you have
liberty to report your proceedings under this Our Commission from time
to time if you shall judge it expedient so to d o :
  A n d Our further will and pleasure is that you do, with as little delay as
possible, report to Us your opinion upon the matters herein submitted for
your consideration.
     Given at Our Court at Saint James’s the twenty-eighth day of February
       1966: In the Fifteenth Year of Our Reign.
                                              By Her Majesty’s Command,
                                                                      R o y J e n k in s .
Royal Commission on the working of the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence)


  Mr. Dick Taverne, Q.C., M.P., resigned from the Commission on 7th April 1966 on his
appointment as Joint Parliamentary Under Secretary o f State for the Home Department.




                                         4
                                         TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                      THE ROYAL WARRANT

                                                    THE REPORT                                                         U
Paragraph                                                                                                                                   Page
                                                       CHAPTER I
   1   I n t r o d u c t io n                 ...........................................................................................      9


                                                     CHAPTER II
   6   H is t o r y             .............................................. .         ...            ...                                   10


                                                     CHAPTER III
            S h o u l d t h e T r ib u n a l s o f I n q u ir y (E v id e n c e ) A c t                                  1921
                                            be r e t a in e d ?

  22     (i) The circumstances in which the need for an inquisitorial
              inquiry arises    ......................................................................                                        15
  32     (ii) The six cardinal principles              ...............................................                                        17
  33    (iii) Alternative procedures
  34          (a) A Royal Commission                   ...                                                                                    18
  35         (b) A Select Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry ...............                                                                  18
  37         (c) An inquiry of the type carried out by LordDenning into
                  the Profumo C a s e ...........................................................                                            19
 43          (d) Departmental Inquiries               .................................................                                      21
 44          (e) Accident In q u irie s ............................................................                                         21
 45          (/) The Security Commission                                                                                                     21
 47     (iv) Conclusion         ........................                                                                                     22

                                                    CHAPTER IV
                   How      TO im p r o v e t h e s a f e g u a r d s f o r w it n e s s e s
                                           a n d in t e r e s t e d p a r t ie s

 48       (i)   Strict observance of the six cardinal principles                                                                             22
 49      (ii)   More time         ...........................................................                                                22
 54     (iii)   Right to be legally represented                     .........................                                                23
 57     (iv)    Examination by own solicitor or counsel ..............                                                                       24
 58      (v)    Right to have further evidence called                                                                                        25
 59     (vi)    Right to c o s ts ................................................                                                           25
                                                                   5
                  llM HilM itfH k




    Paragraph                                                                                           Page
      63 (vii) Further immunity      ....................................                                 26
      65 (viii) Opportunity to make an early statement                                                    27
      66 (ix) Criminal Records       .........................                                            28

                                                  CHAPTER V
      68 SHOUfcD THERE BE STATUTORY RULES OF PRO­
         CEDURE? ....................................................................................     28

                                                 CHAPTER VI
      71 PROCEDURE BY WHICH A TRIBUNAL IS SET UP                                                  ...    29

                                                CHAPTER VII
      72 COMPOSITION, STATUS AND IMMUNITY OF THE
          TRIBUNAL................................................................................       29

                                               CHAPTER VIII
      77   T er m s o f R e fe r e n c e ...                                                             30

                                                 CHAPTER IX
      80 THE CASE FOR AND AGAINST A PRELIMINARY
           HEARING OF EVIDENCE IN PRIVATE ..............                                                 31

                                                 CHAPTER X
                         B y w h o m s h a l l t h e T r ib u n a l b e r e p r e s e n t e d ?
      84     (i) The Treasury Solicitor?         ...         ........................                    32
      90    (ii) The Attorney-General?...............................................                    33

                                                 CHAPTER XI
                                     P roceedings of t h e T ribunal
      98    (i) Preliminary m eeting o f the Tribunal in p ublic...                                      36
     108    (ii) Hearing o f Evidence by the T rib u n a l.................                              37

                                                CHAPTER XII
     115 PUBLICITY ...                                                                                   38

                                                CHAPTER XIII
     123 POWER TO COMPEL EVIDENCE: COMMITTAL FOR
           CONTEMPT  .......................................................................             40




a
                                                 IT               *............




Paragraph                                                                                          Page
                        CHAPTER XIV
 133     REPORT OF THE TRIBUNAL........................................                           43

                           CHAPTER XV
 134     SHOULD THERE BE AN APPEAL FROM THE FINDINGS
          OF THE TR IB U N A L?.................................................... 43

                S u m m a r y o f C o n c l u s io n s a n d R e c o m m e n d a t io n s              44


                                         APPENDICES
  A      Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act, 1921                                                     49
  B      Special Commission Act, 1888                                                                  50
  C      List of inquiries held under the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence)
           Act, 1921                                                                                   52
  D      List of witnesses who gave oral evid en ce.............................                  54
  E      List of witnesses who submitted memoranda of evidence......                              55
  F      Commonwealth legislation considered by the Commission                              ...        56

INDEX TO THE REPORT




                                                      7
       31289                                                                                      A2
             ROYAL COMMISSION ON TRIBUNALS OF INQUIRY
                               1966

                                             REPORT
To The Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty.
M ay i t p l e a s e Y o u r M a je s t y

  We, the undersigned Commissioners, having been appointed by Royal
Warrant “ to review the working of the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence)
Act, 1921, and to consider whether it should be retained or replaced by some
other procedure, and, if retained, whether any changes are necessary or
desirable ; and to, make recommendations ”
H u m b l y s u b m it t o Y o u r M a je s t y t h e F o l l o w in g R e p o r t .



                                            CHAPTER 1
                                        INTRODUCTION
   1. Following the appointment of the Commission on 28th February, 1966,
a questionnaire, together with an invitation to give evidence either orally
or in the form of a memorandum, was sent to a number of persons, and
certain councils, societies, and associations, whose evidence it was thought
would be helpful in considering the matter under inquiry. At the same
time it was made known through the correspondence column of The Times
that the Commission was ready to receive written evidence from any member
of the public who wished to offer it.
   2. A list of witnesses who gave oral or written evidence is given at
Appendices D and E. It was decided generally to hear oral evidence in public
and to defer the publication of evidence, both written and oral, to the end
of the inquiry. The list of witnesses includes three former Lord Chancellors,
the Lord Chief Justice of England, the Master of the Rolls, past and present
members of the Judiciary and Law Officers of the Crown, many persons who
have been members of Tribunals of Inquiry or who have been engaged as
solicitor or counsel or appeared as witnesses before Tribunals of Inquiry,
newspaper trades unions, journalists, and representatives of the editorial and
managerial sides of the newspaper industry, representatives of Government
Departments, and members of both Houses of Parliament. Memoranda were
also submitted by the Bar Council and the Council of the Law Society. We
must express our indebtedness to Prof. Arthur L. Goodhart and Prof. George
W. Keeton for their valuable publications. In addition, it was decided that
information should be obtained on comparable forms of inquiry in other
countries, particularly the United States of America, Norway, France, Sweden,
and Denmark, and we acknowledge the helpfulness of those concerned in the
respective Embassies and others who arranged for this information to be
                                                    9
     31289                                                                             A 3
 provided or for representatives to give oral evidence. We have also heard
 evidence relating to similar tribunals of inquiry held in Canada, Australia,
 India and Hong Kong.
    \ T u6 Comrmssion held twenty-two meetings, of which sixteen were devoted
 to the hearing of oral evidence, and six to discussion and consideration of the
 terms of this report. We have to record our regret at the resignation from
 the Commission of Mr. Dick Taveme, Q.C., M.P., in April, 1966, consequent
 upon his appointment as Joint Parliamentary Under Secretary to the Home
 Office.
 Form of the Report
   4. (a) The evidence that we have received has shown that the criticisms of
die working of the Act of 1921 were not such as to call for its replacement
by some other procedure. We have however recommended certain alterations
in the present procedure to improve its efficiency and particularly to safeguard
persons called to give evidence before Tribunals and also persons who may
otherwise be interested in the subject matter of the inquiry. Some of these
alterations will involve legislation.
   4.(b) This report is sub-divided into chapters in each of which we examine
a particular aspect of the working of the Act of 1921 which has been, rightly
or wrongly, the subject of criticism. Our main conclusions and our recom­
mendations for the improvement of the existing statutory and procedural
arrangements are summarised at the end of the report.
Mr5’ tWm         u6en f Cepti°!ially fortunate in our secretarial assistance.
Mr. J. H. Humphreys has performed the duties of a secretary with unfailing
efficiency and imaginative helpfulness. He has been indefatigble in the hdp
InrlJl H           U\ •    °We a gr6at deal to Ms unrivalled experience and
of mind. Mr. T. G. Mead has °earned
    £       Mr   T  ' r M           f ° UV nquirieS and toduties
                                           out his many    Ms rare  qualities
                                                                 as assistant
h a T e S n T n remarkf i e thoroughness and ability. No Commission could
have been better served by their secretarial staff.


                               CHAPTER II

                                 HISTORY
   6. From the middle of the 17th century until 1921, the usual method of
investigating events giving rise to public disquiet about the alleged mis­
conduct of ministers or other public servants was by a Select Parliamentary
Committee or Commission of Inquiry. Some of the serious disadvantages
of this procedure are illustrated by the following examples from the history
or the last 300 years*
  7. In 1679 a Select Committee of the House of Commons was appointed
to inquire into allegations, made by what was then called the Republican
Opposition, to the effect that the Navy was riddled with Popery and that
the Lord High Admiral, the Duke of York, had wantonly wasted public
funds. The accusations were no doubt made with the object of excluding
the Duke from the succession to the Throne. After a general election
                                     10
in which the Republican Opposition came to power, the Duke went into
voluntary exile abroad, and Samuel Pepys, the Secretary for the Navy, was
left to bear the brunt of the attack. The Committee most unjustly found
Pepys guilty of Piracy, Popery, and Treachery, and he was committed to
the Tower of London on the Speaker’s warrant. The sole evidence against
him had been that of professional informers, whom he had not been allowed
to cross-examine. When the matter was referred to the Attorney-General
for the purpose of prosecuting Pepys, it was found that the evidence was
 so tenuous and suspect that it did not even justify putting him on tria l;
 and he was released. That Committee of Inquiry had no claim to impartiality.
 It was actuated solely by party political motives. This is a characteristic
 defect of such Committees inquiring into matters of this kind which has
 persisted throughout their history.
     8. Later in the same century there were further Select Parliamentary
 Committees of Inquiry to investigate the alleged mismanagement of Irish
 affairs and charges of widespread corruption, including charges against Sir
 John Trevor, the Speaker of the House of Commons.
     9. In the 18th century, a number of Select Parliamentary Committees
 of Inquiry were appointed. Amongst these was a committee set up in 1715
 to investigate circumstances leading to the signing of the Treaty of Utrecht.
  This Committee was set up by the Whigs under the chairmanship of Sir
 Robert Walpole with the object of discrediting members of the Tory Oppo­
  sition. Twenty-seven years later, a committee was set up to investigate
  allegations of incompetence and mismanagement by Sir Robert Walpole,
  who, although retired from political life after twenty-two years as Prime
  Minister, was still bitterly hated by his political opponents.
      10. In the 19th century there were Select Parliamentary Committees
  of Inquiry to investigate the conduct of the expedition to the island of
  Walcheren, the war with Napoleon, and the Crimean War.
      11. Early in the present century there occurred what became known as
  the Marconi Scandal. In 1912 the Postmaster General in a Liberal Govern­
  ment accepted a tender by the English Marconi Company for the construction
  of a chain of State owned wireless telegraph stations throughout the Empire.
  There followed widespread rumours that the Government had corruptly
  favoured the Marconi Company and that certain prominent members of
  the Government had improperly profited by the transaction. The Select
  Committee appointed to investigate these rumours represented the respec­
  tive strengths of the Liberal and Conservative parties. The majority report
  by the Liberal members of the committee exonerated the members of the
   Government concerned whereas a minority report by the Conservative
   members of the Committee found that these members of the Government
   had been guilty of gross impropriety. When the reports came to be debated
   in the House of Commons, the House divided on strictly party lines and
   exonerated the Ministers from all blame. This is the last instance of a
   matter of this kind being investigated by a Select Committee of Parliament.
       12. Even as long ago as 1888 the shortcomings of Select Parliamentary
   Committees of Inquiry had been recognised. In that year, serious allegations
   had been made against a prominent Parliamentarian and leader of the
                                       11
     Irish Nationalists, Charles Stewart Parnell and others. Rather than refer
       e matter for investigation to a Select Parliamentary Committee, a Special
     aT S T w q       a SpeCial P°wers was set up by the Special Commission
     Act looo. (See Appendix B.)
         13 When m 1921 grave allegations were made by a Member of Parlia­
     ment against officials m the Ministry of Munitions, the favourable im-
                    5 the Pa™611 Commission and the unpleasant flavour left
     behind by the Marconi Committee of Inquiry were remembered. It was
      elt that the investigation by Parliamentary Committees of Inquiry of
     alleged public misconduct was entirely discredited, and that accordingly
     new m a t e y should be created more appropriate to d ea /tlo t o r i f S
     mure ,CT ,,,ma,‘r       t ' 1, , ''’11!1 a"y IsimMar mallers » l * h might arise in the
    future Thus the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act, 19212 was bom
    whfch t w f t         I , Wldell' differing nature of the circumstances in
    which the statute would be invoked in the future could not all be foreseen
    and as a matter of necessity the passage of the Bill through Parliament
    was somewhat hurried. As a result, there are certain omissions and short-
      mmgs m the Act of 1921 which are dealt with later. The Act did
     owever, ring into existence a method of inquiry into allegations of public
    misconduct far superior to the method which had hitherto been in vogue
        , \ ur°V       that lf both Houses of Parliament resolve that it is
    d eS ed m
    described in ^the
                   e 81resolution *as ef blishedpublic
                                      of urgent  i0T importance,
                                                            in t0 and
                                                                  a definite matter
                                                                      in pursuance
    of such resolution a Tribunal is appointed either by tta Crown or by a
                        th®n       a Tribunal for certain purposes shall have all
    the powers, rights, and privileges that are vested in the High Court. It can
    enforce the attendance of witnesses whom it may examine under oath, and
    it may compel the production of documents. If any person summoned as
   ttoo which
        w S the Tribunal may °r lfilegally
                                     he,f°eS attend an
                                           require   refuses t0 answer
                                                        answer  or failsany
                                                                         to question
                                                                            produce
   any document m his power or control which the Tribunal legally requires
   him to produce or does anything which would constitute contempt of court
   m a court of law, then the Chairman may certify the offence to the High
   Court which may inquire into the facts and hear evidence, including any
   statements that may be offered in defence. If the witness is found guilty he
   may be punished in the same manner as if he had committed a contempt
   of court. A witness before the Tribunal has the same privileges and immunities
   as m a court of law.          The Tribunal may authoriS anygperso„ T            p S
    before it who appears to it to be interested to be represented by solicitor of
 i T n! f / r ° * er|WISe- Xt is expressly provided that the public are to be
 I aS         tt0 a11 heannf unless the Tribunal finds that this is against the
 h public interest. The Act of 1921 contains no provisions concerning the
)                ?     foHowed by the Tribunal, nor is the Tribunal subject to
| the Tnbunals and Inquiries Act, 1958.3 Nor does the Act of 1921 confer
I any immunity upon members of the Tribunal for what they may say in
ll'fr.6 C?Uf?t,         inquiry or m their report, nor upon solicitors or counsel
 y o r what they say before the Tribunal. Nor is there any provision (as there
    1 51 & 52 Viet. Chap. 35.
    2 11 Geo. 5. Chap. 7.
    3 6 & 7 Eliz. 2, Chap. 66.
    was m the Act of 1888) that answers given by a witness cannot be used
    against him m any criminal or civil proceedings.
  ic m ’ Fl? Sr mquir!es have been held unde1- the provisions of the Act of
  1921, and these are listed m Appendix C to this Report. Five of these were
 concerned with allegations against the police and would now presumably be
 r f Pursuant to the powers vested in the Secretary of State for the Home
 Department by Section 32 of the Police Act, 1964.1 Of the others, four
 are of special[importance. They were inquiries known as the Budget Leak
 “                               Tribunal (1948),3 the Bank Rate Tribunal
 (1957), and the Vassall Tribunal (1962).6 The procedure adopted in this last
 inquiry had evolved naturally from the experience gained in the other three
 inquiries.
    , 15- Immediately prior to the Budget of 1936, there had been substantial
   that tif m      9-ty of such a nature that they gave rise to widespread rumours
   that the impending changes m taxation proposed in the Budget had been
   miproperly disclosed. Following resolutions of both Houses of Parliament
   a Tribunal consisting of Mr. Justice Porter, Mr. Gavin Simonds, K.C (as
  he then was) and Mr Roland Oliver, K.C. (as he then was) was appointed
       mquire into the alleged unauthorised disclosures. Two of the persons
  who had had dealings m the City, out of which they had made considerable
  profits, were friends of Mr. J H. Thomas, the Colonial Secretary. It was not
  until a late stage of the inquiry however that his name was first mentioned.
  It then appeared from the evidence which had come to light durinp the
  course of the hearing that it was he who had made the disclosures.
  Accordingly he was called as a witness at short notice and those representing
  him had very little time in which to prepare his case. The Tribunal found
  that there had been unauthorised disclosure by Mr. J. H. Thomas of infor­
  mation relating to the Budget to his friends, Sir Alfred Butt, M.P. and
 Mr. Alfred Bates and that these two had made use of this information for
 private gam.
      16.     This inquiry is of interest from a procedural point of view. The
 Attorney-General and junior counsel were present to assist the Tribunal. At
 the opening of the inquiry the Attorney-General stated briefly the effect of
 the information and evidence which was then available to him The Attorney-
 General then examined the majority of the witnesses and during their evidence
 the members of the Tribunal asked them questions by way of cross-
 examination. They were further examined by counsel representing interested
parties; When Mr. Thomas was called, the Tribunal directed that it would
 be desirable that he should be examined by his own counsel. At the close
of this examination the Attorney-General declined to cross-examine the
witness. No questions were asked by counsel representing other interested
parties and the Tribunal had no alternative but to descend into the arena and
itself undertake the cross-examination. A similar procedure was followed
m the case of the other principal suspect, Sir Alfred Butt, who was also
represented by counsel. Junior counsel instructed by the Treasury Solicitor
stated he had no question to ask the witness and the Tribunal again had
to undertake the cross-examination.
~     1964, Chap. 48.
    2 Cmd. 5184.
    3Cmd. 7616.
    4 Cmnd. 350.
    5 Cmnd. 2009,
                                     13
    17. This assumption of the cross-examining role proved to be a heavy
 burden for the Tribunal to bear. Moreover it had the inherent disadvantage
 that it tended to make the Tribunal appear hostile to the witnesses whose
 conduct was being investigated. Accordingly, the procedure was reconsidered
 when allegations of bribery of Ministers and other public servants were
 investigated by the Tribunal presided over by Mr. Justice Lynskey in 1948.
 The Treasury Solicitor on behalf of the Tribunal instructed a team of counsel,
 headed by the Attorney-General, to present the evidence and to ascertain
 the facts by examination and cross-examination of the witnesses. The
Attorney-General himself first examined in chief and then cross-examined
the most important witnesses. Counsel who were acting on behalf of other
witnesses were then given an opportunity of cross-examining, and if the
witness giving evidence was represented by counsel, his counsel was then
given an opportunity of examining him ; in conclusion, there was a final
examination by one of the counsel appearing for the Tribunal.
   18. The procedure adopted by the Lynskey Tribunal was generally followed
in the inquiry in 1957 presided over by Lord Justice Parker (as he then was)
into allegations of improper disclosure of information relating to the raising
of the Bank Rate.
   19. In 1962, a Tribunal consisting of Lord Radcliffe (who presided), Mr.
Justice Barry, and Sir Milner Holland, Q.C. was appointed with wide terms
of reference to inquire into the circumstances in which the spy Vassall had
been employed in the Admiralty and “ . . . allegations . . . reflecting on
the honour and integrity of persons who as Ministers, naval officers and civil
servants were concerned in the case.” In this inquiry the procedure which had
already evolved was further developed. The team of counsel representing the
Tribunal included in addition to the Attorney-General an independent leading
counsel who dealt with any evidence which, because of its political character,
might have been embarrassing to the Attorney-General. Nor did the same
counsel for the Tribunal both examine and cross-examine the same witness.
So far as possible the witnesses who appeared to be prejudicially affected by
statements in the Press or by statements obtained by the Treasury Solicitor
were informed before they gave evidence of the substance of the allegations
which might be made against them. This Tribunal is notable also in that
for the first time the powers to certify offences to the High Court for
punishment under Section 1(2) of the Act of 1921 were invoked, and the
public was excluded for security reasons from part of the proceedings in
accordance with Section 2(a) of the Act, and on recommendation by the
Tribunal, certain witnesses were offered an ex gratia contribution towards
their costs. This was the last inquiry so far held under the Act.
   20. It was evident from these inquiries, which all had highly charged
political backgrounds, that although none of the findings had given rise to
dissatisfaction, yet certain matters of procedure were nevertheless causing
grave concern. These related, amongst other things, to the role played by
the Attorney-General as leading counsel for the Tribunal and to the hardship
which might be caused to innocent individuals by the nature of the
proceedings.
   21. In 1963 Mr. Profumo, the Secretary of State for War, made a personal
statement in the House of Commons denying that there was any truth in the
story that he had had a liaison with Christine Keeler. He afterwards admitted
                                      14
that this statement was untrue. There followed wide-spread rumours. It was
alleged that there had been a serious security risk in that Mr. Profumo had
been sharing Christine Keeler as a mistress with the Russian naval attache ;
that the Government knew or ought to have known that the personal state­
ment made by Mr. Profumo was untrue ; that certain members of the Govern­
ment failed in their duty by approving the personal statement before it had
 been made, particularly as they had done so without taking any steps to
check whether or not it was true. There were also many other rumours
 relating to this case. The Government decided that to allay the very wide­
 spread public concern, an inquiry should be held. They decided however not
 to set up a Tribunal for this purpose under the Act of 1921; instead they
 appointed Lord Denning, the Master of the Rolls, to hold this inquiry. This
 task he performed with conspicuous success despite the difficulties inherent
 in the procedure which he followed. The inquiry was conducted behind
 closed doors. None of the witnesses heard any of the evidence given against
 him by others or had any opportunity of testing such evidence. The transcript
  of the evidence was never published. Lord Denning had in effect to act as
 detective, solicitor, counsel and judge. In spite of the many serious defects in
  this procedure, Lord Denning’s Report1 was generally accepted by the public.
  But this was only because of Lord Denning’s rare qualities and high reputa­
  tion. Even so, the public acceptance of the Report may be regarded as a
  brilliant exception to what would normally occur when an inquiry is carried
  out under such conditions.



                                 CHAPTER III

   SHOULD THE TRIBUNALS OF INQUIRY (EVIDENCE) ACT, 1921
                     BE RETAINED?

 (i) The circumstances in which the need for an inquisitorial inquiry arises
    22. The history of inquiries to which reference has been made shows that
 from timpi to time cases arise concerning rumoured instances of lapses in
 accepted standards of public administration and other matters causing public
 concern which cannot be dealt with by ordinary civil or criminal processes
 but which require investigation in order to allay public anxiety.
    23. These cases vary in importance, urgency and complexity and may
 relate to matters of local or national concern. In the past they have been
 dealt with by a variety of tribunals of inquiry. Our terms of reference
 require us to consider in particular whether or not there is a need for any
 permanent machinery of inquisitorial inquiry such as that which is at present
  provided by the Act of 1921.
    24. In considering whether the Act of 1921 should be retained or replaced
  by some other procedure, we have had to decide whether the inquisitorial
  method followed by Tribunals under the Act is so objectionable in principle
  that the Act should be repealed ; and, if so, whether the type of cases which
  have hitherto been dealt with under the Act should be investigated by some
  alternative method.
    i Cmnd. 2152.
                                         15
      31289
    25. Several of the inquiries such as the Thurso case (1959)1 which have
 taken place under the Act of 1921 would and should now be dealt with under
 the Police Act, 1964. There are other inquiries, such as the inquiry into the
  disposal of land at Crichel Down (1954)2 and the inquiry into the
 Evans case (1966)3 which can be dealt with by a Departmental Inquiry.
 There are minor local inquiries, such as the inquiry into conditions
 with regard to mining and drainage in Doncaster (1926-28) which
 certainly are not of such public importance as to require the exceptional
 procedure which we have to consider. The type of inquiry undertaken
 by the investigation into the circumstances surrounding the loss of H.M.
 Submarine “ Thetis ” (1939)4 in normal circumstances would be carried out
 satisfactorily under the Shipping Casualties and Appeals and Rehearing
 Rules 19235.                                                                &
   26. There remain, however, exceptional cases, such as the Budget Leak
Tribunal (1936), the Lynskey Tribunal (1948), the Bank Rate Tribunal
(1957), the Vassall Tribunal (1962) and the inquiry by Lord Denning into
the Profumo case (1963) which, although happily they occur only very
rarely, do in our view require some permanent form of inquisitorial
machinery without the necessity of recourse to legislation at the time when
they arise.
   27. The exceptional inquisitorial powers conferred upon a Tribunal of
 Inquiry under the Act of 1921 necessarily expose the ordinary citizen to
the risk of having aspects of his private life uncovered which would otherwise
remain private, and to the risk of having baseless allegations made against
him. This may cause distress and injury to reputation. For these reasons,
we are strongly of the opinion that the inquisitorial machinery set up under
the Act of 1921 should never be used for matters of local or minor public
importance but always be confined to matters of vital public importance
concerning which there is something in the nature of a nation-wide crisis
of confidence. In such cases we consider that no other method of investiga­
tion would be adequate.
   28. Normally persons cannot be brought before a tribunal and questioned
save in civil or criminal proceedings. Such proceedings are hedged around
by long standing and effective safeguards to protect the individual. The
inquisitorial procedure is alien to the concept of justice generally accepted
in the United Kingdom. There are, however, exceptional cases in which
such procedures must be used to preserve the purity and integrity of our
public life without which a successful democracy is impossible. It is
essential that on the very rare occasions when crises of public confidence
occur, the evil, if it exists, shall be exposed so that it may be rooted o u t;
or if it does not exist, the public shall be satisfied that in reality there is
no substance in the prevalent rumours and suspicions by which they have
been disturbed. We are satisfied that this would be difficult if not impossible
without public investigation by an inquisitorial Tribunal possessing the
powers conferred by the Act of 1921. Such a Tribunal is appointed by
Parliament to inquire and report. The task of inquiring cannot be delegated
 1 Cmnd. 718.                                 "                  '            '
 2 Cmd. 9176.
 3 Cmnd. 3101.
 4 Cmd. 6190.
 5 SRO No. 752(L.9).                   16
 by the Tribunal for it is the Tribunal which is appointed to inquire as well
 as to report. The public reposes its confidence not in some other body or
 person but in the Tribunal to make and direct all the necessary searching
 investigations and to produce the witnesses in order to arrive at the truth.
 It is only thus that public confidence can be fully restored.
     29. During the last 30 years some of the safeguards of our ordinary
  judicial processes against causing unnecessary pain and injustice to individuals
  have been incorporated in this inquisitorial procedure. If this procedure
  is to be retained, it becomes an important part of our duties to consider
 how these safeguards can be maintained, extended and improved. We are
  convinced that much can be done in this direction. In the end, however, one
 must accept that it is impossible to eliminate all risk of personal hurt and
 injustice. This risk is inherent in any procedure which is effective for
 arriving at the truth, but the risk can and should be minimised. Even in
 the normal judicial processes innocent persons are sometimes forced to
 attend court and give evidence and are subjected to accusations which may
 be hurtful to them and damaging to their reputations. This is the inevitable
 price that has to be paid for arriving at the truth. And in matters with
 which Tribunals of Inquiry are concerned it is vital in the public interest
 that the truth should be established.
   30. There are important distinctions between inquisitorial procedure and
the procedure in an ordinary civil or criminal case. It is inherent in the
inquisitorial procedure that there is no Us. The Tribunal directs the inquiry
and the witnesses are necessarily the Tribunal’s witnesses. There is no
plaintiff or defendant, no prosecutor or accused; there are no pleadings
defining issues to be tried, no charges, indictments, or depositions. The
inquiry may take a fresh turn at any moment. It is therefore difficult for
persons involved to know in advance of the hearing what allegations may
be made against them.
     31. It is appropriate at this stage to refer to the inquiries which have
 been held in Scotland and the evidence which we have received from the
 Crown Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department. In our view
 it is essential that all Tribunals set up to investigate the exceptional cases
 to which we have referred in paragraph 26 should observe the principles
 we recommend. Accordingly we recommend that the necessary changes in
 procedure should be made in Scotland to conform with these principles.
 These changes are considered further in paragraphs 53, 89, and 97.
(ii) The six cardinal principles
    32. The difficulty and injustice with which persons involved in an inquiry
may be faced can however be largely removed if the following cardinal
principles which we discuss in Chapter IV are strictly observed: —
       1.    Before any person becomes involved in an inquiry, the Tribunal
   must be satisfied that there are circumstances which affect him and which
   the Tribunal proposes to investigate.
J     2. Before any person who is involved in an inquiry is called as a
I witness he should be informed of any allegations which are made against
\h im and the substance of the evidence in support of them.
                                       17
   31289                                                                 . <■
        J' P tgE SSttzSE ? < w t - w** >*«.
     ■ 4    a    s t o ild t a “ ,T"“ S ShOUld " °™ a"y >* met ° “ of Public funds.

           5. Any material witnesses he wishes pqUpH q+ +1,. : * .
        reasonably practicable, be heard                    mquiry should> lf

    n^ r j T iT S %
    (111) Alternative Procedures
                                                             £                         S:
   alternative methods of investigation a r e : -                                 L 111686
        1. A Royal Commission.
        2. A Select Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry.
     case. An inqUiiy ° f the tyPe Carried out           Lord Denning in the Profumo
         4. A Departmental Inquiry.

     aircraft*1and™ ^ ° f ^     ^               ° Ut “ the case o f accident* to ships or
         6. An inquiry of the type carried out by the Security Commission.
         1. A Royal Commission

  in ^ r iS S f S     t S     S T p S S T S X                “ b J ? “b " 4 ' T " *

  r s s 3£rsfss,otbroad^                                                        £,■35
  involved whole time and to sit on ^ d ^ b y d ^ ”t e k         T h f llT o   f° beC<T




  2 f                ■* “ “ y prMicabie
        2. ^ Se/ec/ Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry

 of p ^ b li^ m S o n d u ct iT to ^ T t h f S s t ^ f 11^   t0 inveStigate le g a tio n s
 Chapter II.                                                        ^    have ^ w n in

, o f l^ V w a T p ^ s s ld ^ ^ X c k 1? bJCaus® itP^    0 whSoTyn d ^ cre^ ted ^ th e^ c!




 to reflect the vie “ o? fte oartv having                    “ ” ay tend ta iB «!*>«
 as in the Marconi                                               a T ^ £ £ £
                                           18
 debated in the House, the House may divide along party lines. On the other
 hand the reports of Tribunals under the Act of 1921, no doubt because of their
        w6 t          standing and political impartiality of their members, have
 3        ♦ «Cer accepted by Parliament without question. A further defect
 SnH        ■^arllf mf1ntai'y Committee is that it does not normally hear counsel
 and some if not all of its members will have had no experience of taking
 evidence or of cross-examining witnesses. Finally, witnesses who give evidence
 before a Select Parliamentary Committee may not be entitled to the same
 absolute privilege as they would enjoy before a Tribunal under the Act of

    36. The procedure in the United States of America for investigating allega­
 tions of public misconduct is by Congressional Committees of Investigation
 consisting of the representatives of the majority and minority parties. These
 Committees insofar as they are constituted on a political basis are closely
 akin to our Select Parliamentary Committees. There are permanent Con­
 gressional standing committees of investigation for these matters and they
 seem to be constantly employed. No doubt this system of investigation
 is effective m the United States of America, but in our view it would not
 be appropriate m the United Kingdom. Moreover, the evidence shows that
 although on some occasions the reports of such Committees have been
 generally accepted by the American public, on others they have been received
with considerable scepticism and have failed to allay public disquiet. Indeed
when any matter of vital importance with a political background arises for
 investigation, an ad hoc tribunal is not infrequently appointed to avoid the
matter being referred to the Congressional Committee. An example of this
practice is to be found in the appointment of the Warren Commission
appointed by President Johnson to investigate the assassination of President
Kennedy. There is no evidence from the United States or elsewhere that does
anything but support our conclusion that in the United Kingdom investiga­
tions of the kind with which we are concerned should be by Tribunals free
from political influences.
     3. An inquiry of the type carried out by Lord Denning into the Profumo
        CQS@
  _ 37. In the chapter dealing with the history of Tribunals of Inquiry in
 this country, we have referred to the difficult conditions under which this
              carried out and expressed the view that the measure of acceptance
     ch the report achieved was due to the exceptional qualities and standing
 tn i w        T 18 al°ne> and Sh°uld be reSarded as a brilliant exception
           T*      n° T ! l y OCCUr when an investigation is carried out under
such conditions. Although Lord Denning considered that this type of
  nquiry had some advantages, he was most conscious of the disadvantages
7       I 61# unS6£a        fr°m lL Referring to the advantages he said at pages
h a j J J °* Jis Report . . “ there can be no dissent . . . in as much as it
has been held m private and m strict confident, the witnesses were, I am
sure, much more frank than they would otherwise have been . . . I was
able to check the evidence of one witness against that of another more freely
     ' a“ ™0r<; ™portant aspersions cast by witnesses against others (who
 are not able to defend themselves) do not achieve the publicity which is
inevitable m a Court of Law or Tribunal of Inquiry. . . . ” Referring to the
disadvantages, Lord Denning said on the same pages of his Report “ . . . it
                                      19
   31289
                                                                        A 6
has two great disadvantages: first, being in secret, it has not the appearance
of justice ; second, in carrying out the inquiry, I have had to be detective,
inquisitor, advocate and judge, and it has been difficult to combine them
. . . . At every stage of this inquiry I have been faced with this great anxiety:
How far should I go into matters which seem to show that someone or
other has been guilty of a criminal offence, or of professional misconduct,
or moral turpitude, or even incompetence? My inquiry is not a suitable
body to determine guilt or innocence. I have not the means at my disposal.
No witness has given evidence on oath. None has been cross-examined.
No charge has been preferred. No opportunity to defend has been open.
It poses for me an inescapable dilemma: on the one hand, if I refrain from
going into such matters my inquiry will be thwarted. . . . Suspicions that
have already fallen heavily on innocent persons may not be removed. Yet,
on the other hand, if I do go into these matters I may well place persons
under a cloud when it is undeserved ; and I may impute to them offences
or misconduct which they have never had the chance to rebut.” Such a
method of investigation is not so objectionable where there is, in truth, no
foundation for the rumours or allegations causing a nation-wide crisis of
confidence. The report will state the truth. The only defect in the pro­
cedure is that since everything takes place behind closed doors, the truth
may not be generally accepted.
   38. If, however, there is in reality an evil to be exposed and any of the
allegations or rumours causing the nation-wide crisis of confidence are true,
it is extremely difficult, if not practically impossible, for the report to
establish the truth. When a person against whom allegations are made
is not even allowed to hear the evidence brought against him, let alone to
check it by cross-examination, when he has “ never had the chance to rebut ”
the case against him, how can any judicially-minded Tribunal be satisfied,
save in the most exceptional circumstances, that the allegations have been
made out? In these most exceptional cases, if they ever occur, in which
such a Tribunal felt justified in making an adverse finding against anyone,
that person would feel and the public might also feel that he had a real
grievance in that he had had no chance of defending himself. It follows
that the odds against any such Tribunal being able to establish the truth, if
the truth is black, are very heavy indeed, and accordingly the truth may remain
hidden from the light of day.
   39. We do not believe that it can ever be right for any inquiry of this
kind to be held entirely in secret save on the grounds of security. It is
true that a Tribunal does not hold a trial but only investigates and reports.
Nevertheless reputations and careers may depend upon their findings, e.g.,
in the Budget Leak Tribunal which was held in public the Tribunal found
that there had been an unauthorised disclosure by Mr. J. H. Thomas to Sir
Alfred Butt of information relating to the Budget and that use was made
by Sir Alfred Butt of that information for private gain ; thus ended both their
political careers.
   40. It is said that sometimes witnesses are willing to give evidence only
if they are allowed to give it in private or in confidence. This is no doubt
true. But such evidence in matters of this kind is treated as suspect by the
general public and, in our view, rightly so. Secrecy increases the quantity
of evidence but tends to debase its quality.
                                       20
   41. It is possible that in the future the same type of salacious rumour
 as some of those which were in circulation at the time of the Profumo case
 may circulate again. No doubt it would be wrong to investigate them in
public. The point is whether they should be investigated at all. It is no
Part_ °f the duty of government to satisfy idle curiosity about scandalous
 gossip. It does not seem to us appropriate for a tribunal of any kind to
inquire into such rumours. Gossip about such matters as these is hardly
likely to cause a nation-wide crisis of confidence and is best ignored. It is
an entirely different matter when it is alleged that a Minister has put himself
in a situation which creates a real security risk, or that colleagues have allowed
a Minister to make a personal statement which they ought to have known was
untrue. If in the future there is a nation-wide crisis of confidence about any
matters of this kind they should in our opinion be investigated before a
Tribunal appointed under the Act of 1921.
   42. We recommend that no Government in the future should ever in any
circumstances whatsoever set up a Tribunal of the type adopted in the
Profumo case to investigate any matter causing nation-wide public concern.
For the reasons we have stated, we are satisfied that such a method of inquiry
is inferior to, and certainly no acceptable substitute for, an inquiry under the
Act of 1921.
     4. Departmental Inquiries
   43. These are normally used to investigate matters which are causing pub­
lic concern, but which are not of such importance as to justify the appointment
of a Tribunal under the Act of 1921. A Departmental inquiry is usually
appointed by the responsible Minister to be conducted by an eminent lawyer
alone or as chairman with others. These inquiries have no power to compel
the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents and are not in our
view suitable for dealing with the special type of case for which the Act
of 1921 was framed.
     5. Accident Inquiries
   44. These are formal inquiries into air accidents and shipping casualties
and are carried out respectively under Regulation 9 of the Civil Aviation
(Investigation of Accidents) Regulations, 19511 and the Shipping Casualties
and Appeal and Re-hearing Rules of 1923. These inquiries are highly tech­
nical and usually include something in the nature of a lis ; there is not the
same degree of urgency about them and they are certainly not concerned
with a nation-wide crisis of confidence in the integrity of any public persons.
They deal with wholly different matters from those dealt with by Tribunals
of Inquiry and could not be any substitute for such Tribunals.
     6. The Security Commission
   45- It seems to us that an inquiry by the Security Commission could never
be a suitable alternative to an inquiry by a Tribunal appointed under the
Act of 1921. The respective purposes of the two forms of inquiry are wholly
different. The purpose of inquiries by the Security Commission is to report
to and advise the Prime Minister upon security arrangements within the
public service. The subject matter of such inquiries may have caused no
public concern and indeed may well be entirely unknown to the public. In
the public interest these inquiries are of necessity .held in private. The
purpose of inquiries under the Act of 1921, as we have already
 1 S.I. 1951 N o. 1653.                                    ---------------------------------
                                       21
   31289                                                                          *7
pointed out, is publicly to establish the truth when there is a nation-wide
crisis of confidence about matters of urgent public importance. It is of the
essence of these inquiries that they should be held in public although most
(exceptionally some part of them may be held in private. The only way
in which the two types of inquiries may overlap is that some aspect of
 a matter referred to a Tribunal of Inquiry might (as in the Vassall case)
by itself have been appropriate for reference to the Security Commission.
   46. Although it is not within our province to advise on such a topic, we
can readily appreciate that the vital importance to the nation of maintaining
efficient security arrangements may require the arming of the Security Com­
mission with powers to compel evidence similar to those enjoyed by a Tribunal
of Inquiry. If such powers are conferred upon the Security Commission, we
recommend that this should be done by a separate enactment and not by turn­
ing members of the Security Commission into a Tribunal of Inquiry for the
purpose of any particular case. We do not consider that the Act of 1921
should be invoked for the purpose of giving teeth to the Security Commission
or any other body. We consider that it should be used only for the purposes
which we have stated. Whenever a Tribunal of Inquiry is appointed then,
whatever its composition, it should in our view follow the principles which
we recommend.
   We consider that our terms of reference preclude us from making any
recommendations about the procedure to be followed by any tribunals other
than those set up under the Act of 1921.
(iv) Conclusion
  47. Our conclusion is that, for the reasons we have indicated, it is essential
in the national interest to retain the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act,
1921, albeit with the amendments and safeguards recommended in this Report.

                                 CHAPTER IV
   HOW TO IMPROVE THE SAFEGUARDS FOR WITNESSES AND
                 INTERESTED PARTIES
(i) Strict observance of the six cardinal principles
   48. We consider it to be of the highest importance that the six cardinal
principles which we have stated in paragraph 32 of this Report should always
be strictly observed.
(ii) More time
   49. The question arises, how is it possible to ensure that any allegations
against witnesses and the substance of any evidence against them will be marte
known to them so as to give them an adequate opportunity of preparing their
 case (Cardinal principles 1, 2 and 3(a)). We believe that the answer to this
 question lies mainly in less haste. We are under the impression that the
tempo of some of the post-war Tribunals, particularly in the early stages
of an inquiry, was somewhat too hurried. We appreciate that there should be
no dilatoriness in starting the inquiry and pushing it to a conclusion. It is
urgent that the truth should be revealed to the public as speedily as possible.
Nevertheless, a few weeks more in preparing the material for arriving at the
truth is a small price to pay in order to avoid injustice.
                                       22
  •'                            .h«| hw    i-




    50. Any potential witness from whom a statement is taken by the Treasury
 Solicitor should be told that, if he so wishes, his own solicitor may be present
 when the statement is taken. In many cases a witness will not require legal
 assistance. If, however, he does wish his solicitor to be present he should
 be given a reasonable opportunity to secure his solicitor’s attendance even if
 this entails a day or two’s delay. As soon as possible after he has given his
 statement, and certainly well in advance, usually not less than seven days
 before he gives evidence, he should be supplied with a document setting out
 the allegations against him and the substance of the evidence in support of
 those allegations.
    51. There may be cases in which the Tribunal will consider that there is
a real danger of witnesses being intimidated or influenced or of a witness
making improper use of the information supplied to him. Accordingly, the
lorm of the document disclosing to a witness the substance of the evidence
against him must be left, in each case, to the discretion of the Tribunal We
realise that however thoroughly a case is prepared fresh evidence may emerge
during the course of an inquiry which may give rise to further material
allegations. In such circumstances, the witness concerned should be given a
reasonable opportunity of meeting those allegations even if this means adjourn­
ing the inquiry for a few days. The time allowed to anyone at any stage for
preparing his case against the allegations he has to meet must be left to the
discretion of the Tribunal.
   52. Further time in preparing for the public hearing would also give the
 inbunal a better opportunity of discarding irrelevant evidence. It is of the
greatest importance that irrelevant evidence should not be marie public
particularly if it contains what are clearly groundless charges against anyone!
   53. From this it will be seen that in our view it is essential for the Tribunal
to consider the evidence which is collated by the Treasury Solicitor. It is
understood that in Scotland the practice has been for the Tribunal not to
see the statements or precognitions of the witnesses. We recommend that
for the reasons given earlier in this chapter in relation to practice in England’
a similar procedure should be adopted in Scotland.
(Iii) Right to be legally represented
 _ 54. Under the Act of 1921 as it now stands no one has the right to be
 legally represented before the Tribunal. The Tribunal, however, has a
 discretion as to whether or not to allow a person to be represented. In the
past this discretion has always been exercised in favour of allowing anv
person to be represented if it appeared to the Tribunal that he m i l t be
prejudicially affected by the evidence or by any finding or comment in the
         ; .,T   means that a witness cannot be represented until he has
satisfied the Tribunal that he may be in peril. We recommend that the Act
should be amended so that anyone called as a witness would have the right
to be legally represented. It is unlikely that any witness will go to this
e«PinS? u T he considers that ^ is in real peril of being prejudicially
affected by the inquiry—and he may know more about this peril than it
would be possible for the Tribunal to know before the evidence is taken.
We can see no reason why a witness who in the public interest has to be
subjected to an inquisitorial form of inquiry and its attendant publicity should
not be accorded this elementary right of being represented should he con­
sider himself to be in peril. We do not think that to give him this right would
                                          23
add significantly to the duration or costs of the inquiry. The control of the
inquiry is in the hands of the Tribunal, and the Tribunal would no doubt
rule out any irrelevant questions by whomsoever such questions might be
asked. Moreover, costs should be in the discretion of the Tribunal as recom­
mended in paragraph 60.
   55. We consider that the Tribunal should have a discretion to allow
anyone to be legally represented who is not a witness but who claims to be
a person interested in the inquiry in that there is a real risk that he might
be prejudicially affected by it. In order to succeed in his application to be
legally represented such a person would have to satisfy the Tribunal about
the existence of such a risk.
   56. Such cases would be rare indeed for it is difficult to imagine circum­
stances in which a person likely to be prejudicially affected by an inquiry
would not be called as a witness. It is impossible however to foresee all
circumstances which may arise in the future and the discretion should
exist to deal with such a case should it occur.

(iv) Examination by own solicitor or counsel
   57. We would here refer to the fourth cardinal principle stated in paragraph
32. We consider that when a witness is legally represented, he should be
examined by his own solicitor or counsel on the written statement given to
the Treasury Solicitor. The witness is no doubt a witness of the Tribunal,
but it must be remembered that he is a witness who is probably at risk so
far as his own reputation is concerned. We consider it right that in the
first instance he should be allowed to tell his own story confident that the
solicitor or counsel questioning him is doing so with the object of bringing
out the evidence which he wishes to be placed before the Tribunal. There
have been instances in the past in which witnesses have felt aggrieved that
although their own counsel was present, they were both examined and cross-
examined by counsel for the Tribunal before their own counsel had a chance
of being heard. Some of them felt that this procedure was unfair, particularly
as they were left with the impression, however wrongly, that their examination
in chief—in sharp distinction to their cross-examination—had been per­
functorily carried out. If, when being examined by his own solicitor or
counsel, a witness should seemingly depart from what he has said in his
written statement to the Treasury Solicitor, his cross-examination by counsel
for the Tribunal will be much more effective than if the witness had been
examined in the first place by some other counsel for the Tribunal. When a
witness is unrepresented, he should be examined by one of the team of
counsel appearing for the Tribunal. If, as will no doubt usually be the case,
there are no allegations against such a witness, there will be no necessity for
him to be cross-examined on behalf of the Tribunal. If, however, such a
necessity arises, the witness should be cross-examined by another member
of the team representing the Tribunal. No witness should ever be examined
and cross-examined by the same counsel. This presents an air of unreality.
The purpose of examination in chief is to establish the evidence being given
by the witness. The purpose of cross-examination is to test and if necessary
to destroy it. If both these tasks are undertaken by the same counsel, how­
ever brilliant the tour de force, the witness may be perplexed and left
with the feeling that he has not been fairly treated.
                                      24
'                                        .




      (v) Right to have further evidence called
        58. This is the fifth cardinal principle stated in paragraph 32. If a witness
      wishes further evidence called, then a statement of the further evidence
      should be taken by the Treasury Solicitor. If the Tribunal in its discretion
     alter seeing this statement considers that the evidence it contains may be
     material and that it is reasonably practicable to obtain it, that evidence
     should be called by counsel for the Tribunal. This matter must be left
     to the discretion of the Tribunal in each case, since it is not impossible
     that a Plea for further evidence might be put forward merely for the pur­
     poses of delay or some other purpose irrelevant to the inquiry.
     (vi) Right to costs
         59. The Act of 1921 contains no provision giving the Tribunal power to
      order that a witness shall be paid his costs out of public funds (Cardinal
      principle 3(b)). We consider that it should be amended to do so.
         60. It is a great hardship that a witness should be left to bear the very
      heavy expenses often incurred in being legally represented before the
      Inbunal. After all, the inquiry is in the public interest, the witness is the
      Iribim als witness, it is usually just that the witness should be represented
      and his solicitor or counsel are assisting the Tribunal in arriving at the truth.’
      It is manifestly unfair that such a witness should be left to face what in
      a long inquiry is sometimes a crippling bill of costs. It was for this
     reason that in the last inquiry to be held under the Act of 1921 the
      inbunal recommended that some of the witnesses should be paid all
     or part of their costs out of public funds. As a result the Treasury wrote
     to these witaesses advising them that it was proposed to make an ex
     gratia contribution towards their costs, and they were asked to submit
     then- bills of costs. This, of course, was all that could be done under
     the Act in its present form and was an advance upon the previous practice of
      eaving all witnesses to pay their own costs. We do not consider however that
     it is satisfactory that the amount to be paid to a witness in respect of his
     costs should be offered e* gratia. It may put the witness in an embarrassing
    position He may feel that he is accepting alms at the public expense. There
    s“ou[j ^e power in the Tribunal to order in its discretion that any witness
    should be paid all or any proportion of his costs out of public funds on a
    Common Fund basis. Common Fund basis means that the amount of the
    costs must be reasonable. If their reasonableness is not agreed by the Treasury
    Solicitor, the costs should be taxed by a Taxing Master in accordance with
    the Rules of the Supreme Court. Once the Tribunal makes an Order for
    costs in favour of a witness, he should receive them as of right and not ex
    gratia.
       61.    It may be helpful if we state how, in our view, the Tribunal’s discretion
    in respect of costs should be exercised. Normally the witness should be
    allowed his costs. It is only in exceptional circumstances that the Tribunal’s
    discretion should be exercised to disallow costs. We have recommended in
    S S T A . 54 !hat any witness shouM be enticed to be legally represented.
    11 the Tribunal came to the conclusion in respect of any witness that there
    had never been any real ground for supposing that he might be prejudicially
    affected by the inquiry and that it was therefore unreasonable for him to have
    gone to the expense of legal representation, the Tribunal should leave him
                                             25
to bear those expenses himself. In any case in which the Tribunal considered
it reasonable for the witness to be legally represented, the practice should be to
order that he should recover his costs out of public funds on a Common Fund
basis unless the Tribunal considered that there were good grounds for
depriving him of all o r part of his costs. It is impossible to catalogue what
these grounds might be ; cases vary infinitely in their facts and the matter must
 be left entirely to the discretion of the Tribunal. It may be helpful, however,
 to give a few examples of the type of case in which a Tribunal might deprive
 a witness of part or all of his costs. If the witness during the course of the
 inquiry sought to obstruct the Tribunal in arriving at the truth or unreasonably
 delayed the inquiry. This does not mean that every departure in evidence
 from strict accuracy even if deliberate should be regarded as necessarily
 disqualifying a witness from recovering his costs. It would be a question
 of fact and degree in each case. The mere fact that a witness had committed
  a criminal offence-—even a serious one—or was a disreputable person should
  not of itself, be a ground for depriving him of his costs. We have no doubt
  that Tribunals can safely be left to exercise their discretion over costs wisely
  and justly.
     62.    In dealing with costs, we have hitherto dealt with the case in which the
  witness would not qualify for assistance under the Legal Aid Scheme. But
  what of these latter cases? No one should be disabled by comparative
   poverty from being legally represented if reason and justice require that
   he should be represented. We therefore recommend that any necessary
   amendments to the relevant statute or regulations should be made to give
   the Tribunal the same power to grant legal aid as the Criminal Courts
   exercise, i.e. the Tribunal would have to be satisfied that prima facie the
   witness’s financial position qualified him for legal aid and that it was
   reasonable in all the circumstances that he should be represented.

  (vii) Further Immunity
     63.   Section 1 (3) of the Act of 1921 provides that a witness before any
  Tribunal shall be entitled to the same immunities and privileges as if he
  were a witness before the High Court or the Court of Session. This means
  that he cannot be sued for anything he says in evidence, e.g. if he says “ A is
  a liar. His evidence is untrue ”, A cannot sue him for defamation. It does
  not mean however that his answers as a witness cannot be used in evidence
  against him in any subsequent civil or criminal proceedings. We consider
  that the witness’s immunity should be extended so that neither his evidence
   before the Tribunal, nor his statement to the Treasury Solicitor, nor any
   documents he is required to produce to the Tribunal, shall be used against
   him in any subsequent civil or criminal proceedings except in criminal
   proceedings in which he is charged with having given false evidence before
   the Tribunal or conspired with or procured others to do so. This extension
   of the witness’s immunity would bring the law in this country into line in
   this respect with similar provisions in the legislation of C a n a d a Australia
    and India and indeed with Section 9 of the Special Commission Act, 1888.
   It would also, in our view, be of considerable assistance in obtaining relevant
    evidence, for persons may be chary of coming forward for fear of exposing
    themselves to the risk of prosecution or an action in the civil courts. Moreover,
                                          26
 t n r f !     extension of the immunity would make it difficult for a witness
 to refuse to answer a question on the ground that his answer might tend
 to incriminate him. Thus not only would the witness be afforded a further
 S taTttuth Pr° teCtl0n but the Tribunal would also be helped in arriving

   64.      No doubt this entails a risk that a guilty man may escape prosecution
 ^          d be unfortunate, but it is much more important that everything
the S      I S            d0nt t°v. enable a Tribunal t0 establish and proclaim
the truth about a matter which is causing a nation-wide crisis of confidence
Moreover the nsk would be minimised by the fact that Tribunals have in the
past and no doubt will in the future wherever practicable forbear from
 investigating any side issues when it is known that a prosecution is in
contemplation or may be brought in respect of them. In any event, it has
         w r®cogmsed that from a Practical point of view it would be’almost
impossible to prosecute a witness in respect of anything which emerged
against him in the course of a hearing before a Tribunal of Inquiry The
Rule against hearsay evidence, rightly in our view, is not applied by the
Tribunal although the practice is for the Tribunal to ignore hearsay evidence
                 ° f u r T n® at any adverse findin§ a§a^ t anyone appearing
before it. The publicity however which such hearings usually attract is so
wide and so overwhelming that it would be virtually impossible for any
person against whom an adverse finding was made to obtain a fair trial
afterwards. So far no such person has ever been prosecuted. This again
may be justified in the public interest because Parliament having decided to
set up an inquiry under the Act has clearly considered whether or not civil
or cnminal proceedings would resolve the matter and has decided that thev
would not.                                                                    y

(viii) Opportunity to make an early (statement

J S We, T ider that il should be left t0 the Tribunal in every case to
decide whether or not an opening statement should be made by counsel
appearing for it. We can conceive of cases in which it would be most
desirable that such a statement should be made and others in which it should
not. This matter is dealt with further in paragraph 109. In the past the
 pening statement of counsel for the Tribunal has sometimes contained
 rong criticisms of persons to be called as witnesses before the Tribunal
I n f i l l Cn!1C1Smf, uVe been given the widest Publicity yet it has not been
possible to call the persons concerned until a much later stage in the
inquiry. Accordingly they have been deprived, sometimes for weeks, of
grnng their side of the story and answering the criticisms that have been
publicly made against them. This unfortunately is sometimes unavoidable It
is not however a feature peculiar to Tribunals of Inquiry but occurs equally
in the ordinary civil and criminal courts. We consider that solicitor or
counsel for any witness before the Tribunal should be given the opportunity
of making a short speech of not more than about five minutes duration
immediately after the conclusion of the opening speech by counsel for the
  nbunal. In most cases we think it unlikely that anyone will wish to avail
himself of this opportunity. There may however be cases in which the
opportunity to make a particular point or refer to a document at an early
stage will immediately put the case in an entirely different light and go far
                                     01
to mitigate the effect upon the public of the criticism made in opening. It
is for this reason that we recommend that it should be the practice of
Tribunals to accord solicitor or counsel appearing for witnesses the oppor­
tunity of m a k in g a very short statement immediately after the opening.
Whilst this is an advantage not enjoyed in the ordinary civil or criminal
courts, it must be recognised that witnesses before an inquisitorial tribunal
are sometimes in an exceptionally difficult position and should be accorded
every possible safeguard.

(ix) Criminal Records
   66. It is perhaps appropriate that at this stage we should deal with the
subject of criminal records. Any information as to crimes committed by any
of the witnesses must together with any other information obtained by the
Treasury Solicitor be placed before the Tribunal in advance of the hearing.
It is of the greatest importance that the credibility of any witness should
be thoroughly tested, particularly if his evidence supports any of the
allegations which are the subject matter of the inquiry. Sometimes a witness’s
criminal record may be of considerable assistance in this respect. On the
other hand there are cases in which the crime was committed so long ago
or was of such a nature that it could not materially affect the witness’s
credibility In such circumstances it would be manifestly unfair that a
witness who has come forward to help in a public inquiry should have his
past dragged up and publicised. In each case it must be left to the Tribunal
to use its discretion as to whether or not a man with a record should have it
used again him.
   67     We consider that with the adoption of the safeguards recommended
in this Chapter—some of which would require legislation—most of the
criticisms which have been made about the workings of the Act of 1921
would be met and all persons appearing before Tribunals would be
adequately protected.

                                CHAPTER V

     SHOULD THERE BE STATUTORY RULES OF PROCEDURE?
  68. The question arises as to whether or not there should be statutory
rules which lay down the procedure to be followed by Tribunals of Inquiry.
The disadvantage of having such rules would be that they would necessarily
be detailed and rigid. This would enable anyone who wished to obstruct
or delay the proceedings of the Tribunal to take advantage of any supposed
technical breach of the rules for this purpose. Any alleged failure to comply
with the rules might be brought up for review by prerogative writ to the
High Court and the inquiry thereby delayed or frustrated.
   69 Moreover, the procedural requirements of Tribunals will differ accord­
ing to the circumstances of each case and it is accordingly desirable to keep
the procedure as flexible as possible so that it may be adapted by the Tribunal
to meet the needs of the particular case.
   70 Rather than have a rigid set of rules, we consider that it is sufficient
to lay down the general principles to be followed as we sought to do in
Chapter IV. We believe that Tribunals of Inquiry can safely be relied upon
                                      28
                                    CHAPTER VI

              PROCEDURE BY WHICH A TRIBUNAL IS SET UP
   n J J ', J he P0Vf r .t0 set up a Tribunal under the Act of 1921 can be exercised
                                            ° f Parliament that * is expedient tha^a
   the re so u H o n S n f       f mu^ mn8 int0 a “ definite m atter” described in
   to set un a TnhnLT8? S?                ™Portance- We consider that this power
      set up a Tribunal should not be extended. We do not aorw                     „
   S ^ r e r toff tState.
   Wgiioftcer        a t " Because
                            T        of the ^inquisitorial
                                                 the P°W6rnature
                                                           “     ofbethe
                                                                      v eproceeding
                                                                         ? 5 in som^
    nd the consequent pain which they may cause to individuals, Tribunals shoufd
   be set up as sparingly as possible. Any temptation therem ay              to 2
  be ao S in tp i tn 7 “? e.lther ? ouse b? statin§ that a Tribunal of Inquiry will
   be appointed to look into the matter should be resisted The fart t w
  resolution ot both H ou*s oj Parliament is req“ ir S M ore a TribnnS
  invoSkldUPpaff?rdS Stme S.afeguard a8ainst this procedure being too readily


  before it is * £ £ £                                               J 'n lS y to




          u.n aer the Act- F°r these reasons we recommend that the nresent
 procedure for setting up Tribunals under the Act be retained.

                                 CHAPTER VII

   COMPOSITION, STATUS AND IMMUNITY OF THE TRIBUNAL

of fte Tribunal ‘’ s S 94? h ™ * no. requirements as to the composition
to consist of members of the judTciSy a n d ^ m S n t ^ ^ ^




advanys       I, ensures Urn £ e p o w ^ o l S e S u n a ? ^ Z         “   r S
f * ™ 5' t0 comPel the attendance of witnesses, the answer to questions
and the production of documents, and to deal with anyone who disobevs h i
orders. We appreciate that the present practice of appointing a c h a e a n
from amongst the judiciary is unlikely to be departed t a         We
however that this practice is of such importance that legislative steps should
be taken to ensure that it shall always be followed. Without , L i ! f
would^achief aSt,Chairman we think k unlikely that the findings of Tribunals
  ould achieve the same measures of public confidence and acceptance as
they have in the past. The Act should not however lay down any require
ment as to the qualifications of the other members of the Tribunal. These
may or may not be lawyers, but none of them should have any close asso­
ciation with any political party. Counsel and solicitors of high standmg are
 experienced in sifting and assessing evidence and e x e r c i s i n g sound and impar­
tial judgment. There may however well be cases m which it would be
 appropriate to appoint a layman as a member of the Tribunal. Much must
 depend upon the nature of the inquiry.
     73. A suggestion has been made that the members of the Tribunal should
 be named in the resolution of Parliament setting up die tribunal. We me
 onnosed to this suggestion. It would be invidious for the names of the
 proposed members of the Tribunal to be bandied about m P a r lia m e n t and
 their suitability for appointment debated. The selection of individuals as
 past experience has shown can safely be left to the Government of the
  day. Moreover, it might well be difficult to find suitable persons willing to
  render these onerous duties if their suitability should be subject to debate.
      74 The Act of 1921 omits to confer immunity upon the members of the
  Tribunal for anything said by them during the c o u r s e of the mquiry or in
  their report. Although no doubt the Government wQuld stand behmd them
  in respect of any damages and costs for which they might be held liiable
  an action brought against them by persons whose conduct they had felt it
   their duty to criticise, it is manifestly undesirable that they should be
   exposed to the risks of being harassed by litigation arising out at the ^ch arg e
   of their duty. A convenient method of dealing with this situation m gh
   by conferring upon the Tribunal the same privileges and immunities as those
   enjoyed by a Superior Court of Record.                                              _
       75. Although this is outside our terms of reference, consideration might
   be given to conferring a similar immunity upon p e rs o n s appointed tc. hold
    an inquiry on behalf of a Government Department. The evidence before
    us shows that, on occasion, such persons—and n o t t h e m Q S t t i m i d a™ 01^
    them—have felt inhibited in carrying out their duties by the lack of such
    immunity. It might be possible to take advantage of the amendments that
    will have to be made in the Act to introduce a short section dealing wit
     such cases.
        76. We would here point out that the Act also omits to confer any
     immunity upon solicitors or counsel or other representatives for what they
     sTy^when appearing before Tribunals of Inquiry The same immuniy shouM
     be conferred upon them as they would enjoy if appearing before the High
     Court or the Court of Session.

                                    CHAPTER VIII

                              TERMS OF REFERENCE
     77 In view of the inquisitorial nature of the proceedings of the Tribunal,
   the terms of reference require careful consideration and should be drawn as
   precisely as possible.
      78.    As the agitation for an inquiry is very often the result o f n °thJJS
   more than general allegation and rumour, it is necessary to keep the
    Tribunal within reasonable bounds. It is not of urgent public importance
                                             30
11|,n ii|(iif,>i iii> i ' i M < iiiM < ifi^v iii< i i< ^ 'J|i K ii^ w f i i w i | i i y p v i ,vf 'M'ikiih I ' m M H ' i i i i      .




       merely to satisfy idle public curiosity. The Act lays down, rightly in our
       view, that what is to be inquired into shall be a “ definite matter
       Accordingly no Tribunal should be set up to investigate a nebulous mass of
       vague and unspecified rumours. The reference should confine the inquiry
       to the investigation of the definite matter which is causing a crisis of public
       confidence. On the other hand it is essential that Tribunals should not be
       fettered by terms of reference which are too narrowly drawn.
          79. The Tribunal should take an early opportunity of explaining in public
       its interpretation of its terms of reference and the extent to which the inquiry
       is likely to be pursued. As the inquiry proceeds, it may be necessary for
       the Tribunal to explain any further interpretation it may have placed on the
       terms of reference in the light of the facts that have emerged.

                                                                                                                                 CHAPTER IX

              THE CASE FOR AND AGAINST A PRELIMINARY HEARING OF
                             EVIDENCE IN PRIVATE
            80. The suggestion has been made that a private preliminary inquiry
         should be held by a Parliamentary Commissioner or other person to decide
         whether or not there was sufficient material for investigation by a Tribunal
         of Inquiry under the Act of 1921 or that there should be some other form
         of preliminary inquiry by a member of the Government before the Govern­
         ment sets up such a Tribunal. No doubt the Government of the day
         usually causes some informal inquiry to be made by the Lord Chancellor
         before it moves any resolution to set up a Tribunal under the Act. We do
         not think that it would be right to seek to fetter the Government’s power to
         move such a resolution in any case in which it appeared to the Government
         that there was a nation-wide crisis of public confidence.
             81. A further suggestion has been made by some witnesses, although many
         have disagreed with it, that the Tribunal should hold a preliminary investi­
         gation in private. At this investigation evidence should be called and sub­
         missions made to enable the Tribunal to decide whether or not there was a
          prima facie case to support any allegation against any of the persons con­
         cerned. The advantage of this course, so it is said, is that the Tribunal
         could thus protect innocent persons from having groundless allegations or
         ru m ou rs against them pursued in the fierce light of publicity. Whilst we
         fully recognise the importance of protecting innocent persons against any
          possible injury to their reputations which may be involved in a public
          hearing, we do not consider that a preliminary hearing in private is the best
          means of affording them this protection. Assuming that there are wide­
          spread rumours and allegations about the conduct of some innocent indivi­
          dual, it seems to us that if the evidence is heard in private at a preliminary
          hearing and the Tribunal thereafter announces that the rumours and allega­
          tions are groundless, there is a real risk that the public will not be convinced
          and may consider that something is being hushed up. Indeed a number of
          witnesses involved in recent Tribunals of Inquiry and those appearing on
          their behalf have stressed in evidence before us the importance they attach
          to being able to destroy the rumours and allegations by evidence given in
          public.
                                                                                                                                        31
   82. If on the other hand the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that there
is enough in the rumours and allegations to warrant a public investigation,
the impression that this would make upon the public might well be
unfortunate from the point of view of the individual concerned. Moreover
there is something unreal about evidence being taken in private and then
being re-hashed before the same Tribunal in public. Besides the untruthful
witness who has done badly under cross-examination at the first attempt
would be forewarned. This procedure would also entail considerable un­
necessary delay for the publication of the Report would be postponed by
the time taken by the preliminary hearing without any corresponding advan­
tage being secured.
   83. It is for these reasons that we prefer the recommendation made in
paragraph 49 under the heading of “ More Tim e”. It seems to us that
if more time is given to collating the material evidence before the public
hearing begins, the Tribunal should have an ample opportunity of defining
the allegations, pinpointing the relevant matters to be investigated, and
discarding any prejudicial testimony that is clearly immaterial. This will
also make it possible for the Tribunal to comply with our recommendations
for making known to witnesses the allegations and rumours -they have to
meet and the substance of the evidence upon which they are based.
If a witness after he has been supplied with this material wishes to make
a submission to the Tribunal in private, either personally or through solicitor
Or counsel, he should be allowed to do so. It is thus, rather than by
a two tier investigation with a preliminary hearing of evidence in private,
that we think that the interests of witnesses can best be protected.

                                CHAPTER X

       BY WHOM SHALL THE TRIBUNAL BE REPRESENTED?
(i) The Treasury Solicitor?
   84. It has always been the practice in England for the solicitor acting
for the Tribunal to be the Treasury Solicitor. In our view, this practice
should continue. It has great advantages. The Treasury Solicitor has vast
experience of public administration and also the entree into all Government
Departments.      This is of great value to a Tribunal for in the course of
their investigations, it is often important to have detailed knowledge of
how Government administration normally functions. It is also often essential
to acquire information or help which can be obtained only from Government
Departments.
   85. The Treasury Solicitor has accumulated over the years wide experience
of Tribunals of Inquiry and is thoroughly familiar with all the important
preparatory work to be carried out. Moreover, he has the staff available
to cope with this most onerous task which it has always performed with
the greatest thoroughness and efficiency. The evidence before us shows
that it is unlikely that any firm of solicitors, however large their staff,
would be willing to take on this work, for to do so would entail virtually
ceasing to carry on their private practice, at any rate for a very long time.
Moreover the cost would be very heavy indeed.
               i i * 1 "'i' " t''1' ir i'g,iW i'irt(,t " r" l |il *1 " 'i/l" ' i'll'i




        86. The Treasury Solicitor no doubt comes into close contact with the
      Government of the day. But Governments come and go. The Treasury
      Solicitor and his staff are, however, civil servants, and, like all civil servants,
     go on impartially carrying out their duties whatever Government happens
     to be in power; the work of the Civil Service is in no way affected by
     political influences, and this fact without doubt is well recognised by the
     public.
        87. It is in our view essential that the practice should continue of the
     Treasury Solicitor, and indeed the counsel he instructs, being in constant
     consultation with the Tribunal. As we have pointed out in paragraph 28,
     the Tribunal’s function is not only to report upon but to inquire into the
     matters which are disturbing the public. It is the Tribunal alone which
     is entrusted by Parliament to carry out this important duty on the public’s
     behalf. And it is in the Tribunal alone which, for this purpose, the public
     reposes its confidence. The nature of the task of the Tribunal is therefore I
>;   inescapably inquisitorial. In carrying out this task it cannot and should |
     not be deprived or me services of solicitors and counsel, for their services
     are essential. But for them, the Tribunal would have to interview the
I    witnesses personally before hearing their evidence and descend into the arena
     at the hearing as they did in the Budget Leak Tribunal. This would in
     our view be in the highest degree undesirable.
        88. The Tribunal must therefore be in close contact with the Treasury |
     Solicitor for the purpose of directing the lines of investigation and with 1
     counsel for the purpose of being advised upon them. The frequency with 1
     which these consultations will occur must depend upon the facts of each I
     case. Experience has shown that such consultations are essential for the
     efficient discharge of the task of the Tribunal. Indeed, the chairmen of
     the last two Tribunals of Inquiry have stated in evidence that without such
     assistance their task would have been impossible. This system has not in
     the past and, in our view, will not in the future in any way hinder Tribunals
     from arriving at impartial findings.
        89. Although in Scotland it might be feasible for private firms of solicitors
     to act for the Tribunal, we consider for much the same reasons as apply
     in England that it would be preferable for the Solicitor for the Scottish
     Department or the Procurator Fiscal to act.
     (il) The Attorney-General?
        90. It is essential in our view for the Tribunal to be represented by counsel         ■
     to make an opening speech if necessary and to make submissions relevant                  I
<    to any question that may arise for decision, to cross-examine and if necessary          I
     to examine witnesses in chief so as to avoid the difficulties which arose in            I
     the Budget Leak Tribunal to which we have referred in paragraph 17 of this              I
     report.                                                                                 I
        91. The practice or tradition that the Attorney-General should appear as
     counsel to conduct the proceedings on behalf of the Tribunal has grown
     up only since the last war. As we have recorded in paragraph 16 of this
     report, although Sir Donald Somervell, the Attorney-General of the day,
     attended before the Budget Leak Tribunal, he refused to take any leading
                                                                                        33




H
 part in the proceedings, perhaps because he considered that the political
 background of the inquiry made it inappropriate for him to do so.
    92. Every one of the post-war Tribunals of Inquiry in England has had
 a highly charged political background, yet in every case the Attorney-
 General of the day has played a leading role. This was because the Attorney-
 General at the time of the Lynskey Tribunal considered that it was his duty
 to do so and this view of the duties of his office was shared by each of his
 successors. We have listened with attention to the evidence of all of them
 upon this matter and they are unanimous in their views. These views are
 supported by some of the other witnesses. On the other hand there is an
 even larger body of evidence, including that of the Lord Chief Justice of
 England, Lord Radcliffe, Lord Devlin, the Bar Council, the Council of the
|Law Society and the Treasury Solicitor, to the effect that it would be better
lif the Tribunal were to instruct independent counsel of the highest standing
■to represent them.
     93. The arguments in favour of retaining the present practice which has
  existed only since 1948 can be summarised as follows. The Attorney-
  General has a special responsibility for the public interest and as the pro­
jector of the public interest should ensure that the Tribunal has all relevant
I material before it since the subject matter of an inquiry is ex hypothesi of
  vital public importance. If the Attorney-General were to renounce or be
' deprived of this function, it would derogate from his high office, since it
  might be construed as a reflection upon his complete impartiality. This
  might call into question his constitutional function of deciding whether or
  not a prosecution should be instituted in important cases with a political
  background. The position of the Attorney-General and his reputation for
  fairness and impartiality in the conduct of legal proceedings would thus be
  undermined. The Attorney-General has a specialised knowledge of Gov­
  ernment administration which helps in the investigations, and his part in
  the proceedings gives him an inside knowledge of what occurred before the
  Tribunal should there be any debate on the Report after its publication.
  Accordingly the Attorney-General should always conduct the proceedings
  before Tribunals of Inquiry unless he is personally involved or in his
  discretion decides that he might otherwise be seriously embarrassed. We
  are very conscious of the force of all these arguments just as we appreciate
  the admirable way in which all Attomeys-General appearing before Tribunals
  in the past have performed their onerous and self-imposed task. We have
  nothing but admiration for their impartiality and high sense of duty.
     94. Nevertheless we consider that the arguments in favour of changing
1    the present practice should undoubtedly prevail. Since the last war a
     Tribunal of Inquiry has only been appointed when political passions have
  been running high and public suspicion about the conduct of prominent
  persons, including members of the Government, has been rife. We have
   no reason to suppose that the picture is likely to be any different when
   future Tribunals are set up. In these circumstances we consider it advisable
  that counsel conducting the examination or cross-examination of witnesses
   on behalf of the Tribunal should have no connection whatsoever with the
   Government of the day or with any political party. Whilst we of course
   fully appreciate the distinction for all purposes between the position of the
                                      34
zsza zzz .fH i-H rS i
understand in relation to a Tnbunal of Inquiry
of the ministerial colleagues of the Aliorney-Genera .
                                                                            “
                                                                                   •
                                                                                       ot hH
     *         o        th e inauirv whose interests are inimical to tnose 01 uic
S ^ o f S i s t r s T n S n e d are liable however wrongly. to l*m dte
impression t o , the odds
undoubtedly some criticism of all the Attorney8 uene                  PP^                 ^
the post-war Tr* u^ . s of                          cross-examined too vigorously or
their political affiliations either ^                            and unnecessary that
Law-Officers of the Crown should be exposed to such criticisms.


                          fassions are                           “   SSd2
 confidence in the conduct of some m e m t a : w o u l d be
 that the confidence of the public m * e .        f    f      the Government,
 enhanced if the A t» rn e y ^ n « a l, w h o j ^            ^
 w     not to act for the
     e r e                          ^       matters with no political content.
 Inquiry may be set up to > <1                should be, only when there is a
 If, however, Tribunals are set up,         >              , Uc importance, it
  nation-wide crisis of confidence in matters ot         ? ,       will almost
  seem s-and indeed experience * o w s - t o t * e m vesU ^U ons^ ^ ^
 certainly have strong ^ “ 'ribiinal shouM not be represented by independent
 is no real reason why the Tribunal snouia no                  f        of the Crown.
     counsel of high stending ra er                     specialised knowledge of
     It is true that the Law Officers of the Crown nav ^    ^ ^ ^ Treasury
     the administration of Govemmc           ?       d instructing counsel on its
     S i r I ? 1 5 .                      a^    “       published, the matter is debated
     ^ H ^ f ^ X o n s                   a full ^     P  ^ d V          "      T ^and
     a; S “   in°a t * “         n' "                 matter than if he had been
     personally involved in the conduct of the proceedings.
             * . We cannot accept the argument drat if Law
         the Tribunal ^                  '“ y ^ ta m in g their traditional non-politcal
         doubt upon ' ^        ““ “ ' ^ ^ r a ^ n d u c t of criminal proceedings
         functions in relation to the 1               no1itical implications bear no real
         Even such criminal proceedings as have p o ^                       Qf Inquify In
         resemblance to the sort of m a e r s _          bli confidence, and the personal
          such cases there is no nation-wide cnsis of P ™ ^ Gener d is not normally
          conduct of the mimsterial coneagu                           Officers usually deal
          involved. Moreover, m the matters witn wn ^             guardians of the public
           as legal advisers to the Cro ’        y , decisions subject to no interference
           interest. They and they a one                      1           even advise them
           by any outside source. No one may dictate to mem nor                          we
          as to how they s h o u ld ^ £ a r g e t o r ^ u ^    ^     Qf ^       pubUc interest,
          ” d w S l i e i s t h a ^ P a r U a m e n , to invesUgate and report m the
. ,          f     rinWir       If the Attorney-General is brought into such matters,


                  S OJ inquiry to be pursued and upon other matters. Whilst we




whrther or not he or the Solicitor-General rather than some other counsel
? i f o l » r fnr the Tribunal To leave the choice with him would be to
S h L S t m o s t invidious position. If he decided not to ■
S S t he was shirking an unpleasant duty or that some simster ^plication
          reTd into his decision. For all these reasons we have come to the
conclusion that it would be much better that the present practice should be
discontinued and that in future neither the A t t o m e y - C e n e r ^ n o y h e Sohcxtor-
 General should represent a Tnbunal set up under the Act of 1921. Ih
 Tribunal should select its own counsel to be instructed by the Treasury
 Solicitor There is however in our view no reason why a Law Officer, he
 S S e d           to do so, should not represent any minister or Government
 Department concerned in such proceedings.
    97. For the reasons we have indicated above we consider that it would
 be preferable for Tribunals in Scotland not to be represented by the Lor
 Advocate or the Solicitor-General, but by an independent counsel of the highest
 standing nominated by the Tribunal.

                                         CHAPTER XI

                         PROCEEDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL

  (i) Preliminary meeting of the Tribunal in public
       08 Tn nrevious inquiries the Tribunal has held a preliminaiy meeting in

l e ^ s S            T      m      ^ h    S    „ ^ U d uS i


 f e n g more effective and will be a greater protection to those who are '“W1™ 1;

        " d we
      S S n S
                                :sse“
                       the table rather t o n       — J
      and cross-examination might more likely lead to the truth.
                                                                 1*1                    ,ion

           100 There is however a real danger in departing from well toed and proved
      methods of arriving at the truth. Whilst therefore in our view examination
      and c r o s s - e x a m i n a t i o n should be retained, every effort should be made by
      the Tribunal and counsel appearing on its behalf to put witnesses at their
      ease. We have no doubt that this can be done.
            101 At the preliminary meeting the Tribunal should read its terms of
       r e fe r e n c e in public and iive its interpretation of these terms of reference
      and the extent of the intended lines of inquiry.
                                                          36
M                                             ""’N




       102. The Tribunal should then proceed to give directions on matters of
    administration and procedure.
       103. The Tribunal should explain the duties of the Treasury Solicitor
    and counsel instructed on behalf of the Tribunal, the duties of counsel
    appearing for witnesses and interested persons and the order of speeches by
    the counsel appearing at the inquiry.
       104. The Tribunal should indicate so far as it is possible to do so, the
    allegations which will be investigated. The Tribunal will also indicate
    what, if any, parts of the proceedings they then intend to hold in private
    session and give directions as to the venue and times of hearing of the
    evidence.
       105. It may be necessary for the Tribunal to entertain applications for
    representation earlier than the preliminary meeting in public and this can be
    done by writing to the Tribunal applying for the representation under the Act.
       106. It is essential that sufficient time is given between the preliminary meet­
    ing and the hearing of evidence to enable the Treasury Solicitor to make
    any necessary further investigations and to give the persons involved adequate
    time to prepare their cases.
       107. During the period between the preliminary meeting and the hearing of
    the evidence, if it has not been done already, the Treasury Solicitor should
    provide all witnesses with copies of their statements and all the witnesses and
    persons interested with a nrecis or a list of the allegations which they will be
    required to answer. The Tribunal should direct the Treasury Solicitor to
    provide witnesses and interested persons with a document containing the
    substance of any evidence which affects them. The form of any such document
    should in each case be at the discretion of the Tribunal for the reasons we
    have stated in paragraph 51.
     (ii) Hearing of evidence by the Tribunal
        108. The hearing of the evidence in public by the Tribunal should be held
     in premises which are easy of access to the public and provide sufficient
     accommodation to enable the greatest number of the public to attend.
        109. In its discretion the Tribunal will direct whether or not counsel
     instructed on its behalf should make an opening statement indicating the,
     progress which has been made in the investigation before the evidence is
     heard.
        110. It has been suggested that it would be preferable to have no open­
     ing statement by counsel for the Tribunal otherwise allegations are made in
     the full glare of publicity when the Press and the public are most interested.
     By the time the allegations have been dealt with in the evidence and the
      report has been published the interest in the inquiry has waned.
        111. Provided a sufficient time has been given to the preparation for the
     inquiry, an opening statement by counsel for the Tribunal is usually helpful
     as it is otherwise difficult for the persons who have been granted representa­
     tion and the members of the public to understand the line of inquiry which
     is being followed. An opening statement will also assist the Press in reporting
     the proceedings. The statement should be an impartial summary of the
     investigation and avoid any comments likely to make sensational headlines.
                                            37




    «RR
l i t should be emphasised that until the evidence has been heard it would be
 lwrong to draw any conclusions.
      112. After submissions have been made by counsel, the witnesses should
   be called in the order directed by the Tribunal.
       113. At the close of the examination in chief, the witness should, if
   necessary, be cross-examined by a member of the team of counsel instructed
    on behalf of the Tribunal. The Tribunal should then give leave in its
    discretion to other counsel representing interested persons to cross-examine
    the witness before the witness is finally re-examined by his own counsel.
    Members of the Tribunal will question the witness at any stage ot his
    examination should they wish to do so.
  i 114 There should be one counsel in the team of counsel acting on behalf
  I of the Tribunal who is appointed to examine and re-examine any witness
  | who is not legally represented.

                                 CHAPTER XII

                                   PUBLICITY

         115 As we have already indicated it is, in our view of the greatest
   importance that hearings before a Tribunal of I n q u i r y should be held in
   public. It is only when the public is present that the public will have com­
   plete confidence that everything possible has been done for the purpose of
   arriving at the truth.
         116 When there is a crisis of public confidence about the alleged mis­
    conduct of persons in high places, the public naturally distrusts any investiga­
    tion carried out behind closed doors. Investigations so conducted will always
    tend to promote the suspicion, however unjustified, that they are not being
    conducted sufficiently vigorously and thoroughly or that something is bemg
     hushed up. Publicity enables the public to see for itself how the investigation
     is being carried out and accordingly dispels suspicion. Unless these inquiries
     are held in public they are unlikely to achieve their main purpose, namely, that
     of restoring the confidence of the public in the integrity of our public life.
     And without this confidence no democracy can long survive.
          117 It has been said that if the inquiry were held in private some witnesses
      would come forward with evidence which they would not be prepared to give
      in public. This may well be so. We consider, however, as we have said in
      paragraph 40, that although secret hearings may increase the quantity ot the
      evidence they tend to debase its quality. The loss of the kind of evidence
      which might be withheld because the hearing is not in secret would, in our
      view be a small price to pay for the great advantages of a public hearing
       Moreover, experience shows that the Tribunals of Inquiry which have sat
       in public have not been hampered in their task by lack of any essential
       evidence.
           118.   We appreciate that publicity may be hurtful to some witnesses who
       are called before the Tribunal and indeed to some persons who are mentioned
        and perhaps not called to give evidence. But this is a risk which, on the
        rare occasions when such inquiries are necessary, must be accepted in the
                                           38
national interest. We have already dealt with the measures which we
recommend to safeguard the interests of persons called to give evidence.
Careful preparation and sifting of the statements of witnesses before the
witnesses are called will do much to eliminate the risks of groundless charges
being thrown up for the first time by the evidence. It may be decided to
discard some witnesses altogether as being immaterial. In other cases, where
there is some material evidence which the witness can give, care must be taken
whilst examining him in chief not to bring out in his evidence irrelevant
and groundless allegations against anyone. Nevertheless the risk remains
that such allegations might be made by the witness whilst under cross-
examination. This is unavoidable, but it is not a risk peculiar to hearings
 before a Tribunal of Inquiry. It may equally well occur in any ordinary civil
or criminal proceedings.
     119.    It has been suggested to us that the Press should be prohibited from
 reporting the proceedings day by day and that the evidence should be made
 public only after the publication of the Tribunal’s report. This would no
 doubt eliminate the pain sometimes caused to innocent persons by the glare
 of publicity. On the other hand we are satisfied by the evidence that on
 balance it is in the interest of innocent persons against whom allegations have
 been made or rumours circulated to have the opportunity of giving their
 evidence and destroying the evidence against them in the full light of
  publicity. If, as we believe, it is essential for the inquiry to be held in public
  it seems to us that those members of the public who are not able to attend
  the hearing in person are entitled to be kept informed through the national
  Press of what is taking place. Moreover, if the evidence is not published daily
  and the public has to wait for weeks or months for authentic information
  about what is occurring before the Tribunal, rumours will grow and
  multiply and the crisis of public confidence will be heightened.
      120. When the evidence is published in bulk after the report, there is
   perhaps only a small percentage of the reading public which embarks upon
   the formidable task of reading and digesting it, certainly far fewer than
   read the newspaper reports of the Tribunal’s proceedings.
       121. We have also considered the suggestion that the Press tends to
   highlight sensational aspects of the evidence without providing the other side
   of the picture. No doubt when 'this occurs it is largely due to the difficulties
   which the newspaper has in giving an accurate account of the proceedings
   because of the roving nature of the investigations and the consequent problem
    for all concerned of distinguishing between what is important and what is
    not We wish to emphasise the extreme care which the Press should exercise
    in reporting these matters. It should be made clear, particularly in the open­
    ing stages of an inquiry, that only one side is then being published. This is
    especially important in an inquisitorial inquiry when new facts may emerge
    suddenly during the proceedings. Care should also be taken to give the same
    prominence to the evidence of persons denying allegations or rumours made
    against them as was given to the allegations and rumours themselves^ We
     are confident that the Press in general can safely be relied upon to be fair
    to all persons involved in an inquiry.
        122. Although it is of the greatest importance that the hearing should be in
     public, it has been generally conceded in evidence that there may be most
                                          39
exceptional circumstances in which justice demands that the Tnbunal should
have a discretion to hear some of the evidence in pnvate. Under Section 2
of the Act of 1921 the Tribunal has no power to exclude the public unless
it is of the opinion that “ it is in the public interest expedient so to do for
reasons connected with the subject matter of the inquiry or the nature of the
 evidence to be given”. These words have so far only been construed as
applying to cases in which hearing the evidence in public would constitute
 a security risk. This is because no question has yet arisen as to whether they
 may confer a wider discretion. We consider that the Tnbunal s h o u ld have a
 wider discretion, certainly as wide as the discretion of a Judge sitting ui the
 High Court of Justice. This discretion enables the public to be excluded
 in circumstances in which a public hearing would defeat the ends of jjwtee,
 e.g. where particulars of secret processes have to be disclosed and m infancy
 cases      We do not think however the discretion should necessarily
 confined to infancy cases or to trade secrets It 18 ^ ^ n a l o f ° £ S y
 the multifarious contingencies which may anse before a              reaS o f
  We can imagine cases in which for instance a name might              q
  T w S e s s ^ n would be just that he should be allowed to wnte it down
  rather than state is publicly. The Tribunal might consider it desirable to
  exclude the public from the inquiry for the purpose of making anexpJ“ atl°*
  to a titn e s s 'o r admonishing him. The Tribunal might c o n f e r ^ a t the
  interests of iustice and humanity required certain parts of evidence to be
  T e n t private This would be only in the most exceptional circumstances
  S        X e d may nevlr occur. The discretion should however be wide
  enough to meet such cases in the unlikely event of their occurnng. cle^ ly
  that discretion should be exercised with the greatesyeluctance and care
                                              so L T c o M e r such ^
 Tribunal.
                                     CHAPTER XIII

   POWER TO COMPEL EVIDENCE : COMMITTAL FOR CONTEMPT
      123 We have no doubt that it is necessary that some power should exist,
  to be exercised only in the last resort, for the purpose of compelling persons
  to give evidence and preventing them from defying the Tnbunal. Thispower
  £ contained in Section 1(2) of the Act of 1921. No witness has doubted fce
  necessity for such a power, nor suggested that jo u r n a lis ts or anyone else
   should be exempted from its application. It has been invoked only once since
   the Act came into force in 1921. This was in the Vassall Tnbunal when
   certain journalists refused to reveal the sources of their                  f
   question concerning the revelation of sources is rare although the risk of
   S g l somewhaf greater before Tribunals of Inquiry than in the ordinary
   courts where hearsay evidence is inadmissable and sources are seldom
   relevant. Even so, it has arisen before a Tribunal in an acute form only
   once in the last 45 years. It is true that in the Bank Rate Tribunal one of
    the journalist witnesses asked whether he had to answer a questi.>n pul to
    him about the source of his information, but on being told by the Tribunal
    that he had to answer, he did so without demur.1              _______ _
     1 Page 12 o f the Report o f the Proceedings, December, 1957.
                                                 40
     124. It has been said that, as a general rale, journalists should not be asked
to compromise the source of their information. The Press is a watchdog ot
our liberties. They often reveal matters which should be disclosed in the
public interest, and they might be hampered in this function if they were
normally obliged to disclose the source of their information. It has also been
urged in evidence on their behalf that as they are u s u a l l y given, information
in strict confidence, it is against their conscience to reveal the name ot the
person who gave them the information, and that rather than disclose sources
 which they feel in honour bound to conceal, they would prefer to suiter a
 prison sentence. The matter has been put more prosaically by the chairman
 of a large group of newspapers who said in evidence that all these reasons
 are moonshine. He stated that the real reason for the reticence of journalists
 is that their living depends upon concealing their sources, because it is on
 these sources that their value as journalists depends. If it were thought
 that there was any risk in their revealing their sources, these would dry up.
 We consider that the real reason for the reticence of journalists to reveal
 their source is, as stated by the Chairman of the Press Council, an amalgam
  of all those given in evidence. In the ultimate analysis, it is unthinkable
  that a great institution such as the Press would seek to defy the law. The
  law clearly requires that any witness before a Tribunal should, in the
  national interest, reveal the source of his information if the revelation of that
 source is vital.
       125. A witness sometimes thinks, quite mistakenly, that the person who
  has given him the information would object to his name being revealed, or
   a witness may not understand the vital importance of the identity 01 his
  source of information to the subject matter of the inquiry. Tribunals do not
   insist on the disclosure of the source of information unless it is of vital
   importance to the inquiry to do so. In such cases the Tnbunal should, so
   far as practicable, fully explain to the witness precisely why the answer to
   the question asked is of vital importance and if necessary give the witness
   an opportunity of referring back to his source. In the appropriate case it
   might be well to point out to the witness that should he still refuse to
    disclose his source, the public may be left with the strong suspicion that
    there is none and that the journalist’s story is an invention or a distortion
   of any information which he may have received.
        126. We are confident that a clash will rarely occur between the Tribunal
    and a witness. But what if a clash does occur? What if any witness should
    contumaciously refuse to give evidence vital to the subject matter of the
    inquiry? The question then arises as to whether the matter should be
 ■ referred to the High Court on the certificate of the Tribunal as is now pro­
    vided by Section 1(2) of the Act of 1921 or whether the Tnbunal should
    itself be empowered to deal with the matter and punish the offender. The
     arguments one way and the other are nicely balanced.
        127. The arguments in favour of the present provisions of the Act of
     1921 are that it might be considered inappropnate that the Tribunal should
     commit as this would reflect adversely upon the impression that the Tribunal
     makes upon the public. It is inappropriate that an inquisitonal tnbuoal
     should have power to commit. The Act of 1921 was amended in the Com­
     mittee stage to take the power to commit away from the Tnbunal and
     transfer it to the High Court, and this was for the protection of the individual.
     At that time, however, it was not known that chairmen of Tribunals would
                                           41
be persons holding high judicial office. The process of certification to the
court and the procedural steps which have to be taken give opportunity for
reflection by the Tribunal and the offender. The offender has the advantage
of being dealt with by a court approaching the matter with a fresh mind. If j
the Tribunal had the power to commit, provision would have to be made
for an appeal from its decision to the High Court. This would have the effect
of making a decision of the Tribunal directly subject to appeal to the High
Court—perhaps an undesirable precedent. The present procedure was followed
in the Vassall Tribunal and proved to be procedurally satisfactory. There is
 a further complication that if the power to commit were vested in the
Tribunal, the sentence of imprisonment might exceed the time during which
the Tribunal would be in office and it is clearly preferable that the authority
 which commits should be in existence and approachable by the offender
 at any time during which he is serving his sentence.
      128. The arguments in favour of amending the Act of 1921 and giving
 the Tribunal the power to commit are as follows. The Tribunal will always
 be presided over by a holder of high judicial office and is in no sense to be
 compared with the usual ad hoc tribunal to which it might be considered
 inadvisable to grant the exceptional power of depriving a person of his
 liberty. It may be thought to be derogatory of such a Tribunal that it is
 not entrusted with the power to commit. The Restrictive Practices Court
 has such a power. Under the present practice, members of the Tribunal
 might find themselves liable to be called as witnesses and cross-examined in
 the High Court proceedings.
      129. The power to commit if given to the Tribunal would no doubt be
  exercised only by a unanimous decision; and from the public point of view
  this would provide an additional safeguard to the individual. The Tribunal
  would be in the best position to assess the seriousness of the contempt and
  the effect it has upon the inquiry. It is in possession of all relevant material
  and has the advantage of seeing the witness concerned and judging his
  behaviour at the inquiry. If the matter is dealt with by the Tribunal, the
  delay which would be incurred in referring the matter to the court would be
  avoided.
       130. It has been suggested that a further advantage of the Tribunal having
   the power to commit would be that the Tribunal would be unlikely to punish
   offenders as severely as the High Court. There is of course no basis upon
   which this contention can be judged, but it might be said that if punishment
   is to act as a deterrent against offenders placing personal considerations
   before the national interest, that interest may demand that they should be
   dealt with severely.
       131. We have found this an intransigent problem to solve. On the whole,
    however, we incline to the view that the existing procedure might well be
    retained.
       132. We unreservedly reject one suggestion which has been made, namely,
    that the question of committing to prison should be referred to Parliament.
    This would involve a cumbersome and long drawn out process with little to
    commend it. Parliament would have to find time which it can ill afford to
    deal with the m atter; nor would it be easy for Parliament to inform itself
    of all the relevant facts. There is, moreover, no reason to suppose that the
     offender would fare any better before Parliament than he would before the
    courts or the Tribunal.
                                           42
                             CHAPTER XIV

                    REPORT OF THE TRIBUNAL
   133.    There has been no criticism made to us of the findings of the reports
of any of the Tribunals set up under the Act of 1921. We wish to emphasise,
however, that if any allegations are made against witnesses or interested
persons and are shown to be unfounded, Tribunals, as they always have done
in the past, should make this abundantly clear in their report.


                              CHAPTER XV

SHOULD THERE BE AN APPEAL FROM THE FINDINGS OF THE
                    TRIBUNAL?
   134.      The question has been canvassed before us as to whether or not
there should be any appeal from the findings of Tribunals of Inquiry. The
great preponderance of evidence is against such appeals. These Tribunals
have no questions of law to decide. It is true that whether or not there
is any evidence to support a finding is a question of law. Having regard,
however, to the experience and high standing of the members appointed to
these Tribunals and their natural reluctance to make any finding reflecting
on any person unless it is established beyond doubt by the most cogent
evidence, it seems to us highly unlikely that any such finding would ever
be made without any evidence to support it. Any adverse finding which a
Tribunal may make against any persons will depend upon what evidence the
Tribunal believes. Accordingly it would be impossible to reverse such
findings without setting up another Tribunal to hear the evidence all over
again This would be as undesirable as it would be impractical. In matters
of the kind with which Tribunals are concerned, it is of the utmost importance
that fin a lity should be reached and confidence restored with the publication
 of the report.




                                      43
   SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
   1. There is a need for standing legislation to   p e r m  setting-up^when-
                                                              it   t h e


ever necessary of an inquisitorial tribuna           971 subject to certain
purpose the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1 9 2 1 sub]
amendments and safeguards, should be retained (paragrap       )•
   2 The Act should not be invoked for matters of local or minor importance,
but confined to circumstances which occasion a nation-wide ensis of con­
fidence (paragraph 27).
   3 The following cardinal principles (paragraph 32) should be observed
m i ^ i S S H T o f personal tart and injustice to any peKon mvolved m

           BrfoSre”anv person becomes involved in an inquiry, the Tribunal must
     ‘'       te T an ^ ed t S there are circumstances which aSect him and which
              the Tribunal proposes to investigate.
       (ii^ e fo re any person who is involved in an inquiry is ealledasawitness
     T T h e ZoZd be informed in advance of allegations against him and
           1 the substance of the evidence in support of them.
       (iii) (a) He should have adequate opportunity of preparing            hiscaseand
               of being assisted by legal advisers.              , f miMirfunds
               (b) His legal expenses should normally be met out p                 •
        (iv)   He   should  have  the opportunity  of being  exam ined'
               solicitor or counsel and of statmg his case in public at the mqu ry
        w Any material witnesses he wishes called at the mquiry should, 4
        (v)
               reasonably practicable, be heard.                             .
         Cv)' [He should have the opportunity of testing by cross-examination
         ( ’ » n ]“        b7 t o own S c ito r or counsel any evidence which may
              * affect him.                                                    .
     4 Investigation by Royal Commission would not afford a practicab e
  a l t e n S f to procedure — er the Act of 1921 (parapaph 34)^



  with under the Act (paragraph 35).
    6 N o Government should in future set up a tribunal <*
  in the Profumo case to investigate any matter causing nation-wide public
  concern (paragraph 42).
     7 The procedure followed by Departmental           Aeeident lnqume^would
                                                     a n d

  n o t be suitable for dealing with the special type of case which the A c t was
  designed to meet (paragraphs 43 and 44).
      8 Inquiry by the Security Commission could not be regarded as a suitable
   alternative to inquiry by a 1921 Act Tribunal (paragraph 45).
     9. Should the Security Commission oi■ “ y °          ^ ^ ^ f u S S
   of compulsion similar to those provided by the Act, Uiey snouiu
   by separate enactment (paragraph 46).
      10 More time than has been allowed in the past should be given o
   the preparation of an inquiry before public hearings begm (paragraph 49).
     11. A witness should, if he wishes, have his own legal adviser present
 when his statement is taken by the Treasury Solicitor (paragraph 50).
     12. Before giving his evidence in public, a witness should be supplied with *
 a document setting out the allegations against him, and the substance of the I
 evidence in support of those allegations (paragraph 50).                        |
     13. The form of disclosure of evidence to a witness should be in the
 discretion of the Tribunal; and where fresh evidence or allegations emerge
 in the course of the inquiry, the persons concerned should be given adequate
 opportunity for meeting the new situation (paragraph 51).
     14. In Scotland, a procedure similar to that followed in England, should
 be adopted to permit the Tribunal to see the precognitions of witnesses
                                                                                I
 (paragraph 53).
     15. The Act should be amended so that anyone called as a witness would
 have the right to be legally represented (paragraph 54).
      16. The Tribunal should have a discretion to allow anyone to be legally
 represented who is not a witness, but who claims to be an interested person
 in that he is at risk of being prejudicially affected by the inquiry (paragraph
  55).
      17. When a witness is legally represented, he should be examined by his
                                                                                I
  own solicitor or counsel on his statement to the Treasury Solicitor. When
  he is not represented, he should be examined by one of the counsel appearing
  for the Tribunal. No witness should be examined and cross-examined by the
  same counsel (paragraph 57).
      18. Subject to the discretion of the Tribunal, a witness should have the
                                                                                I
  right to have evidence called on his behalf by counsel for the Tribunal
  (paragraph 58).                                                                I
       19. The Act should be amended so as to include a provision empowering
  the Tribunal to order payment of a witness’s costs out of public funds
   (paragraph 59). This would enable witnesses to receive costs as of right
   and not ex gratia (paragraph 60).
       20. The Tribunal should deprive a witness of all or part of his costs if,
   in their view, there are good grounds for doing so (paragraph 61).
       21. The relevant statutes and regulations should be amended so as to permit
   a Tribunal to grant legal aid (paragraph 62).
       22. The Act should be amended so as to extend the present immunity
: conferred on a witness so that neither his evidence nor statement to the
    Treasury Solicitor, nor documents he is required to produce shall be used
    against him in subsequent civil or criminal proceedings except where he is
    charged with giving false evidence before the Tribunal, or conspiring with
    or procuring others to do so (paragraph 63).
        23. The Tribunal should decide, in its discretion, whether an opening
    statement should be made by counsel appearing for it; and counsel
    for any witness should have the opportunity of making a short speech
    following the opening speech by counsel for the Tribunal (paragraph 65).
        24. Criminal records of persons involved should be made available to the
    Tribunal, who will decide in their discretion whether such evidence may be
    used in cross-examination (paragraph 66).
                                         45
                                                VMMmi



    25. There should be no statutory rules of procedure, but Tribunals sh°uld
follow the general principles laid down in this report (paragraphs 6b )•
    26. The present procedure whereby the power to set up a Tribunal can
be exercised only on a resolution of both Houses of Parliament should be
retained (paragraph 71).
     27. The Act should be amended so as to provide that the Chairman^ of a
Tribunal must be a person holding high judicial office ; no requirement should
 be laid down as to the status or qualifications of the remaining members,
 but the possibility of a non-legal appointment should be considered
 (paragraph 72).
      28. Members of a Tribunal should not be named or debated in the
 passage of the resolution through Parliament (paragraph 73).
      29. The Act should be amended to provide immunity for members of
 Tribunals, similar to that enjoyed by a Superior Court of Record, for anythmg
 said by them in the course of the inquiry or in their report (paragraph 74).
      30. Consideration should be given to conferring a similar immunity on
 persons appointed to conduct a Departmental inquiry (paragraph 75).
      31 The Act should be amended to provide immunity for solicitors and
  counsel and others for what they may say before a Tribunal of Inquiry
  (paragraph 76).
       32. The terms of reference of Tribunals should be drawn as precisely
  as possible (paragraph 77).
       33. Tribunals should not be set up to investigate vague and unspecified
   rumours ; equally, they should not be fettered by terms of reference which
   are too narrowly drawn (paragraph 78).
  I 34 Tribunals should explain in public their interpretation of their
  terms of reference at the earliest opportunity (paragraph 79).
       35. A prelim in a ry hearing of evidence in private, whether by the Tribunal
   (paragraph 81) or another agency (paragraph 80), would be inappropriate.
   The Tribunal should be afforded ample opportunity to define the allegations
   and discard irrelevant material before public hearings begin (paragraph 83).
       36. The Treasury Solicitor should continue to be appointed as the solicitor
    acting for the Tribunal (paragraphs 84-88).
        37. In Scotland, it would be preferable for the Solicitor for the Scottish
    Department or the Procurator Fiscal to act for the Tribunal rather than a
    private firm of solicitors (paragraph 89).
        38 The Tribunal should nominate counsel other than a Law Officer of
    the Crown to be instructed by the Treasury Solicitor and to act on its behalf
    (paragraphs 90-96).
        39 It would be preferable for Tribunals in Scotland to be represented by
     independent c o u n s e l rather than the Lord Advocate or Solicitor-General
     (paragraph 97).
         40. The Tribunal should, at a preliminary meeting in public, give its
     interpretation of its terms of reference, and give directions as to procedure
     and intended lines of inquiry (paragraphs 101-107).
         41. Adequate accommodation should be provided for the inquiry (para­
     graph 108).
                                              46
   42. One of the team of counsel acting on behalf of the Tribunal should
be available to examine and re-examine any witness not legally represented
(paragraph 114).
   43. Proceedings should be conducted generally in public and reported day
by day in the Press (paragraph 119).
   44. The Press should exercise extreme care in reporting proceedings
(paragraph 121).
   45. Discretion of Tribunals to sit in private should be interpreted to
extend beyond the hearing of evidence which would constitute a security
risk ; but nevertheless to be exercised with reluctance and only in most
exceptional circumstances (paragraph 122).
   46. Tribunals to insist on revelation of sources of information only where
of vital importance, and to explain fully to witnesses concerned why the
information is vital to the inquiry (paragraph 125).
   47. Present procedure whereby cases of contempt are referred to the High
Court on the certificate of a Tribunal should continue to be followed
(paragraphs 126-131).
   48. Questions concerning committal for contempt should in no circum­
stances be referred back to Parliament (paragraph 132).
   49. Tribunals to give particular emphasis in their report to cases where
allegations against witnesses or interested persons are shown to be unfounded
(paragraph 133).
   50. There should be no appeal from the findings of a Tribunal
(paragraph 134).


ALL OF WHICH WE HUMBLY SUBMIT FOR YOUR MAJESTY’S
   GRACIOUS CONSIDERATION.


                                               C y r il S a l m o n   {Chairman).
                                               St u a r t .
                                               G oodm an.
                                               W. L.      H eyw ood.
                                               J. B. Bu tterw o rth.
                                               H.    W . R . W ad e.

J. H . H u m ph rey s  (Secretary).
T.   G . M ead   (Assistant Secretary).

Is/ November, 1966.




                                          47
APPENDICES
                                       APPENDIX A
ril Geo. 5.1                 Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence)                     [Ch. 7.]
1                                          Act, 1921
                                        CHAPTER 7
An Act to make provision with respect to the taking of evidence before and
       the procedure and powers of certain Tribunals of Inquiry. [24th March,
       1921.]
Be it enacted by the King’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows.
    1 —(i) Where it has been resolved (whether before or after the commencement
of this Act) by both Houses of Parliament that it is expedient that a tribunal
be established for inquiring into a definite matter described in the Resolution as
of urgent public importance, and in pursuance of the Resolution a tnbunal is
 appointed for the purpose either by His Majesty or a Secretary of State, the
 instrument by which the tribunal is appointed or any instrument supplemental
 thereto may provide that this Act shall apply, and in such case the tribunal
 shall have all such powers, rights, and privileges as are vested in the High
 Court, or in Scotland the Court of Session, or a judge of either such court, on
 the occasion of an action in respect of the following matters:
        (a) The enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath,
              affirmation, or otherwise ;
        (b) The compelling the production of documents ;
        (c) Subject to rules of court, the issuing of a commission or request to
              examine witnesses abroad;
  and a summons signed by one or more of the members of the tribunal may
  be substituted for and shall be equivalent to any formal process capable of
  being issued in any action for enforcing the attendance of witnesses and com­
  pelling the production of documents.
     (2) If any person—
         (a) on being duly summoned as a witness before a tribunal makes default
              in attending ; or                                                        .
         (b) being in attendance as a witness refuses to take an oath legally required
              by the tribunal to be taken, or to produce any document in his power
              or control legally required by the tribunal to be produced by him, or
              to answer any question to which the tribunal may legally require an
               answer ; or
         (c) does any other thing which would, if the tribunal had been a court of
               law having power to commit for contempt, have been contempt ot
               that court;
  the chairman of the tribunal may certify the offence of that person under his
   hand to the High Court, or in Scotland the Court of Session, and the court may
   thereupon inquire into the alleged offence and after hearing any witnesses who
   may be produced against or on behalf of the person charged with the offence,
   and after hearing any statement that may be offered in defence, punish or take
   steps for the punishment of that person in like manner as if he had been guilty
   of contempt of the court.
      (3) A witness before any such tribunal shall be entitled to the same
   immunities and privileges as if he were a witness before the High Court or the
   Court of Session.
      2. A tribunal to which this Act is so applied as aforesaid—
          (a) shall not refuse to allow the public or any portion of the public to be
                present at any of the proceedings of the tribunal unless in the opinion
                of the tribunal it is in the public interest expedient so to do for reasons
                connected with the subject matter of the inquiry or the nature of the
                evidence to be given ; and
           (b) shall have power to authorise the representation before them of any
                person appearing to them to be interested to be by counsel or solicitor
                or otherwise, or to refuse to allow such representation.
        3. This Act may be cited as the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act, 1921,
                                                 50
                                  APPENDIX B
[51 and 52 Viet.]        Special Commission Act, 1888                 [Ch. 35]
                                  CHAPTER 35
An Act to constitute a Special Commission to inquire into the charges and
     allegations made against certain Members of Parliament and other persons
     by the Defendants in the recent trial of an action entitled O’Donnell v.
     Walter and another.
                                                            [13th August 1888.]
   Whereas charges and allegations have been made against certain Members
of Parliament and other persons by the defendants in the course of the pro­
ceedings in an action, entitled O’Donnell versus Walter and another, and it is
expedient that a special commission should be appointed to inquire into the
truth of those charges and allegations, and should have such powers as may be
necessary for the effectual conducting of the inquiry:
   Be it therefore enacted by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :
   1. (1) The three persons herein-after mentioned, namely, the Right Honourable
Sir James Hannen, the Honourable Sir John Charles Day, and the Honourable
     Archibald Levin Smith, are hereby appointed Commissioners for the purposes
of this Act, and are in this Act referred to as the Commissioners.
   (2) The Commissioners shall inquire into and report upon the charges and
allegations made against certain Members of Parliament and other persons in
the course of the proceedings in an action entitled O’Donnell versus Walter and
another.
   2. (1) The Commissioners shall, for the purposes of the inquiry under this
Act, have, in addition to the special powers herein-after provided, all such powers
rights, and privileges as are vested in Her Majesty’s High Court of Justice, or
in any judge thereof, on the occasion of any action, including all powers, rights
and privileges in respect of the following matters:                                *
      (i) the enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath,
            affirmation, or promise and declaration ; and
      (ii) the compelling the production of documents; and
      (iii) the punishing persons guilty of contempt; and
      (iv) the issue of a commission or request to examine witnesses abroad;
and a summons signed by one or more of the Commissioners may be substituted
for, and shall be equivalent to, any form of process capable of being issued in
any action for enforcing the attendance of witnesses or compelling the production
of documents.
   (2) A warrant of committal to prison issued for the purpose of enforcing the
powers conferred by this section shall be signed by one or more of the Com­
missioners, and shall specify the prison to which the offender is to be committed.
   (3) The Commissioners may, if they think fit, order that any document or
documents in the possession of any party appearing at the inquiry shall be
produced for the inspection of any other such party.
   3. If any person, having been served with a summons under this Act, shall fail
to appear according to the tenour of such summons, the Commissioners shall
have power to issue a warrant for the arrest of such person.
   4. Any person summoned to attend before the said Commissioners who shall
refuse, neglect, or fail to attend in pursuance of any summons, shall, notwith­
standing the dissolution of the Commission, be liable to punishment for contempt
of the High Court of Justice, on the motion of any person who has appeared
at the inquiry before such Commissioners.
   5. A warrant or order for the arrest, detention, or imprisonment of a person
for contempt of the Commissioners shall, notwithstanding the special Commission
is dissolved or otherwise determined, be and remain as valid and effectual in all
                                        51
 respects as if the special Commission were not so dissolved or otherwise deter­
 mined, and upon such dissolution or determination all the powers, rights, and
 privileges of the Commissioners with respect to such warrant or order, and
 to a person arrested, detained, or imprisoned, or to be arrested, detained, or
 imprisoned by virtue thereof, shall devolve upon and be exercised by the
 Queen’s Bench Division of the High Court of Justice or a judge thereof; and
 such contempt, and a proceeding with respect thereto, shall not be in anywise
 affected by such dissolution or determination of the special Commission.
    6. The persons implicated in the said charges and allegations, the parties to
the said action, and any person authorised by the Commissioners, may appear
 at the inquiry, and any person so appearing may be represented by counsel or
 solicitor practising in Great Britain or Ireland. Where it shall appear to the
Commissioners that any person affected by any of the said charges or allegations
is at any time during the holding of the said inquiry detained or imprisoned,
the Commissioners may order the attendance of such person at such inquiry
in such manner, for such time, and subject to such conditions as regards bail,
or otherwise, as to the Commissioners may seem fit.
    7. The Commissioners shall have power, if they think fit, to make reports from
time to time.
   8. Every person who, on examination on oath, affirmation, or promise and
declaration under this Act, wilfully gives false evidence, shall be liable to the
penalties for perjury.
   9. Any person examined as a witness under this Act before the Commissioners,
or under a commission to examine witnesses abroad, may be cross-examined
on behalf of any other person appearing before the Commissioners. A witness
examined under this Act shall not be excused from answering any question
put to him on the ground of any privilege or on the ground that the answer
thereto may criminate or tend to criminate himself: Provided that no evidence
taken under this Act shall be admissible against any person in any civil or
criminal proceeding except in the case of a witness accused of having given
false evidence in an inquiry under this Act, or of a person accused of having
procured, or attempted or conspired to procure, the giving of such evidence.
   10. (1) Every person examined as a witness under this Act who, in the
opinion of the Commissioners, makes a full and true disclosure touching all
the matters in respect of which he is examined, shall be entitled to receive a
certificate signed by the Commissioners, stating that the witness has, on his
examination, made a full and true disclosure as aforesaid.
   (2)     If any civil or criminal proceeding is at any time thereafter instituted
against any such witness in respect of any matter touching which he has been
so examined, the court having cognizance of the case shall, on proof of the
certificate, stay the proceeding, and may in its discretion award to the witness
such costs as he may be put to in or by reason of the proceeding: Provided
that nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply in the case of proceedings
for having given false evidence at an inquiry held under this Act, or of having
procured, or attempted or conspired to procure, the giving of such evidence.
   11. This Act may be cited as the Special Commission Act, 1888.




                                      52
                                  APPENDIX C

                LIST OF INQUIRIES HELD UNDER THE
            TRIBUNALS OF INQUIRY (EVIDENCE) ACT, 1921
Year             Subject o f Inquiry                Members o f Tribunal
1921   Destruction of documents by Ministry The Rt. Hon. Lord Cave, G.C.M.G.
         of Munitions officials.             The Rt. Hon. Lord Inchcape,
            (Cmd. 1340.)                        G.C.M.G.
                                             Sir William Plender.
1924 Royal Commission on Lunacy and Royal Commission under chairman­
         Mental Disorder given powers           ship of The Rt. Hon. H. P.
         under the Act.                         MacMillan, K.C., LL.D.
            (Cmd. 2700.)
1925 Arrest of Major R. O. Sheppard, Rt. Hon. J. P. F. Rawlinson, K.C.,
         D.S.O., R.A.O.C. Inquiry into          M.P.
         conduct of Metropolitan Police.
            (Cmd. 2497.)
1925 Allegations made against the Chief Mr. William Lyon Mackenzie, K.C.
         Constable of Kilmarnock in con­
         nection with the dismissal of Con­
         stables Hill and Moore from the
         Burgh Police Force.
            (Cmd. 2659.)
1926/8 Conditions with regard to mining and Special Commission under chairman­
         drainage in an area around the         ship of Sir Horace Cecil Monro,
         County Borough of Doncaster.           K.C.B.
1928   Charges against the Chief Constable Mr. T. H. Walker, K.C. (Recorder
         of St. Helens by the Watch Com­        of Derby).
         mittee.                              Mr. C. de C. Parry, C.B.E. (H.M.
            (Cmd. 3103.)                        Inspectorate of Constabulary).
1928 Interrogation of Miss Irene Savidge The Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon Banks,
         by Metropolitan Police at New          G.C.B.
         Scotland Yard.                       Mr. H. B. Lees-Smith, M.P.
            (Cmd. 3147.)                      Mr. J. J. Withers, C.B.E., M.P.
1933 Allegations of bribery and corruption Lord Anderson.
         in connection with the letting and Sir Robert Boothby, K.B.E.
         allocation of stances and other Mr. J. M. Hunter, K.C.
         premises under the control of the
         Corporation of Glasgow.
            (Cmd. 4361.)
1936 Unauthorised disclosure of informa­ Mr. Justice Porter.
         tion relating to the Budget.         Mr. Gavin Simonds, K.C.
            (Cmd. 5184.)                      Mr. Roland Oliver, K.C.
1939 The circumstances surrounding the Mr. Justice Bucknill, O.B.E.
         loss of H.M. Submarine “ Thetis.”
            (Cmd. 6190.)
1943 The conduct before the Hereford Lord Justice Goddard.
         Juvenile Court Justices of the pro­
         ceedings against Craddock and
         others.
            (Cmd. 6485.)
1944 The administration of the Newcastle- Mr. Roland Burrows, K.C.
         upon-Tyne Fire, Police and Civil
         Defence Services.
            (Cmd. 6522.)
                                       53
                                                               Members o f Tribunal
Year               Subject o f Inquiry
                                                      Mr. Justice Lynskey.
1948    Bribery o f M inisters o f th e Crown or
                                                      Mr. G . R ussell V ick, K .C .
           other public servants in connection
                                                      M r. G . R . U pjohn, K .C .
           w ith th e grant o f licences, etc.
              (Cm d. 7616.)
        A llegations o f im proper disclosure o f     Lord Justice Parker.
1957                                                  M r E . M . H olland, C .B .E ., Q.C .
           inform ation relating to the raising
                                                      M r. G . V eale, Q.C .
           o f the Bank R ate.
              (C m nd. 350.)
        A llegations that John W aters was            L ord S o m , M .C .
1959                                                  Sir James R obertson, O .B .E ., J .r .
            assaulted o n 7th D ecem ber, 1957,
            at T hurso and the action taken by        Mr. J. N . D andie, M .C .
            Caithness P olice in connection
            therewith.
               (Cm nd. 718.)
                                                       T he R t. H o n . Lord R adcliffe, G .B ..E
 1962    T he circumstances in which offences
                                                       M r. Justice Barry, M .C .
            under the Official Secrets A ct were       Sir Edward M ilner H ollan d , C .ii.t - ,
             com m itted    by     W illiam    John
             Christopher V assall.                        Q.C .
                (Cm nd. 2009.)




                                                 54
                                APPENDIX D
           LIST OF WITNESSES WHO GAVE ORAL EVIDENCE
Mr. P. G. Benham       1 _,           T ,
Mr. J. W. Gauntlett J (M^srs. Linklaters and Paines).
Mr. Peter Bristow, Q.C.
Mr. F. N. Charlton, C.B., C.B.E.
Professor Abram Chayes.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Denning, Master of the Rolls.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Devlin, F.B.A.
Mr. H. M. Dickie (Messrs. Freshfields).
The Rt. Hon. Viscount Dilhorne.
Mr. John F. Donaldson, Q.C.
Sir Dingle Foot, Q.C., M.P.
The Hon. T. G. Galbraith, M.P.
The Rt. Hon. Sir John Hobson, O.B.E., Q.C., M.P.
Sir E. Milner Holland, K.C.V.O., C.B.E., Q.C.
Senator Jacob K. Javitz.
The Rt. Hon. Sir Elwyn Jones, Q.C., M.P.
Mr. T. D. Lucy.
Mr. George Viner
                         ► National Union of Journalists.
Mr. Kenneth Morgan
Mr. Allan Lofts
Professor G. W. Keeton, LL.D., F.B.A.
The Rt. Hon. Earl of Kilmuir, G.C.V.O.
Mr. Cecil King.
Mr. J. Emrys Lloyd (Farrer and Co.).
Mr. Maurice Lush.
Mr. D. H. McLachlan, O.B.E.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest, C.B.E., M.C.
Mr. A. D. M. Oulton.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Parker of Waddington, Lord Chief Justice of England.
Mr. E. D. Pickering.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Poole, C.B.E., T.D.
The Rt. Hon. Viscount Radcliffe, G.B.E.
The Hon. Mr. Justice Scarman, O.B.E.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Shawcross.
The Rt. Hon. Viscount Simonds.
The Rt. Hon. Sir Frank Soskice, Q.C., M.P.
Mr. H. S. Trembath (Richards, Butler and Co.).
Mr. D. C. W. Walsh (Swepstone, Walsh and Son).
Dame Rebecca West, D.B.E.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Winn, C.B., O.B.E.




                                       55
                               APPENDIX E
         LIST OF WITNESSES WHO SUBMITTED MEMORANDA
                          OF EVIDENCE
The Hon. Mr. Justice Ashworth, M.B.E.
The General Council of the Bar.
The Hon. Mr. Justice Barry.
Mr. Peter Bristow, Q.C.
Sir Andrew Clark, M.B.E., M.C., Q.C.
The National Council for Civil Liberties.
Crown Office and Scottish Home and Health Department.
Mr. John F. Donaldson, Q.C.
Mr. Elliott Fitzgibbon, O.B.E., M.A., B.A.I., M.T.P.I.
The Rt. Hon. Sir Lionel Heald, Q.C., M.P.
The Rt. Hon. Sir Elwyn Jones, Q.C., M.P.
The Institute of Journalists.
 The National Union of Journalists.
 Justice.
 The Law Society.
 Mr. Mark Littman, Q.C.
 Mr. D. H. McLachlan, O.B.E.
 The Solicitor for the Metropolitan Police.
 The Hon. Mr. Justice Milmo.
 The Rt. Hon. Lord Parker of Waddington, Lord Chief Justice of England.
 The Hon. Mr. Justice Pauli.
  The Press Council.
  Mr. W. Emrys Pride, D.I.C., A.R.C. Sc., M.Sc. (London).
  H.M. Procurator-General and Treasury Solicitor (in consultation with the Home
    Office, Lord Chancellor’s Office and H.M. Treasury).
  The Hon. Mr. Justice Roskill.
  The Hon. Mr. Justice Scarman, O.B.E.
  The Rt. Hon. Lord Shawcross.
  H.M. Treasury.
  The Rt. Hon. Lord Upjohn, C.B.E.
  Mr. Neville D. Vandyk, B. Com., Ph.D. (London).
  Dame Rebecca West, D.B.E.
  Civil Service National Whitley Council (Staff Side).
                                   APPENDIX F
              COMMONWEALTH LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
                      BY THE COMMISSION
C anada
   Inquiries Act, Revised Statutes of Canada 1952, ch. 154.
   Public Inquiries Act, Revised Statutes of Ontario 1960, ch. 323.
   Evidence Act, Revised Statutes of Canada 1952, ch. 397.
I nd ia
   Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952.
   Twenty-Fourth Report of the Law Commission of India.
   Central Commissions of Inquiry (Procedure) Rules, 1960.
A ustra lia
  Royal Commissions A c t, 1902-1933.
  Royal Commissions Acts, 1923-1934 (New South Wales).
  Evidence Act, 1958 (Victoria).
  Evidence Act, 1906 (Western Australia).
H ong K ong
  Commissioners Powers Ordinance.
  Commissions of Inquiry Bill, 1966.
                                    INDEX TO THE REPORT
 N ote : N um bers in the in d ex refer to paragraphs o f the Report.

 Accident Inquiries 25, 44.                        “ Thetis ” Inquiry (1939) 25.
 Attorney-General 16, 17, 19, 20, 90-96.           Thurso Case (1959) 25.
                                                   Treasury Solicitor 16, 17, 19, 84- 89.
  Bank Rate Tribunal (1957) 14, 18, 26,            Tribunal of Inquiry
    123.                                              appeal from findings of 134.
  Budget Leak Tribunal (1936) 14, 15, 26,             composition and status of 72, 73.
    39, 87, 90, 91.                                   immunity of 74.
  Costs 59-62.                                        premises 108.
  Counsel                                             proceedings of
    immunity of 76.                                      exclusion of public 122.
  Crichel Down Inquiry (1954) 25.                        hearings in public 108-114.
                                                         preliminary meeting in public
  Denning Report 21, 37.                                    98-107.
  Departmental Inquiries 25, 43.                      report of 133.
    immunity of 75.                                   representation of 84-97.
  Doncaster Mining and Drainage Inquiry               setting up 71.
    (1926-28) 25.                                     terms of reference 77-79, 101.
  Evans Case (1966) 25.                            Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act,
                                                         1921
  Inquisitorial Inquiry                                inquiries under 14, Appendix C.
     need for 22-30.                                  power to compel evidence 19, 123-
     alternative procedures 33—47.                        132.
  Lynskey Tribunal (1948) 14, 17, 26, 92.              power to exclude public 19, 122.
                                                      provisions 13, 59, 72, 74, 76,
  Marconi Scandal (1912) 11, 13.                         Appendix A.
  Parnell Inquiry (1888) 12.                           recommended amendment of 59, 72,
  Person interested other than a witness                 74, 76.
     representation 55.                            Vassall Tribunal (1962) 14, 19, 26, 123.
  Police Act, 1964 14, 25.
  Preliminary Hearing (in private) 80-83.          Witnesses
  Profumo Case (1963) 21, 26, 37-^42.                allegations against 32, 49-52,106, 107.
   Publicity 115-122.                                cardinal principles to be observed 32,
                                                        48.
   Royal Commissions 34.                             criminal records 66.
   Rules of Procedure 68-70.                         costs 32, 59-62.
   Scotland                                          evidence in support of allegations
     procedure 31, 53.                                  against 50, 51, 107.
     representation of Tribunal 89, 97.              immunity 63, 64.
   Security Commission 45, 46.                       legal aid 62.
   Select Parliamentary Committees 6-13,             protection of sources of information
     35, 36.                                            123-125.
   Solicitors                                        representation 32, 50, 54—57, 65.
     immunity of 76.                                 right to call evidence 32, 58.
' Special Commission Act, 1888 12, 63,             ■ statements of 50, 107.
     Appendix B.                                     witnesses to be the Tribunal’s 57.




      (31289)   Dd.128812   K 40   10/66   St.S.
          Printed and published by
H e r M a j e s t y ’s S t a t i o n e r y O f f i c e

          To be purchased from
    49 High Holbom, London w .c.l
     423 Oxford Street, London w .l
      13a Castle Street, Edinburgh 2
       109 St. Mary Street, Cardiff
     Brazennose Street, Manchester 2
        50 Fairfax Street, Bristol 1
 35 Smallbrook, Ringway, Birmingham 5
      80 Chichester Street, Belfast 1
        or through any bookseller

               Printed in England
