       From: The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor




                                                  ROYAL C OU RT S   OF JUSTICE

     & uS&                                        STR A ND , LON DON , WC2A 2 L L




     You may have seen an article in The Independent on Sunday yesterday
suggesting I have changed my mind about all-seater football grounds and that
seating is more dangerous than standing.  It was inaccurate and although I do
not wish to be embroiled in the resurgent controversy on this subject, I also
do not wish to be misrepresented.  I have therefore written to the Editor and
sent you a copy for information.

                                                     Yours sincerely,




Mr Robert Atkins M .P .,
House of Commons.
London SW 1A OAA.

Chairman, The Football Stadia Advisory Council,
Winchester House,
259-269, Old Marylebone Road,
London NW 1 5RA.

Chairman, The Football Licensing Authority,
27, Harcourt House,
19, Cavendish Square,
London W1 M 9AD

Mr Chris Lightbown,
C/o The Sunday Times,
1, Virginia Street,
London E 1 9XJ

Mr Tom Pendry, M.P.
House of Commons
London SW 1A OAA.
         From: The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor




                                                  ROYAL C OU RTS   OF JUSTICE

                                                  STR A ND , LON DON , WC2A 2LL




The Editor,
Independent on Sunday,
40, City Road,
London EC1Y 2DB                                          27th January 1992


Dear S ir ,
     In your 26th January edition (page 2) Jonathan Foster asserts that I am
"understood" to have changed my mind about all-seater football grounds. Not
so. I made recommendations in my report following Hillsborough and see no
reason to change them. In the euphoria of escape from the identity card
scheme, the report was generally accepted. It was predictable that when the
cost of implementation loomed there would be some back-sliding.  But whatever
the merits of the present arguments from the smaller clubs based on financial
hardship, it does not help to suggest incorrectly that I have changed my mind,
that I was concerned with "social engineering" rather than safety, or that
seating is more dangerous than standing. Of course, simply to stick seats onto
existing terraces regardless of sightlines is a recipe for trouble. That is
why, on my recommendation, the Football Stadia Advisory Design Council was set
up to assist clubs to adapt their accommodation as effectively and economically
as possible.

     I have, until now, declined invitations to comment on these matters since
all I had to say was in my Report. I write simply to say I would be grateful
if you would correct the impression given by your article.

                                                   Yours faithfully,




Copies to:-
Mr Robert Atkins M.P
 Minister for Sport.

Chairman, The Football Stadia Advisory Design Council.

Chairman, The Football Licensing Authority
