5th September, 1990

Lord Justice Taylor,
Hillsborough Incident,
Houses of Parliament,
Westminster,
London




   SUBJECT : GAME     ARSENAL v LUTON played on 29th August 1990.


Dear Sir,

Unfortunately I feel obliged to report to you what I feel was
a totally unacceptable incident at the above game played at
Arsenal Stadium, Highbury during the evening of 29th August
1990.
The game was due to kick-off at 7-45pm, and with it being the
first home game of the season, and knowing the reduction in
the standing room available, I arrived well in time at the
ground, actually 6-15pm. I was surprised that the gates where
not yet open after your report suggesting that fans should
arrive earlier at the grounds to avoid any last minute crush.
I joined the queue for the Avenell Road entrance for Standing
room at the North End at about 6-20pm. People where annoyed
that the gates were not yet open, and a long queue started to
form. An orderly queue I must add. After asking a policeman
on horseback who was organising the queues if the gates were
open, he just replied they should be by now, and if not they
will be soon. He did nothing to contact Command to find out
what the hold-up was, so to pass on any information to the
supporters. This I felt was contarary to one of your
recommendations of keeping the waiting fans informed.
The Avenell Road gates were eventually opened at 6-55 pm, just
50 minutes before the game was due to start, and by the
movement in the Gillespie Road queue, their gates were not
opened any earlier.
The crowd was over 30,000 at the game and we were given just
those 50 minutes to get in, and I think that was appalling.
In fact I am sure there must have been many outside the ground
at kick-off time.
Furthermore, whatever excuse is given by the authorities at
the game, and I am copying this letter to the Arsenal Football
Club and the Metropolitan Police, it surely will not suffice,
especially in the knowledge that no apology was given either
outside the ground, or in the ground - once let in.
Many people were commenting in the queue who had attended like
myself the game at Wimbledon the previous Saturday, that the
organisation there was far more professional. At l-15pm, or
may well have been slightly earlier, the gates were open for
the 3-00pm kick-off time. This game attracted just 13,000,
but the gates were open nearly two hours before kick-off.
With all due respect to Wimbledon, surely if a small first
division club can be well organised in this department, why is
it that one of the bigger clubs in the land cannot.

I do hope that I receive a reply from you as well as the other
recipients of this letter.



As a football supported of 26 years, I feel I must take this
opportunity of making a few observations on your recent
report.

A)   As proved in the above incident, it is the organisers
     who cause many of the problems by not having a
     professional enough attitude to its customers. If the
     organisers did their job properly, there would not be any
     reason to bring in all-seater stadiums into this country.
     I feel that your report is saying that the British people
     especially the Police have not got the ability of
     organising large crowds that want to stand at a football
     match, rather than sit. Maybe that this is the case
     right now, but surely we must be able to train the
     people to do this type of work. If you do not think
     this is possible, I think you have a very low opinion of
     the people in this land.

B)   Tradition in this country is that certain people   prefer
     to stand at sporting occasions, and you have now   proposed
     to take that option away. It is for some people    a way of
     life. In four years time all our first division    stadiums
     will be changed for ever with no going back.

     I am sure that you may well feel there is some areas of
     our current Law that you   disagree with. But surelyyou
     would not advocate a complete change to say American Law,
     but to make minor changes that keeps our Law along
     basically a similar path, but enhanced a little.

     This I feel is the best analogy I can give, in the hope
     that you will reconsider your findings regarding
     all-seater stadiums, and   recommend that far better
     training is given to the   administrators that are
     appointed.


                \                   Yours sincerely
Guildford,
Surrey,
GU2 p n                              __________
